
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-78</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B022-177</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dwarcon1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123559 text/html 26854
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:18:53 GMT
Content-length: 26636
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Drug War and the Constitution </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>The Drug War and the Constitution </h1>

<p> <b>by Paul Hager</b> </p>

<p> Following is a transcript of the speech I gave at the ICLU
Conference. I am appending the companion notes to the end. Text
between brackets [] is description or commentary and not part of
the actual transcript. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> I'd like to draw your attention to companion notes that I put
together for this talk. They're located on the tables out back
there, and I think that those of you who are doing CLE have them
in your manuals. </p>

<p> Well, I'm going to attempt to descend into the murky depths
of political philosophy and Constitutional analysis. At the
outset, I do have a caveat: the arguments I am going to be
presenting have never been endorsed by Congress or the courts and
I hope that during the question and answer session we can get
into this in a little bit more detail. </p>

<p> The thesis that I want to advance today is that the drug war
and the laws that prohibit the private consumption of certain
drugs are un-Constitutional. Prohibition laws, themselves,
violate every tenet of limited government that is embodied in our
Constitution. </p>

<p> To begin, let me pose a question: why was it necessary to
amend the Constitution in order to prohibit the drug alcohol?
And, while you are cogitating on that: how is it possible to
prohibit other drugs without going through the formal amendment
process? Well, I think, in order to answer these questions, it's
necessary to take a look at what the Constitution is supposed to
be. </p>

<p> At the recent confirmation hearings of Judge Clarence Thomas
(uh, Clarence Thomas, by the way, -- he and I have at least two
things in common: we're both ex marijuana users [chuckles from
the audience], and we're both married to attorneys) -- in any
case, there was a lot of discussion at the hearings about natural
law and natural rights. Just about all of the participants seemed
to agree that our system recognizes the existence of
&quot;inalienable&quot; natural rights and that government exists
to &quot;secure&quot; those rights for its citizens. It's just as
well that they agreed on that -- the architects of our system of
government, in fact, had that principle in mind, and they viewed
the Constitution as being a blueprint for a limited government in
which those powers that were to be made available to the federal
government would be listed. If a power is not listed in the
Constitution, it is not supposed to be available to the Federal
government. Two hundred odd years ago, when the Bill of Rights --
which we're here to celebrate -- was being debated, there were
those who opposed the Bill of Rights on the grounds that, uh,
they're completely unnecessary. It's redundant -- the rights
already exist and therefore they don't have a place in the
Constitution. In fact, they made the argument that a Bill of
Rights is dangerous because at some future point in time, people
would get the idea that if a right wasn't to be found in the
Constitution -- like privacy -- it did not exist. Perhaps the
best articulation I've ever seen of this principle is to be found
in _The Federalist Papers_. [I hold up a paperback of _The </p>

<p> Federalist Papers_.] Alexander Hamilton writing in Federalist
number 84 -- and I'll just read some of this out to you. He says:
</p>

<p> &quot;... bills of rights, in the sense and in the extent in
which they are contended for, are not only unnecessary in the
proposed constitution, but would even be dangerous.&quot; </p>

<p> And then his argument is: </p>

<p> &quot;For why declare that things shall not be done which
there is no power to do? Why for instance, should it be said,
that the liberty of the press shall not be restrained, when no
power is given by which restrictions may be imposed? I will not
contend that such a provision would confer a regulating power;
but it is evident that it would furnish, to men disposed to
usurp, a plausible pretence for claiming that power. They might
urge with a semblance of reason, that the constitution ought not
to be charged with the absurdity of providing against the abuse
of an authority, which was not given, and that the provision
against restraining the liberty of the press afforded a clear
implication, that a power to prescribe proper regulations
concerning it, was intended to be vested in the national
government. This&quot;, he concluded, &quot;may serve as a
specimen of the numerous handles which would be given to the
doctrine of constructive powers, by the indulgence of an
injudicious zeal for bills of rights.&quot; </p>

<p> Good writer, Mr. Hamilton. [I gestured with the book and put
it aside.] Well, anyway, as we know, Hamilton's view did not
prevail and 10 of the 12 Amendments that were proposed as a Bill
of Rights were ratified in December of 1791. </p>

<p> In order to mollify critics and meet the arguments of people
like Hamilton, language was added to the Bill of Rights to
address this idea of limited government and natural rights. </p>

<p> I just happen to have a copy of the Constitution here --
don't leave home without it [I hold up my pocket copy of the
Constitution]-- and I'll read the language that bears on this. </p>

<p> &quot;The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights
shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by
the people.&quot; </p>

<p> That's the 9th Amendment, this lays out that whole idea of
rights existing apart from the Constitution. </p>

<p> And then we have: </p>

<p> &quot;The powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to
the States respectively, or to the people.&quot; </p>

<p> That's the 10th Amendment and that has to do with delegation
of powers and the idea of limited government. </p>

<p> Well, let's go back to those questions. I think the answer to
the first question is fairly straightforward -- this idea of
alcohol prohibition. We were talking about a new power that was
being acquired -- surrendered by the people and the states - and
so the 18th Amendment was passed to give that power to the
Federal government. In the case of our second question --
prohibiting other drugs -- I would argue that we are talking
about new powers being granted to the Federal government that
have never been surrendered by the people and the states. Ergo,
the drug war, prohibition laws, the DEA, the whole ball of wax,
are all unconstitutional. I think what we have here is a prime
example of the illegal acquisition of powers by a central
government through a process of slow accretion. And this was
exactly the sort of thing Hamilton was warning against back in
1787. </p>

<p> If it is the case the federal government can't get involved
in the prohibition business, what about the state governments?
Uh, I think one answer to this is to look at the right of privacy
which is protected by the 9th Amendment and extended to the
states by the 14th. The right has been invoked to protect privacy
in such areas as family planning -- birth control -- and, at
least so far, the right of privacy seems to be protecting a
woman's choice whether or not to have an abortion. Furthermore,
this same right should apply in matters involving an individual's
decision to consume, privately, a recreational drug in his or her
home. </p>

<p> One argument that might militate against this idea of a right
of privacy taking precedence might be -- uh, well, what if the
people who use drugs are infringing on the rights of other
people. For example, users of cocaine and opiates. Is there a
compelling state interest -- is there some kind of balancing test
that we can apply that gives the state the right to intervene? </p>

<p> I'd like to pose a hypothetical here that we can use for the
purposes of analysis. Let's posit the existence of a drug that is
100% addicting and potentiates violence in its users 100% of the
time. I think we'd have a very clear case of there being a
compelling state interest to get itself involved in prohibiting
this drug on the grounds that the state is protecting the rights
of the non-users. Well, suppose we begin reducing those
percentages. Let's suppose that we're talking about a drug that
is 15% addictive and potentiates violence in some lesser
percentage of its users. We have an empirical answer for that: </p>

<p> I've just described alcohol. And, just for another for
instance, let's suppose that we have a drug that is 90% addictive
but doesn't seem to correlate with violence at all. Again,
empirically we have an answer: I've just described cigarettes. </p>

<p> I would argue that pharmacological and population data can be
adduced to compare alcohol and tobacco with other drugs like
opiates and cocaine derivatives. And, if we do this, we find that
alcohol is, in fact, more addictive than many forms of opiates
and many forms of cocaine although less addictive than crack
cocaine. Furthermore, smoked tobacco is generally recognized as
being the most addictive drug around. That other area, having to
do with violence and anti-social behavior, once again we find
that the drug that is the greatest potentiator of violent
behavior is alcohol. And if we look at the other drugs like
opiates and cocaine, we find that most of the violence that is
associated with these drugs is associated with the black
market/organized crime component of the drug trade and is not a
pharmacological feature of the drug itself. </p>

<p> Well, I'm the political coordinator of the Hoosier Cannabis
Re-legalization Coalition, and I haven't said a word about
marijuana yet and I probably should -- uh -- marijuana, which is
the Nation's number one illegal drug, which is estimated to have
been used by over 60 million people, is recognized as being
relatively non-addictive. For a point of comparison, if we look
at the common drug caffeine -- which I was dosing myself with
earlier today -- caffeine, which is in coffee and soft drinks, is
generally recognized as being more addictive than marijuana. </p>

<p> Furthermore, no scientific evidence has ever been brought
forth that would support the idea that marijuana leads to
violent, anti-social behavior. Thus, by no stretch of the
imagination is there a rational or scientific justification for
marijuana prohibition and, perforce, there is no marijuana
prohibition law that passes Constitutional muster. Moreover,
using alcohol and tobacco as our metrics, even heroin and crack
prohibition cannot be justified. </p>

<p> At this point, it's probably time to boldly go where no
Constitutional interpreter has gone before and so I'm going to
move into more speculative areas. The 1st Amendment, which
protects religion and speech, I think also by extension protects
thought and belief. Well, what is the seat of religion, thought
and belief? [A pregnant pause.] The brain, right? [Tapping my
cranium.] In fact, speech and belief are manifestations of the
internal state of a person's brain. Science is beginning to
inform us as to how chemicals and neurotransmitters, indeed the
physical &quot;wiring&quot; of our brain defines who we are and
how we think. Unless we get involved in metaphysics I think we
have to recognize that there is physical basis for belief. Where
I'm heading with this is that, if it is the case that your
physical brain state determines whether you are a Methodist, an
agnostic, or a Nazi then clearly the state of your brain is
protected in some sense. The question I'd like to put to you is:
if it is the case that the 1st Amendment allows a person to alter
his or her cognitive system by reading &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; --
which might well alter it permanently, you might become a Nazi
for the rest of your life -- then how is it possible for the
government to step in and say that a person may not temporarily
alter his or her cognitive system for two or three hours by
smoking a marijuana joint? [Scattered applause.] Also, another
way of looking at this same thing is, what is the rationale for
saying that programming your brain across the visual or aural
pathways is OK but programming your brain _chemically_ across the
blood-brain barrier is not? </p>

<p> And finally -- uh, and I think that this is the most
frightening prospect in this whole thing -- consider this: if a
state government can come up to you and can say, you may not pass
delta-9-THC -- the principal intoxicant in marijuana - you cannot
pass that across your blood-brain barrier, what is to prevent a
state from saying at some point in the future, you _must_ pass
drug X -- let's call it soma like in _Brave New World_ -- you
must pass soma across your blood-brain barrier? I guess what I'm
arguing is that the government has intruded into your biochemical
and physiological brain and in principle, once the government can
do this, then in principle the government can control any part of
your body. </p>

<p> I think I've just about wrapped up the general comments I
wanted to make. One thing I might suggest: we might also talk
about some specific areas where government has been in violation
of Constitutional rights all at the behest of this drug war. </p>

<p> Thank you. </p>

<p> ---------------------companion notes to
talk------------------- </p>

<p> The Drug War and the Constitution </p>

<p> by Paul Hager </p>

<p> Companion Notes </p>

<p> By focusing on the Constitutional dimension of drug
prohibition, I've attempted to approach the issue from a
different perspective. In claiming that the drug war and drug
prohibition violate the U.S. Constitution and fundamental
principles of civil liberty I am aware that there is a dearth of
present day case law to support my arguments. Instead, I have
relied on the writings of Hamilton, Madison, and Jay in The
Federalist Papers and, to a lesser extent, selected writings of
Thomas Jefferson that appear in Jefferson: Writings (Merrill D.
Peterson wrote the notes and selected text, ISBN 0-940450-16-X). </p>

<p> I assert that current prohibitionist policy entails a grant
of power to government that was never contemplated and was, in
fact, explicitly rejected by the framers of the Constitution. </p>

<p> The Harrison Act of 1914 was the first major step by the
Federal government in the direction of drug prohibition. The 18th
Amendment and the enabling legislation of the Volsted Act were to
come later, in 1919 and 1920 respectively. An excellent analysis
of the case law interpreting the Harrison Act is to be found in
Arnold S. Trebach's book, The Heroin Solution (Yale University
Press, 1982, ISBN 0-300-02773-7), chapter 6. For a short overview
of drug prohibition &quot;cycles&quot; in U.S. History, and the
place of the Harrison Act in them, see &quot;Opium, Cocaine, and
Marijuana in American History&quot;, by David F. Musto,
Scientific American, July 1991, volume 265, number 1. </p>

<p> An excellent source on the &quot;heroin problem&quot; and
possible solutions is The Hardest Drug: Heroin and Public Policy
, by John Kaplan (University of Chicago Press, 1983, ISBN
0-226-42427-8). Professor Kaplan devotes the first two chapters
of the book to exploding the myths about heroin's addictiveness
and dangers that have been used to justify its prohibition.
Kaplan also argues that the Harrison Act was in large part
responsible for the development of many of the social problems
that we now associate with heroin use and considers the Act to
have been a mistake. Unaccountably (given the foundation he
lays), Kaplan shies away from legalization strategies completely
and offers heroin maintenance programs with possible coercive
treatment as his alternative to the present approach. Arnold
Trebach, on the other hand, argues in his book that doctors
should be allowed to prescribe heroin to addicts as needed and to
include heroin in their pharmacopoeia. Trebach's legal analysis
of the Harrison Act (mentioned above) is used to buttress his
argument in favor of a liberal interpretion of the Act.
Interestingly, Kaplan, who considers the Act to have been a
mistake, favors a much more restrictive solution than does
Trebach who considers the Harrison Act to have been an
appropriate piece of social engineering. </p>

<p> On the subject of marijuana, John Kaplan is also the author
of a book entitled Marijuana -- the New Prohibition (1970).
Kaplan argued convincingly for marijuana decriminalization in
this book. Arnold Trebach is currently the head of the Drug
Policy Foundation, an organization that seeks alternatives to the
drug war. The organization generally favors full legalization of
marijuana but embraces a variety of opinion regarding changes in
the legal status of other drugs. </p>

<p> The issue of &quot;addictiveness&quot; of drugs is
complicated. The term itself has fallen into disfavor among the
scientific establishment and &quot;drug dependence&quot; is
generally preferred. I will stick with the more common term for
simplicity. It turns out that the picture of addiction that is a
favorite with police departments and drug czars is far from
accurate. In &quot;The Tragedy of Needless Pain&quot;, (by Ronald
Melzack, February 1990, Scientific American), scientific evidence
is presented that morphine used for pain relief is not addictive.
Trebach notes statistics that gave a rate of 500,000 heroin
addicts and 3,500,000 &quot;chippers&quot; or non-addicted
occasional users in the late 1970's which would mean a 12.5%
addiction rate. Laboratory studies show a higher rate but these
studies use medical grade, pure heroin. In Health Consequences of
Smoking: Nicotine Addiction (Surgeon General's Report, 1988), a
comparison is made of the relative addictiveness of smoked
tobacco and several other drugs (the 15% figure for alcohol comes
from this source). The Surgeon General's Report observes that of
service men who became addicted to heroin in Vietnam,
aproximatedly 90% were able to avoid readdiction upon return to
the U.S. The report also mentions the frequency of
&quot;chipping&quot; in heroin use but notes that nonaddicted
cigarette users are exceedingly rare. The addiction rate of 90%
for cigarette smokers also derives from the Surgeon General's
Report. </p>

<p> Other sources that give some picture of comparative addiction
include &quot;Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,
Consequences, and Alternatives&quot; by Ethan Nadelmann (Science,
September 1, 1989). In building his case for drug legalization,
Nadelmann cites National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) research
that gives a surprisingly low value for cocaine addiction rates. </p>

<p> A more complete comparision of addictive potentional is to be
found in the magazine, In Health, in an article entitled
&quot;Hooked, not Hooked&quot; by Deborah Franklin (Nov/Dec
1990). Franklin cites addiction experts' rankings of various
legal and illegal drugs as follows (p. 41): </p>

<p> 1) Nicotine </p>

<p> 2) &quot;Ice&quot; (smoked methamphetamine) </p>

<p> 3) Crack </p>

<p> 4) Crystal Meth (injected methamphetamine) </p>

<p> 5) Valium (diazepam) </p>

<p> 6-8) Quaalude </p>

<p> 6-8) Seconal (secobarbital) </p>

<p> 6-8) Alcohol </p>

<p> 9-10) Crank (snorted methamphetamine) </p>

<p> 9-10) Heroin </p>

<p> 11) Cocaine </p>

<p> 12) Caffeine </p>

<p> 13) PCP </p>

<p> 14) Marijuana </p>

<p> 15) Ecstasy (MDMA) </p>

<p> 16-18) Psilocybin Mushrooms </p>

<p> 16-18) LSD </p>

<p> 16-18) Mescaline </p>

<p> (The rankings as they appear in the magazine are in the form
of a bar graph -- I've converted them to a rank ordering. Note
also that, although amphetamine is broken down according to the
method of administration, other drugs with multiple modes of
administration are not. I.V. injection will, for a number of
reasons, be more addicting than oral ingestion. Concentration is
also an important factor as well. Although the
&quot;potency&quot; of heroin is considered to be 3 to 4 times
that of morphine, heroin is actually diacetylmorphine -- morphine
reacted with acetic anhydride. In the body, heroin breaks down to
morphine in order to produce its effect. Apparently, the
&quot;potency&quot; of heroin is the result of the ease with
which heroin crosses the blood-brain barrier before it breaks
down to morphine.) </p>

<p> The Drug Policy Letter, Vol II, number 2, Mar/Apr 1990 (a
newsletter published by the Drug Policy Foundation) uses a back-
of-the-envelope calculation to expose the myth that &quot;crack
is the most addictive drug known to man.&quot; It is often said
that if one uses crack just once, a person is addicted. According
to the NIDA-sponsored National Household Survey, 2.5 million
people have tried crack, and 480,000 used it in the month prior
to the survey. Even if one assumed that anyone who used the drug
in the past month was an addict, that would still give an
addiction rate of only 19%. Using this same method for alcohol
would give a 62% rate and, for powdered cocaine a 13% addiction
rate. Though this is not the sort of analysis that should be used
to gauge addiction rates, it does give the lie to the &quot;one
puff and you're hooked&quot; claim. </p>

<p> A number of the sources cited above present evidence that
violent criminal activity associated with heroin and cocaine use
is actually the result of the high cost of the drugs coupled with
the low socio-economic status of inner-city addicts. In other
words, violent crime is not a pharmacological feature of the drug
itself but a reflection of black market economics. The same Drug
Policy Letter cited above also reports on research done by
Goldstein, Brownstein, Ryan, and Bellucci on the drug component
of violence in New York City. They found that only a very small
proportion of drug-related murders were a function of the drug
itself and most of those were caused by alcohol. Heroin and other
opiates, in particular, are well known to not provoke aggressive
or violent behavior in people under the influence. </p>

<p> Two monographs by Professor Bruce L. Benson and Professor
David W. Rasmussen of the Policy Sciences Program of Florida
State University in Tallahassee give another view of drug use and
violent crime from the perspective of incarceration rates in
Florida. Benson and Rasmussen find that the overwhelming number
of people who have been arrested for a drug offense have no
arrest history for a violent or property crime. (See &quot;Drug
Offenders in Florida&quot;, July 1990, and &quot;Drug Crime and
Florida's Criminal Justice Problem&quot;, December 1990.) This is
not the result one would expect if the drug-violent crime
connection were as intertwined as apologists for the drug war
would have us believe. </p>

<p> Notes on Additional Materials </p>

<p> Along with these notes, I'm including two additional items.
The first is &quot;Marijuana Myths&quot;, a collection of some
typical anti-marijuana and D.A.R.E. Program falsehoods and their
refutation. Each of the numbered refutation sections has an
associated reference section which will allow readers to check my
sources. The second item is Report #126 of the ABA Law Student
Division which recommended that the ABA reverse its 18 year
position favoring marijuana decriminalization. Report #126 offers
no references of any kind, scientific or otherwise. This is
understandable because most of its assertions are without
scientific foundation. If this represents the sort of evidence
that is considered acceptable for a major policy reversal of the
ABA, I believe it reflects badly on the level of scholarship
practiced by the national organization. </p>

<p> One item that appears in #126 deserves a comment. Much is
made of the increased potency of marijuana. In the Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, Vol. 20(1), Jan-Mar 1988, Tod Mikuriya, M.D.
and Michael Aldrich, Ph.D. address this matter in &quot;Cannabis
1988 Old Drug, New Dangers The Potency Question.&quot; In a
careful piece of research, Mikuriya and Aldrich demonstrate that
a review of independent, contemporary assays of imported
marijuana from the early 70's show it was every bit as potent as
modern domestic sensimilla varieties. (Anyone who has personal
experience with Thai Sticks, Panama Red, and Oaxacan in the
period from the late 60's to early 70's can attest to the potency
of the imports.) They also reveal that improper DEA and police
evidence handling techniques (e.g., no refrigeration of seized
marijuana) led to an underestimate of street potency in the 1970s
because samples degraded rather quickly in evidence warehouses.
Besides the country's illicit experience with marijuana, Mikurya
and Aldrich point to the extremely potent forms of cannabis
(i.e., marijuana) tonics that were in common use in the United
States prior to marijuana prohibition in the 1930's. Such tonics
were frequently given to children with no reported ill effects.
Eli-Lilly and Parke, Davis, &amp; Co. entered into a
&quot;joint&quot; venture to produce a potent strain of domestic
cannabis sativa for their cannabis pharmaceuticals which they
called cannabis americana (note: a picture of the 1929
Parke-Davis catalogue for &quot;Cannabis U.S.P.&quot; can be
found on page 113 of Dr. Andrew Weil's book, Chocolate to
Morphine: Understanding Mind-Active Drugs, written with Winifred
Rosen, 1983, ISBN 0-395 -33108-0). Parke-Davis claimed uniform
effectiveness for their cannabis extract at a 10 milligram dose
level (the effective dose of pure delta-9-THC, the main
cannabinoid, is between 25 and 50 micrograms per kilogram). For
those who appreciate irony, take note that Parke-Davis, which
used to make a profit from selling legal cannabis, now makes
money from marketing drug testing kits which primarily detect
marijuana use. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>