
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-216</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf41_50.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043525 text/html 36365
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:05 GMT
Content-length: 36147
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp facts 41 - 50</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #41-Police News </p>

<p>Date: 95-02-23 11:11:31 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Our Drug Laws Have Failed </b></p>

<p><b>By James P. Gray, U.S. Superior Court Judge</b> </p>

<p><b>In Police News, Spring 94</b> </p>

<p>What we are doing is not working We have focused our
attention, effort and resources upon intercepting heroin, cocaine
and marijuana, and incarcerating those who sell and use them. We
have been increasingly successful in seizing even larger
quantities of these drugs, con`vichog greater numbers of
defendants who are involved with them and sentencing those
defendants to even longer terms in our jails and prisons. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, the magnitude of the problem created by making
these drugs illegal continues to grow. The only practical
resolution available to us is to revise our laws so that the use
by adults of heroin, cocaine and marijuana, and the purchase by
adults of these drugs generically at licensed commercial
pharmacies is legal. </p>

<p>Although under this proposal the purchase and use by adults of
heroin, cocaine and marijuana from the pharmacies would be legal,
the sale, transfer or furnishing hy anyone of any quantity of
these drugs to minors would he severely punished. Also, present
laws concerning public drunkenness, driving a motor vehicle while
under the influence, etc., would not he changed, and the
unlicensed sale of these drugs would remain a violation of the
law. The price of the drugs at the pharmacies would be set at an
amount that would be continually adjusted so as to undercut the
sales price of any illegal sale &quot;on the street.&quot; This
would do away with the financial incentive to sell them
illegally. </p>

<p>Without a doubt, some people will continue to buy and abuse
these drugs under this proposal. However, since there would be no
incentive to &quot;push&quot; these drugs, they would never be
advertised or &quot;on sale&quot;, and free samples would never
be given to anyone, including non-users in order to get them
&quot;hooked&quot;, etc., the usage should not be above the
present rate, and probably, after a possible initial surge, would
be materially reduced. </p>

<p>All of the other results under this plan would be positive.
Crime would he materially reduced. For example, there is no
violence now in the manufacture, distribution and purchase of
alcohol. Also, for those who would continue to burglarize in
support of their drug habit, they would do so less often because
of the reduced price. Since part of the sales price at the
pharmacies would be a tax, resources for the education about and
treatment of drug abuse would he substantially increased. Police
and society's other pressing needs. No new taxes would be needed
for jail or courthouse construction. Lower income areas would be
reclaimed from the drug sellers. Monies obtained by juvenile
gangs and other organized crime would be decreased. Violence and
corruption in our country and abroad would be significantly
decreased. Overdoses and other medical problems from the usage of
these drttgs would be reduced because the Food and Drug
Administration would ensure that the strengths of these drugs
would be accurately set forth on the labels. Drug treatment would
be encouraged because of warning labels outside, and literature
inside the packages, including toll-free numbers to call for more
information. Clean needles would reduce the spread of AIDS. </p>

<p>Many good, honest and intelligent people may disagree with
this proposal on moral and/or other reasonable grounds. In
addition, other people who have vested interests in the present
system may also oppose this plan. However, in my opinion, the
choice we have now is further to escalate our efforts and the </p>

<p>spending of our limited resources in a losing or lost
&quot;war on drugs,&quot; or to face the reality that is upon us
and legalize these drugs under a plan of regulated distribution
such as this one. The sooner we make the change, the sooner we
can stop the bleeding. </p>

<p>Tomorrow ??????????????? Stay Tuned </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #41-Police News </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-24 11:20:01 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Quotables from Notables (was &lt;--- that too cute or what)
More stuff from Police News</b> </p>

<p><b>Views from the Front</b> </p>

<p>George Schultz, the former Secretary of State for Reagan, says
legalization would destroy dealers profits and remove their
incentive to get young people addicted. He concedes, however,
that such a proposal is unpopular. </p>

<p>&quot;Sometimes at a reception or cocktail party I advance
these views and people head for somebody else,&quot; says
Schultz. &quot;Everybody is scared to talk about it. No
politician wants to say what I just said, not for a minute.&quot;
</p>

<p><b>Patrick Murphy:</b> </p>

<p>We over rely on law enforcement and interdiction. Only about
30% of our spending is on treatment, prevention and education. In
Canada the balance is about the exact opposite. </p>

<p>Politicians get in a bidding war over who can talk the
toughest. It started when I was police commissioner of New York
when Rockefeller was governor. </p>

<p>A lot of people have gone to prison since then and drug abuse
has gotten worse. I think NAVPO's effort to show police officers
another way to look at this issue is a commendable and an
enlightened approach. </p>

<p><b>Jerry V. Willimas, Former Chief of Police, Washington D.C.:</b>
</p>

<p>(Former) Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders' suggestion that we
study the idea of decriminalizing illicit drugs took me back to
the early 1970s, when people were talking seriously about
decriminalizing marijuana. One private conversation from that
time stuck in my mind. &quot;Personally, I don't think that
marijuana is any more dangerous than my favorite psychoactive
drug, the martini,&quot; the statement went. &quot; But I'm
afraid that decriminalization would send a signal to young people
that it is all right to use it.&quot; </p>

<p>The words are not exact, for I did not make notes, but that is
the crux of what President Nixon said to me some two decades ago.
Here we are 20 years later, and I wonder if anyone received the
signal Mr. Nixon was talking about. In 1992, local and state law
enforcement agencies reported nearly a million arrests for drugs
violations. Drug offenders make up one-third of the felony
convictions in the state courts. In a nation where three-quarters
of all robberies go unsolved and where violent offenders go free
on bail awaiting trial dates on overburdened court dockets, we
choose to clog the system with drug offenders. </p>

<p>Coming Tomorrow -- Some actual Drug Usage Stats from The
Netherlands. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #42-Netherlands </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-25 12:41:36 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>All Drug Warriors--Please Take Note--This is The Netherlands
where soft drugs are legal and hard drug addicts are not thrown
in jail--they are given treatment. This should go to add some
proof to the argument that legalization SHOULD NOT lead to an
increase in drug usage. </p>

<p><b>1.2 DRUG MISUSE IN THE NETHERLANDS</b> </p>

<p>The Netherlands is one of the most densely populated countries
of Europe, with 15 million inhabitants. Appr. 90% lives in urban
areas. Amsterdam has 700,000 inhabitants. </p>

<p>Estimate of total number of drug misusers/addicts Netherlands:
</p>

<p>21,000 addicts. Sources: 1) assessments of municipalities; 2)
recent research on all methadone programmes in the Netherlands
(Bureau Driessen, 1990;1993). </p>

<p>Amsterdam: 6,000 - 7,000 addicts. Source: capture/recapture
method based on several data systems: Municipal Health Service,
Municipal Police, local studies (1990)(1993).
Prevalence/incidence_data_ Prevalence of drug use in 1990
(population of 12 years and over inAmsterdam) </p>

<p>----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>Ever used Used past year Used past month drug </p>

<p>n % n % n % numsurv. drug </p>

<p>-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>3010 67.7 2066 46.5 1899 42.7 4444 Tobacco </p>

<p>3820 86.0 3459 77.8 3073 69.1 4444 Alcohol </p>

<p>847 19.1 420 9.5 289 6.5 4442 Hypnotics </p>

<p>912 20.5 417 9.4 272 6.1 4439 Sedatives </p>

<p>1111 25.0 438 9.9 268 6.0 4442 Cannabis </p>

<p>245 5.5 57 1.3 17 0.4 4440 Cocaine </p>

<p>183 4.1 20 0.5 10 0.2 4440 Amphetamines </p>

<p>56 1.3 30 0.7 5 0.1 4442 Ecstasy </p>

<p>182 4.1 13 0.3 3 0.1 4430 Hallucinogens </p>

<p>42 0.9 6 0.1 2 0.0 4430 Inhalants </p>

<p>325 7.3 86 1.9 28 0.6 4425 Opiates </p>

<p>295 6.7 83 1.9 28 0.6 4425 Pharm. </p>

<p>48 1.0 5 0.1 1 0.0 4425 Heroin </p>

<p>----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>Source: Licit and illicit drug use in Amsterdam: report of a
household survey in 1990 on the prevalence of drug use among the
population of 12 years and over J.P. Sandwijk, P.D.A. Cohen, S.
Musterd. Amsterdam: Instituut voor Sociale Geografie, Faculteit
der Ruimtelijke Wetenschappen, Universiteit van </p>

<p>Amsterdam. The table shows that even in Amsterdam (an urban
area where drug use is always highest) cocaine use was very low
in 1990. The household survey will be repeated in 1994. </p>

<p>Tomorrow--Haven't planned that far ahead yet. Suggestions
Welcome </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #43-MoreNetherlands </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-26 15:17:33 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Sorry I'm late today. My wife decided the carpet cleaning was
more important and I &quot;had&quot; to agree with her ;-) </p>

<p>In keeping with the Netherlands theme from yesterday, I came
across a column in today's Dallas Morning News Viewpoints section
written by Joanne Jacobs who writes for the San Jose Mercury
News. </p>

<p>Following are excerpts from her column. (Any typos are mine) </p>

<p><b>Holland's Approach to Drugs</b> </p>

<p><b>Joanne Jacobs</b> </p>

<p>...Contrary to what Americans think, drugs aren't legal in the
Netherlands. It is just that drug laws aren't enforced. Marijuana
and hashish are tolerated, unless users or sellers cause
problems, in which case a </p>

<p>coffeehouse may be closed down. Hard drug smugglers and
vendors aren't tolerated. </p>

<p>Occasionally, police sweep a neighborhood where drug use is
out of hand. Otherwise addicts are offered help at rehabilitation
or residential treatment centers. Addiction isn't criminal. </p>

<p>A Baltimore grand jury recently came out for
&quot;medicalizing&quot; rather than criminalizing--or
legalizing--drug abuse. It proposed offering users treatment
instead of time behind bars. The idea is lifted from the </p>

<p>Netherlands and other countries that try to reduce the harm
caused by drug abuse, rather than turning users into criminals. </p>

<p>The grand jury concluded that legalizing drugs would increase
addiction but suggested that doctors might be allowed to
prescribe drugs to addicts. The goal isn't to make everyone clean
and sober--that isn't possible--but, rather, to lower the level
of street dealing and the crime that goes with it. &quot;Removing
the profit from the drug trade may be the only way to
resolve&quot; the problem, the report says. </p>

<p>According to the report, 80 percent of prisoners in Baltimore
jails are in for drug-related crimes. Baltimore Circuit Judge
Joseph P. McCurdy Jr. had told the grand jury to consider
decriminalization, saying:&quot;Many of us feel that the war on
drugs hasn't succeeded (my note: duhhh), that we are losing
ground with each passing day, that we are wasting resources and
that we have to look at the problem anew&quot;. </p>

<p>...The Dutch say that their relaxed approach hasn't boosted
the Dutch addiction rate and that marijuana use by teenagers is
declining. Junkies steal car radios to finance their habits. But
there is little violence. The streets are safe. </p>

<p>The Dutch success with harm reduction policies may not
transplant easily to American society, which is more puritanical
and more violent. But we have to get serious about the trade-offs
in confronting drug abuse. Protecting law-abiding citizens from
street violence should be our top priority. Making it harder for
drug abusers to harm themselves shouldn't take precedence. </p>

<p>Medicalizing drugs wouldn't make the steets as safe as they
are in Amsterdam. But it could help. And it would make room in
prisons for the real criminals. </p>

<p>Talk to you folks manana, now back to my Web Browser (what a
tool) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #44-Interpol </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-27 12:09:50 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Following is a statement made by Raymond Kendall, secretary
general of the International Criminal Police Organization. Let's
all jump on his bandwagon. </p>

<p><b>Head of Interpol advocates &quot;drug&quot;
decriminalization</b> </p>

<p>On Wednesday, June 8, the head of the international police
agency Interpol stated his support for decriminalizing drugs. </p>

<p>Raymond Kendall, secretary general of the International
Criminal Police Organization, responded to the British Police's
call to decriminalize drugs by saying, &quot;I think we should
accept the reality of the situation... that there are many, many
drug users who are living in a situation of illegality
already.&quot; </p>

<p>Kendall's comment touched on one of the main arguments for
ending Marijuana Prohibition, namely that prohibition is not
preventing or dissuading people from consuming cannabis. </p>

<p>Kendall also acknowledged that most British cannabis consumers
are not even being dealt with by the law, probably because (1)
most consumers go undetected by the law, and (2) many who are
actually caught by the police are not arrested. This comment
touches on two more NORML tenets: (1) It is simply impossible to
arrest and incarcerate every marijuana consumer, and (2)
marijuana's illegality is causing widespread disrespect for the
law and makes police the citizens 'enemies'. </p>

<p>Many Supporters of Marijuana Prohibition repeatedly insist
that marijuana &quot;legalization&quot; will encourage people to
use the drug. The truth is that millions are already consuming
cannabis in complete disregard for the law. </p>

<p>... Civil Forfeiture is Government Theft </p>

<p>--- DB 1.54/002827 </p>

<p>* Origin: Elan Data Systems (1:147/1011.12) </p>

<p>If anyone is interested in the internet sites I find all this
good info, e-mail. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #45-Interpol#2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-28 10:58:30 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Another Interpol Article</b> </p>

<p>Date: 05-Oct-94 20:20 PDT </p>

<p><b>RTw 10/04 Interpol head says drugs a threat to democracy</b>
</p>

<p><b>By Melanie Goodfellow </b></p>

<p>ROME, Oct 4 (Reuter) - The global drug problem is one of the
biggest threats to democracy and the scourge cannot be conquered
by law enforcement alone, one of the world's top police officials
said on Tuesday. </p>

<p>&quot;I believe that the struggle between East and West has
been replaced by the world's struggle against drugs,&quot;
Interpol Secretary-General Raymond Kendall told reporters on the
final day of the organisation's 63rd annual conference. </p>

<p>&quot;But there is an imbalance between the resources put into
the law enforcement side and that put into stemming the demand by
which I mean the drug abuse side,&quot; he added. &quot;Unless we
address this we will not affect the problem.&quot; </p>

<p>Kendall said that the United Nations' drugs commission had
recommended a move away from law enforcement which hit suppliers
towards an emphasis on more powerful health and education
campaigns which would cut the demand for drugs. </p>

<p>&quot;Unfortunately there are very few countries which have
adopted these recommendations,&quot; added Kendall, whose
organisation coordinates the work of 176 police forces worldwide.
</p>

<p>Over 500 top international policemen attended the six-day
conference at a police school on the outskirts of Rome. </p>

<p>Money laundering, counterfeiting of currency and luxury goods,
and environmental crime such as the dumping of toxic waste and
trafficking of nuclear products were also high on the agenda,
Kendall said. </p>

<p>Interpol also pledged to work closely with the International
tribunal set up to tackle crimes committed in former Yugoslavia. </p>

<p>Next year's conference is to be held in Beijing in China,
while Turkey and India are vying to host it in 1996. </p>

<p>Interpol, which will have a budget of $28 million next year,
elected Swedish national police commissioner, Bjorn Eriksson, as
the organisation's new chairman. </p>

<p>&quot;It's a great honour for me. There are few trade names so
well known as the concept of Interpol. Every little girl and boy
in Sweden knows about Interpol because it's in all the detective
stories,&quot; the 48-year-old Eriksson. </p>

<p>In his speech, Eriksson called for greater cooperation among
the world's police forces and the need for public support. </p>

<p>&quot;It is vital that criminals should be unable to find
refuge in any part of the world,&quot; he said. </p>

<p>REUTER Copyright Reuters America Inc. 1994. All rights
reserved. </p>

<p>Poster's note: Drug addiction is a disease. There is nothing
criminal about the use of drugs. I can't help it if
&quot;uninformed&quot; people are in charge of making laws and
the lawmakers that are &quot;informed&quot; are too
&quot;chicken&quot; (haven't used that expression in a long time,
but it seemed to fit) to do anything about it. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #46-Cancer </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-01 12:19:13 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Back to the medical stuff again. If you have cancer or know
someone that does, please read the following article. </p>

<p><b>A quote from the July 6-12, 1991 issue of the Economist</b>
</p>

<p>Drugs can be medicinal or recreational: marijuana is both. For
nearly 20 years advocates of its medicinal use- to relieve the
nausea of chemotherapy, to treat glaucoma and to help AIDS
patients gain weighthave fought in the American courts to have
the drug reclassified so that doctors can prescribe it. Currently
marijuana is grouped with the most disapproved of drugs, such as
LSD and heroin. The government argues it must remain so because
it has no &quot;currently accepted medical use in
treatment&quot;. A new study by researchers at Harvard refutes
this. </p>

<p>Mainly because of its effectiveness in treating the vomiting
common among cancer patients during chemotherapy,
tetrahydrocannibinol (THC), the main psychoactive ingredient in
marijuana, was approved for medical use in America in 1985. A
synthetic form of THC is sold in pill form under the trade name
Marinol; last year almost 100,000 doses were prescribed. Smokable
marijuana, however, is available to just 34 people through a
&quot;compassionate use&quot; programme. To the confusion of many
a police officer, these patients are given a supply of marijuana
cigarettes rolled by government hands at a research farm in
Mississippi. </p>

<p>Proponents claim that smoking marijuana works better than
taking oral THC. In 1988 Francis Young, a judge who examines
administrative issues for the Drug Enforcement Agency,
recommended that marijuana be reclassified on the ground that
&quot;current acceptance&quot; of a drug is present if a
&quot;respectable minority&quot; of doctors endorse it. The
administration disagreed, claiming that the vast majority of
doctors believe oral THC is as reliable and effective as smokable
marijuana and produces fewer side-effects. </p>

<p>Enter Rick Doblin and Mark Kleiman, two drug-policy
researchers at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. To test
the administrations thesis, they conducted a random survey of
members of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. Some 1,035
responded, about 10% of America's oncologists. The results,
published in the July 1st issue of the Journal of Clinical
Oncology, surprised even Mr. Doblin and Mr. Kleiman; nearly half
of the respondents said they would prescribe smokable marijuana
if it were legal. Indeed 44% of them said they had, in effect,
done so already by recommending it to one or more of their
patients, despite the possibility of prosecution. </p>

<p>Nearly two-thirds of the oncologists agreed that marijuana was
an effective anti-emetic, while 77% of the 157 who expressed a
preference said that smokable marijuana is more effective than
oral THC. A majority said that marijuana was no worse than
Marinol in terms of producing bad side-effects. </p>

<p>Adios for today. Back again manana. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #47-Notables </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-02 12:25:41 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is a column called &quot;Notable People for
Legalization&quot;. This column was published in the Daily Texan,
the student paper at The University of Texas. Most of the
columnist's research info came from Internet sources. </p>

<p>********* </p>

<p><b>Support swells for legal drugs</b> </p>

<p><b>Gabriel Demombynes</b> </p>

<p><b>TEXAN COLUMNIST</b> </p>

<p>In recent months, discussion of drug legalization has vaulted
from the pages of High Times and obscure academic journals onto
the front page of The New York Times. Prominent people are
talking seriously about changing the direction of America's drug
policy. </p>

<p>The shift in sentiment can be traced to an effort begun a year
ago in California. Several notable names gathered at Stanford
University's Hoover institution to draft and sign a letter
demanding a fresh look at drug policy. </p>

<p>The original signatories included Nobel-laureate economist
Milton Friedman, former Secretary of State George Shultz,
Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke and about 20 others. </p>

<p>Since the initial meeting, hundreds of doctors, businessmen,
attorneys, educators, judges and members of the clergy have
signed the resolution. Among them are the mayors and police
chiefs of San Francisco, Oakland and San Jose; 20/20
correspondent Hugh Downs; and members of the California Medical
Association. </p>

<p>On Feb. 27, The New York Times printed a similar proclamation
by another Nobel laureate, Gabriel Garcia Marquez. He's convinced
more than 2,000 of his Latin American intellectual buddies to
sign the statement declaring that we must &quot;focus on the
various ways in which legalization can be administered. This
means putting an end to the self-seeking, pernicious, useless war
that the consuming countries have inflicted on us.&quot; </p>

<p>To protest the inanity of our drug policy, roughly 50 of the
nation's 680 federal judges now refuse to accept drug cases. One
researcher surveyed 450 judges, prosecutors, and defense
attorneys and found that 95 percent believe &quot;the drug war
has failed and more innovative measures are needed.&quot; </p>

<p>The Feb. 28 Time included a pro-legalization column by
respected writer Barbara Ehrenreich. Surgeon General Joycelyn
Elders says that we would &quot;markedly reduce our crime
rate&quot; by legalizing drug use. The Economist last year
editorialized in favor of legalization. Conservative pundit
William Buckley has said, &quot;If you had all the facts, you
would agree like me that marijuana should be legal.&quot; </p>

<p>This political change has begun to gather momentum because the
Hoover signatories explicitly shied away from advocating a
specific new policy. Some favor merely making marijuana available
for medical uses. Others want comprehensive drug legalization. </p>

<p>All are part of the movement -- which has made for some
strange bedfellows. Just imagine Friedman phoning up Garcia
Marquez: </p>

<p>Friedman: &quot;Gabriel, it's Milt. What's say you and me and
Joy Elders get together to discuss this drug legalization
stuff?&quot; </p>

<p>Garcia Marquez: &quot;Last night I awoke from the desperate
slumber of a man who has tasted his lover's tears. In my bliss I
felt a prescient understanding. Next Tuesday two men and a woman
will meet on the zocalo in San Cristobal. While passionate men
die on the streets in the name of revolution, the three friends
will sip cafe con leche and whisper their desires.&quot; </p>

<p>Friedman: &quot;OK, so I'll see you Tuesday. But you're
buying. I don't carry any of that Mexican funny money.&quot; </p>

<p>The curious coalition shows no sign of breaking up. A proposal
now being considered in Congress would charge a national
commission with recommending a new national drug policy. The
resolution has 17 co-sponsors in the House and five backers in
the Senate. </p>

<p>Mark Smith, UT assistant professor of American studies and
history, teaches a class in the &quot;Cultural History of Alcohol
and Drugs.&quot; He says the hardliners &quot;have been
discredited because they've been in power and their results have
been absurd.&quot; </p>

<p>It's already possible to talk about legalization without
having a &quot;Dope Fiend&quot; label pasted across one's chest. </p>

<p>More tomorrow. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #48-AncientUse </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-03 12:05:37 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Another interesting article I came across. This stuff's been
around for a LONG time. </p>

<p><b>USE OF MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT TIMES</b> </p>

<p>The use of marijuana is as old as the history of man and dates
to the prehistoric period. Marijuana is closely connected with
the history and development of some of the oldest nations on
earth. It has played a </p>

<p>significant role in the religions and cultures of Africa, the
Middle East, India, and China. </p>

<p>Richard E. Schultes, a prominent researcher in the field of
psychoactive plants, said in an article he wrote entitled
&quot;Man and Marijuana&quot;: </p>

<p>&quot;...that early man experimented with all plant materials
that he could chew and could not have avoided discovering the
properties of cannabis (marijuana), for in his quest for seeds
and oil, he certainly ate the sticky tops of the plant. Upon
eating hemp the euphoric, ecstatic and hallucinatory aspects may
have introduced man to an other-worldly plane from which emerged
religious beliefs, perhaps even the concept of deity. The plant
became accepted as a special gift of the gods, a sacred medium
for communion with the spiritual world and as such it has
remained in some cultures to the present.&quot; </p>

<p>The effects of marijuana was proof to the ancients that the
spirit and power of the god(s) existed in this plant and that it
was literally a messenger (angel) or actually the Flesh and Blood
and/or Bread of the god(s) and was and continues to be a holy
sacrament. Considered to be sacred, marijuana has been used in
religious worship from before recorded history. </p>

<p>According to William A. Embolden in his book Ritual Use of
Cannabis Sativa L, p. 235: </p>

<p>&quot;Shamanistic traditions of great antiquity in Asia and
the Near East has as one of their most important elements the
attempt to find God without a vale of tears; that cannabis played
a role in this, at least in some areas, is born out in the
philology surrounding the ritualistic use of the plant. Whereas
Western religious traditions generally stress sin, repentance,
and mortification of the flesh, certain older non-Western
religious cults seem to have employed Cannabis as a euphoriant,
which allowed the participant a joyous path to the Ultimate;
hence such appellations as &quot;heavenly guide&quot;. </p>

<p>According to &quot;Licit and Illicit Drugs&quot; by the
Consumer Union, page 397-398: </p>

<p>&quot;Ashurbanipal lived about 650 B.C., but the cuneiform
descriptions of marijuana in his library &quot;are generally
regarded as obvious copies of much older texts.&quot; Says Dr.
Robert P. Walton, an American physician and authority on
marijuana, &quot;This evidence serves to project the origin of
hashish back to the earliest beginnings of history.&quot; </p>

<p>Berry interesting. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #49-DeathRates </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-04 12:17:06 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>The following was posted to the Newsgroup alt.drugs </p>

<p>Part 1 </p>

<p>From: glo@globox.Eng.Sun.COM (Gary Owens) </p>

<p>Newsgroups: alt.drugs </p>

<p>Subject: Re: Death RATES among recreational drug users. </p>

<p><b>Death RATES among recreational drug users.</b> </p>

<p>The exact numbers vary, depending on the source and their
methodology. I have presented several sets of numbers here. In
general you will see that the vast amount of money/energy/etc.
applied to &quot;illicit&quot; drugs is quite misplaced if one is
counting deaths or death rate per user. You may have access in
your library to things like the Center for Disease Control
Mortality and Morbidity reports and yearly summaries. The last
one I looked at listed 800 something deaths a year for aspirin
(and more for acetominephin (sp?) and ibuprofen) - verses 0 for
cannabis (hemp/pot/marijuana/...). </p>

<p>============ </p>

<p>(on the back cover of The Emperor Wears No Clothes) &quot;How
Dangerous is Marijuana in Comparison to Other Substances?&quot;
Number of American Deaths per year that result directly or
primarily from the following (selected) causes nationwide,
according to World Almanacs, Life Insurance Actuarial (death)
Rates, and the last 18 years of the U.S. Surgeon General's
Reports. </p>

<p>Tobacco....................................340,000 to 395,000 </p>

<p>Alcohol (not including 50% of all highway </p>

<p>deaths and 65% of all murders).....125,000+ </p>

<p>Aspirin (including deliberate overdose).... 180 to 1,000+ </p>

<p>Caffeine (from stress, ulcers and triggering </p>

<p>irregular heartbeats, etc.)........ 1,000 to 10,000 </p>

<p>'Legal' drug overdose (deliberate or accidental) </p>

<p>from legal, prescribed or patent medicines </p>

<p>and/or mixing with alcohol e.g. Valium/alcohol... 14,000 to
27,000 </p>

<p>Illicit drug overdose (deliberate or accidental) from </p>

<p>all illegal drugs................................ 3,800 to
5,200 </p>

<p>marijuana (including overdose)........................... 0
(zero) </p>

<p>------------ </p>

<p>The Emperor Wears No Clothes </p>

<p>by Jack Herer </p>

<p>available from: </p>

<p>H.E.M.P. Publishing </p>

<p>5632 Van Nuys Blvd suite 210 </p>

<p>Van Nuys CA 91401 (213) 392-1806 </p>

<p>============ </p>

<p>&gt;from Thinking About Drug Legalization </p>

<p>by James Ostrowski </p>

<p>Cato Institute Paper # 121, May 25, 1989 $2.00 </p>

<p>to order or for information, write </p>

<p>Policy Analysis </p>

<p>Cato Institute </p>

<p>224 Second St. SE </p>

<p>Washington DC 20003 </p>

<p>pg 47 reprinted without permission (I didn't find
&quot;Copyright...&quot; or circled-C, but they did say to
contact them... I guess if you want to reprint the whole thing -
what the hey - at $2.00 for 64 pages why reprint, just buy the
whole thing from them! </p>

<p>[ my (glo's) the posters notes in [] - glo] </p>

<p>[ glo note: *xxx* used in place of underlines - glo] </p>

<p>=============== </p>

<p>pg 47 </p>

<p>Table 4 presents the estimated per capita death rates for each
drug. (While a number of people have died as a result of
marijuana *enforcement*, there are apparently no confirmed deaths
traceable to marijuana *use*.) The figures for cocaine and heroin
have been adjusted downward, in accordance with the previous
analysis, to include only those deaths due to drug use per se.
The unadjusted death rate for these drugs is in parentheses. </p>

<p>Estimated Per Capita Death Rates by Drugs </p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p>Drug Users Deaths per Year Deaths per 100,000 </p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p>Tobacco 60 million 390,000 (a) 650 </p>

<p>alcohol 100 million 150,000 (b) 150 </p>

<p>Heroin 500,000 400 (c) 80 (400) </p>

<p>Cocaine 5 million 200 (c) 4 (20) </p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p>(a) &quot;Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking: 25
Years of Progress&quot; Surgeon General's Report (1989). </p>

<p>References &quot;b&quot; and &quot;c&quot; on following post. </p>

<p>Hemp FACT #49-Pt2DeathRates </p>

<p>Date: 95-03-04 12:19:25 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>These are references from the previous post. </p>

<p>(b) Estimates vary greatly, depending upon whether all health
consequences, or only those traditionally associated with
alcoholism, are considered. The Fifth Special Report to the U.S.
Congress on Alcoholism and Health from the Secretary of Health
and Human Services contains two references indicating a death
toll of 200,000: The report states, first, that alcohol
&quot;plays a role in 10% of all deaths in the United
States,&quot; which comes to about 200,000 deaths each year. P.
vi. It further states that present estimates of the death toll
from alcohol abuse are as high as 93.2 per 100,000. Ibid., p. x.
This ratio translates into a total of about 210,000. </p>

<p>(c) These figures were determined as follows: Drug Abuse
Warning Network (DAWN) heroin and cocaine fatalities for 1984,
1985, and 1986 were averaged. The number of suicides was
subtracted. The figures were discounted to account for deaths in
which both heroin and cocaine played a role. Since DAWN covers
about one-third of the nation's population but almost all major
urban areas where drug use florishes, totals were doubled to
arrive at yearly estimates of 2,000 for heroin deaths and 1,000
for cocaine deaths. Finally, these figures were dis-counted by 80
percent in accordance with the analysis presented in the text </p>

<p>========== end of table 4, pg 47====================== <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>