
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-54</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B019-117</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/konopi.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052823 text/html 13659
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:08 GMT
Content-length: 13441
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Hemp - Its History - Traditional and Popular Application</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/_private/schaffer_logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="5">HEMP -- ITS HISTORY -- TRADITIONAL AND POPULAR
APPLICATION</font></p>

<p><font size="3">KONOPI JAKO LEK (Hemp) [in Czech {Slovak}
except for summaries]&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Acta Universitatis Palackianaw
Olomucensis--Tom. VI 1955</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Prof. Dr. Jan Kabelik</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary (p. 41)&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A review of hemp applications -- hemp shoots
and hemp seeds -- taken from ancient herbaria, popular
pharmacology, and the present official pharmacology has been
presented inasmuch as partial recordings of the application of
the cannabis extract have been extant. The author ascertains that
the antibiotic and analgetic effect of the hemp, forgotten in
nowadays medical science, was made use of by our forefathers
particularly. In the following reports no mention is made of the
hashish effect and this for the reason that our hemp does not
possess any stupefying effect. In Europe hashish had been unknown
up to Napoleon's Campaign to Egypt and has been imported from
then on. &nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">THE ANTIBACTERIAL EFFECT OF CANNABIS INDICA
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary (p. 55-56)&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Our study of the Mideuropean flora with regard
to its contents of substances producing antibacterial effects
comprehends 3,000 species from which the Indian hemp --- Cannabis
indica --- grown in Czechoslovakia has been selected for
elaborate investigation. A preliminary method of isolation
accomplished by paper chromatography with the disclosure of an
effective zone in the biological way has been described. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The most advantageous methods of extraction
were determined, and the bactericide effect of the hemp
substances experimentally proved in vitro on Gram-positive
microorganisms: Staphylococcus pyogenes autreus haemolyticus,
Staphylococcus aureus --- resistant to penicillin, Streptococcus
beta haemolyticus, Streptococcus viridans, Pneumococcus
Cornyebacterium diphteriae, and Bacillus anthracis.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Gram-negative microorganisms of the typhus-coli
group remain resistent, as well as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Proteus vulgaris. An excellent antibacterial effect on
Mycobacterium in vitro even in a dilution 1: 150,000 could be
ascertained.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A parallel between the bactericide effect of
isolated, amorphous, and crystal substances, and a comparison of
the sensibility of the two applied bacterial methods, both the
modified Oxford method and the tests in a liquid medium was made
in detail. The limit of efficacy in the maximal dilution of
biologically active substance (1: 100,000) and the velocity of
their effect in various dilutions were determined. The influence
of inactivating factors has been studied in detail. Blood,
plasma, and serum partly inactivate them and reduce their
antibacterial effect.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">As a conclusion, a comparison of the efficacy
of these active substance[s] with penicillin and streptomycin at
various pH was worked out, and a summary of hemp preparations
manufactured for the purpose of clinical application in
stomatology, oto-rhino-laryngology, dermatology and phthisiology
has been given.</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;PHARMACODYNAMIC EFFECT OF SUBSTANCES
ISOLATED FROM CANNABIS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;Summary (p. 71) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A preliminary pharmacologic investigation of
the hemp substances was carried out. It was ascertained that the
isolated hemp extract possesses analgetic, anticonvulsive and
locally anaesthetic properties. Administered to white mice per os
its toxicity was determined with 1.83 g / kg as LD-50.* (*Ed.
note...LD-50 ratio of 18,300: 1 for a concentrated extract.) Acid
II and the acetylderivative of the canabidiol-acid --- pure
substances obtained from hemp do not possess these pharmacologic
properties. All the investigated substances were observed to
bring forth local irritations. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Further studies will have to explain this
irritative effect with regard to the fact that the extract from
the drogue, (sic) when being deprived of a part of its ballast
substances only, does not show to be an irritative factor in
clinical use but, on the contrary, does relieve pain entirely, a
fact having been known to ancient physicians, and nowadays newly
confirmed both by stomatologists and oto-laryngologists. &nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">THERAPEUTICAL RESULTS IN STOMATOLOGY AFTER
APPLICATION OF SUBSTANCES OBTAINED FROM CANNABIS INDICA &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary (p. 77-78) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Cannabis substances were applied either in the
form of a 5% hempsalve with lanolin, or they were used in the
form of alcohol extracts for mouth sprayes. (sic) The application
of these substances shows significant positive results in the
treatment of herpes labialis, paradental painful gum pockets, gum
capuches over the wisdom teeth, dry sockets, aphthae and ulcerous
gingivostomatitis. More than five hundred patients were subjected
to this treatment.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Cannabis substances found their application to
practical advantage mixed with sterile tooth-powder for the
treatment and maintainance of a vital tooth pulp. This was done
in cases of indirect covering of the tooth pulp (about 300
patients -- 80 of whom were reexamined), and in those of direct
covering (about 70 cases -- with 15 patients reexamined). Even
here quick analgesia was considered to be the positive effect. In
two patients, direct covering was experienced with teeth destined
for extraction beforehand, and the extraction performed a certain
time thereafter and the teeth studied histologically. For general
therapeutical use, it is suggested to verify these methods in
further cases or, eventually, to find methods of a more suitable
aplication of cannabis substances in direct or indirect covering
of the tooth pulp. &nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">APPLICATION OF THE CANNABIS INDICA EXTRACT IN
PRESERVING STOMATOLOGY&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary (p. 81-82) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In 64% of patients with deep dental caries
incidence, and in more than 30% cases of casually opened or
irritated tooth-pulp, and finally in 41% of persons suffering
from pulpitis partialis positive response could be observed when
treated with cannabis paste. This result corresponds to the
analogous number obtained on application of the Lezovic-paste.
(Paste containing a high ratio of streptomycin, penicillin,
tricresol or benzocaine respectively.) The anaesthetic effect of
cannabis has been attested: in numerous cases with negative
response to therapy painlessness lasting for several days could
be attained, in many patients painless necrosis could be
achieved. In a number of cases the failure was due to an
unsuitable vehicle that did not liberate the antibioticum in the
right proportion. (The same vehicle as with the Lezovic-paste was
made use of.) Future research work will have to include further
clinical control, histological investigations and the search for
a more proper vehicle.) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">STUDY ON THE EFFECT OF CANNABIS INDICA IN
OTO-RHINO-LARYNGOLOGY&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary (p. 85)&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A positive response due to antibiotics obtained
from hemp could be observed in patients with otitis, ulcers of
the anterior narines, and furuncular otitis. With chronical
otitis positive results could be obtained in most cases --
failure, however, in patients with pyocyaneum and proteus
infections. The most striking effect could be observed with
sinusitis, particularly with both-sided sinusitis maxillaris when
one side had been treated with penicillin on control with
negative result, whilst the other side had been healed by three
punctures of hemp extract. The sinus resultlessly treated wit
penicillin showed an immediate positive response to hemp
thereafter. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">EFFECTIVENESS OF CANNABIS INDICA ON CHRONIC
OTITIS MEDIA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;Summary (p. 89) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Local application of cannabis indica was
experienced in 18 patients suffering from chronic otitis media,
and in 4 patients after mastoidectomy. A significant improvement
was noticed in 13 cases of chronic otitis. Up to the present, our
experiences are of a rather short time, i.e., of three weeks
only. It will be necessary to test cannabis with other more
proper vehicles that would gradually liberate antibiotica on a
satisfactory scale. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="3">PRELIMINARY STUDY ON THE LOCAL EFFECT OF
CANNABIS INDICA --- A REMEDY FOR SPECIFIC FISTULAS &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary ( p. 92) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The reported results of our preliminary
investigations made it possible to establish that specific
fistulas respod positively to hemp extracts, except the cases
brought about by pyocyaneum infection. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">IMPORTANCE OF HEMPSEEDS IN THE TUBERCULOSIS
THERAPY &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary (p. 106-107) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The application of the hempseed in the
tuberculosis therapy is based on a thirty years' experience
acquired with regard to diet at the sanatorium in Jince. The
right function of the liver has always been considered by the
authors as the necessary supposition for complete assimilation:
that is why those commands and limitations, nowadays known as the
fundamental rules of a liver diet, have been stressed. To a
certain extent, we consider it to be the universal base of every
diet therapy. Next to the vitamins B-1, C and A the tuberculosis
diet must contain protein substances above all and among those
particularly such as got from nature the faculty to yield
building material for the construction of the organism. Such are
especially curd, egg-yolk and spare protein substances contained
in corn, nuts and other fruits. It is essential to get these
proteins prepared without their being denatured. Curd prepared in
an expert way becomes a precious dietetic, it is worthless in its
tough or coagulated from. Analgous observations can be made with
raw or hard boiled egg-yolks. A daily dose of only 15 or 20 g of
oatflakes in the form of porridge prepared in an expert way
proves to be a highly effective substance in a short time,
whereas twenty times as much cereals denatured by baking or
boiling in water, show to be a mere indifferent foodstuff. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Ground hempseeds extracted by milk at a
temperature from 60 to 80 degrees C. prove to be analogically ---
even in their smallest doses --- an utmost effective remedy. The
mouldable organism of the consumptive child is a good criterion
for such a diet, eked out with hempseeds. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;(Special thanks to Jack Herer, author of
&quot;The Emperor Wears No Clothes&quot; for pointing out this
forgotten study from Czechoslovakia.)</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>