
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-46</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B014-17</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/alcohol/MCCLURES.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122042331 text/html 7662
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:23:24 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:35:37 GMT
Content-length: 7445
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The City of Chicago, A Study of the Great Immoralities</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->

<hr>

<h2><font color="#000000"><font size="2">The City of Chicago, A
Study of the Great Immoralities</font></font></h2>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2"><strong>George Kibbe
Turner, &quot;The City of Chicago, A Study of the Great
Immoralities,&quot; </strong><strong><i>McClure's Magazine</i></strong><strong>
28(April 1907): 576-79</strong><br>
</font></font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">&quot;The sale of
dissipation is not only a great business; it is among the few
greatest businesses of Chicago. The leading branch of it ... is
the sale of alcoholic liquor.... The liquor interests are vastly
more extended in Chicago that any other. There are 7,300 licensed
liquor sellers in Chicago, and in addition about a thousand
places where liquor is sold illegally. The only business which
approaches it in number of establishments ... is the grocery
trade, which has about 5,200. The city spends at least half as
much for what it drinks as for what it eats.... </font></font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">The great central power
in the liquor business in America is the brewery. ...The
breweries own or control the great majority of the saloons of
American cities. They have a distinct policy:--if there are not
as many saloons as there can be, supply them. This is what has
been done in Chicago. Fully ninety per cent of the Chicago
saloons are under some obligation to the brewery; with at least
eighty per cent, this obligation is a serious one.</font> </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">The business of the
brewery is to sell beer.... The brewery, under present conditions
in Chicago, must sell beer at all cost, or promptly die. This is
because the brewery business has become over-capitalized and
overbuilt there for at least ten years. There has been furious
competition.... At the present time a full third of the capital
invested in the forty companies and fifty plants is not earning
dividends. Under these circumstances, the breweries of Chicago
can have but one aim--to fill Chicago with beer to the point of
saturation.</font></font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">Each brewer disposes of
his product by contracting with special saloon-keepers to sell
his beer and no other. The more saloons he has, the better....
The brewers employ special agents to watch continually every nook
and cranny in Chicago where it may be possible to pour in a
little more beer. If a rival brewery's saloon keeper is doing
well, his best bartender is ravished from him and set up in
business alongside. If a new colony of foreigners appears, some
compatriot is set at once to selling them liquor. Italians,
Greeks, Lithuanians, Poles,--all the rough and hairy tribes which
have been drawn into Chicago,--have their trade exploited to the
utmost. ...No man with two hundred dollars, who was not subject
to arrest on sight, need go without a saloon in Chicago.... With
that two hundred dollars as a margin, the brewery sorts him out a
set of its stock of saloon fixtures, pays his rent, pays his
license, and supplies him with beer. He pays for everything in an
extra price on each barrel of beer.... </font></font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">Under this system ...
Chicago has four times as many saloons as it should have, from
any standpoint whatever, except, of course, the brewers' and the
wholesalers'. A new license law ... now limits the number to one
[saloon] in every five hundred people; but it will be years
before that law will have any appreciable effect. There is now
one retail liquor dealer to every two hundred and eighty five
people, disregarding, of course, the one thousand unlicensed
dealers. In the laboring wards the licensed saloons run as many
as one to every one hundred and fifty. Take the stock-yards.
Around that long and dismal stockade, at every hole from which a
human being can emerge, a shop or group of shops sits waiting. At
the main entrance they lie massed in batteries....</font> </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">The Chicago market is
thoroughly saturated with beer, and incidentally with other
liquor. Reckoning it out by population, every man, woman, and
child in Chicago drank, in 1906, two and one-quarter barrels of
beer,--that is, seventy gallons,--three and one-half times the
average consumption in the United States.... </font></font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">Now, if the competition
is red-handed among the breweries, it is simply ravenous among
the saloon-keepers. There is a popular fallacy that there is a
great profit in the retail saloon business. The saloon-keepers
themselves believe this when they go into it....</font></font></p>

<p><font color="#000000"><font size="2">All this means one
thing--a premium on the irregular and criminal saloon-keeper. The
patronage of the saloon is a very fickle and elusive thing. A
place is popular, or it is nothing. ... There are two general
business methods of attracting [a good trade]: By giving
unusually large measures or big bonuses of free lunch; or by
carrying illegitimate and illegal side lines. The first ... does
not leave large margins of profit; the second does. A year ago
the license fee was raised in Chicago from five hundred to one
thousand dollars. It was hoped this would wipe out the criminal
saloon. It did, of course, nothing of the sort. The poor,
miserable little dives in the working-man's ward, each snatching
a starvation living from the lips of the dwellers of the dozen
smoke-befouled frame tenements about it, staggered down--a few
hundred of them--and died. The man with the side-line of
prostitution and gambling naturally survived and had the benefit
of the others' failure.</font> </font></p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>