
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-64</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-298</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/eleuch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064827 text/html 30981
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:48:16 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:21:52 GMT
Content-length: 30762
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Road to Eleusis - Chapter 1</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h6>CHAPTER ONE</h6>

<h3>THE WASSON ROAD TO ELEUSIS</h3>

<hr>

<p> With this little book we begin a new chapter in the history
of the fifty-year-old discipline of ethnomycology, a chapter that
for the first time takes within its purview, and in a big way,
our own cultural past, our legacy from ancient Greece.
Ethnomycology is simply the study of the role of mushrooms, in
the broadest sense, in the past of the human race; and it is a
branch of ethnobotany. </p>

<p> The English language lacks a word to designate the higher
fungi. &quot;Toadstool&quot; is an epithet, a pejorative
designation embracing all those fungal growths that the user
distrusts, whether rightly or wrongly. &quot;Mushroom&quot; is
ambiguous, covering different areas of the fungal world for
different persons. In this little book we will use
&quot;mushroom&quot; for all the higher fungi. Now that at long
last the world is coming to know these fungal growths in all
their myriad shapes and colors and smells and textures, perhaps
this novel usage will answer to a need and come to be generally
accepted. </p>

<p> We are three who have enlisted for this presentation. Dr.
A1bert Hofmann is the Swiss chemist renowned for his discovery in
1943 of LSD, but his familiarity with the plant alkaloids is
encyclopaedic and he will draw our attention to attributes of
some of them relevant to the Eleusinian Mysteries. </p>

<p> As we are dealing with a central theme of Greek civilization
in antiquity, it was obvious that we needed the cooperation of a
Greek scholar. At the appropriate moment I learned of Professor
Carl A. P. Ruck, of Boston University, who for some years has
been making notable discoveries in the recalcitrant area of Greek
ethnobotany. For many months we three have been studying the
proposal that we are making and his paper will be the third and
concluding one. The <i>Homeric Hymn to</i> <i>Demeter</i> is the
source for the myth that underlies Eleusis and we offer a new
English rendering of it by Danny Staples. </p>

<p> It will be my function, in this first of three papers, to
stress certain attributes of the cult of inebriating mushrooms in
Mexico. </p>

<p> Early Man in Greece, in the second millennium before Christ,
founded the Mysteries of Eleusis and they held spellbound the
initiates who each year attended the rite. Silence as to what
took place there was obligatory: the laws of Athens were extreme
in the penalties that were imposed on any who infringed the
secret, but throughout the Greek world, far beyond the reach of
Athens' laws, the secret was kept spontaneously throughout
Antiquity, and since the suspension of the Mysteries in the 4th
century A. D. that Secret has become a built-in element in the
lore of Ancient Greece. I would not be surprised if some
classical scholars would even feel that we are guilty of a
sacrilegious outrage at now prying open the secret. On 15
November 1956 I read a brief paper before the American
Philosophical Society describing the Mexican mushroom cult and in
the ensuing oral discussion I intimated that this cult might lead
us to the solution of the Eleusinian Mysteries. A famous English
archaeologist specializing in the archaeology of Greece, with
whom I had had the friendliest relations for about thirty-five
years, wrote me in a letter a little later the following: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>I do not think that Mycenae had anything to do with the
    divine mushroom or the Eleusinian mysteries either. May I add
    a word of warning? Stick to your Mexican mushroom cult and
    beware of seeing mushrooms everywhere. We much enjoyed your
    Philadelphia paper and would recommend you keep as close to
    that as you can. Forgive the frankness of an old friend. </p>
</blockquote>

<p> I am sorry that he has now joined the shades in Hades, or
perhaps I should be happy that he will not be pained by my
brashness in disregarding his well-meant advice.</p>

<hr>

<p> My late wife Valentina Pavlovna and I were the first to use
the term ethnomycology and we have been closely identified with
the progress in this discipline over the past fifty years. That
the reader may sense the drama of this our latest discovery I
will begin by retelling the story of our mushroomic adventure. It
covers precisely the last fifty years. It constitutes in large
measure the autobiography of the Wasson family, and it has now
led us directly to Eleusis. </p>

<p> Late in August 1927 my bride, as she then was, and I took our
delayed honeymoon in the chalet lent to us by the publisher Adam
Dingwall at Big Indian in the Catskills. She was a Russian born
in Moscow of a family of the intelligentsia. Tina had fled from
Russia with her family in the summer of 1918, she being then 17
years old. She qualified as a physician at the University of
London and had been working hard to establish her pediatric
practice in New York. I was a newspaper man in the financial
department of the <i>Herald Tribune.</i> On that first beautiful
afternoon of our holiday in the Catskills, we went sauntering
down the path for a walk, hand in hand, happy as larks, both of
us abounding in the joy of life. There was a clearing on the
right, a mountain forest on our left. </p>

<p> Suddenly Tina threw down my hand and darted up into the
forest. She had seen mushrooms, a host of mushrooms, mushrooms of
many kinds that peopled the forest floor. She cried out in
delight at their beauty. She addressed each kind with an
affectionate Russian name. Such a display she had not seen since
she left her family's <i>dacha</i> near Moscow, almost a decade
before. She knelt before those toadstools in poses of adoration
like the Virgin hearkening to the Angel of the Annunciation. She
began gathering some of the fungi in her apron. I called to her:
&quot;Come back, come back to me! They are poisonous, putrid.
They are toadstools. Come back to me!&quot; She only laughed the
more: her merry laughter will ring forever in my ears. That
evening she seasoned the soup with the fungi, she garnished the
meat with other fungi. Yet others she threaded together and
strung up to dry, for winter use as she said. My discomfiture was
complete. That night I ate nothing with mushrooms in it. Frantic
and deeply hurt, I was led to wild ideas: I told her that I would
wake up a widower. </p>

<p> She proved right and I wrong. </p>

<p> The particular circumstances of this episode seem to have
shaped the course of our lives. We began checking with our
compatriots, she with Russians and I with Anglo-Saxons. We
quickly found that our individual attitudes characterized our
respective peoples. Then we began gathering information, at first
slowly, haphazardly, intermittently. We assembled our respective
vocabularies for mushrooms: the Russian was endless, never to
this day exhausted; the English, essentially confined to three
words, two of them ill-defined --- toadstool, mushroom, fungus.
The Russian poets and novelists filled their writings with
mushrooms, always in a loving context. It would seem to a
stranger that every Russian poet composes verses on
mushroom-gathering almost as a rite of passage to qualify for
mature rating! In English the silence of many writers about
mushrooms is deafening: Chaucer and Milton never mention them,
the others seldom. For Shakespeare, Spenser, William Penn,
Laurence Sterne (extensively), Shelley, Keats, Tennyson, for
Edgar Allan Poe and D. H. Lawrence and Emily Dickinson,
&quot;mushroom&quot; and &quot;toadstool&quot; are unpleasant,
even disgusting epithets. Our poets when they do mention them
link them to decay and death. We began to cast our net wider and
to study all the peoples of Europe, not only the German and
French and Italians, but more especially the peripheral cultures,
out of the main stream, where archaic forms and beliefs survive
longest --- the Albanian, Frisian, Lappish, Basque, Catalonian
and Sardinian, Icelandic and Faroese, and of course the Hungarian
and the Finnish. In all our inquiries and travels we looked, not
to the erudite, but to the humble and illiterate peasants as our
most cherished informants. We explored their knowledge of
mushrooms and the uses to which they put them. We were careful
also to take the flavor of the scabrous and erotic vocabularies
often neglected by lexicographers. We examined the common names
for mushrooms in all these cultures, seeking the fossil metaphors
hiding in their etymologies, to discover what those metaphors
expressed, whether a favorable or unfavorable attitude toward our
earthy creatures. </p>

<p> A little thing, some of you may say, this difference in
emotional attitude toward wild mushrooms. But my wife and I did
not think so, and we devoted most of our leisure hours for
decades to dissecting it, defining it, and tracing it to its
origin. Such discoveries as we have made, including the
rediscovery of the religious role for the hallucinogenic
mushrooms of Mexico, can be laid to our preoccupation with that
cultural rift between my wife and me, between our respective
peoples, between the mycophilia and mycophobia (words that we
devised for our two attitudes) that divide the Indo-European
peoples into two camps. If this hypothesis of ours be wrong, then
it must have been a singular false hypothesis to have borne the
fruit that it has. But it is not wrong. Thanks to the immense
strides made in the study of the human psyche in this century, we
are all now aware that deep-seated emotional attitudes acquired
in early life are of profound importance. I suggest that when
such traits betoken the attitudes of whole tribes or peoples,
when those traits have remained unaltered throughout recorded
history, and especially when they differ from one people to
another neighboring people, then you are face to face with a
phenomenon of deepest cultural implications, whose primal cause
is to be discovered only in the well-springs of cultural history.
</p>

<p> Our card files and correspondence kept expanding and in the
end, sometime in the early 1940's, we sat down, Tina and I, and
asked ourselves what we were going to do with all our data. We
decided to write a book, but there were so many lacunae in our
evidence that it would be years before we could put words to
paper. In our conversations at that time we found that we had
been thinking along the same lines, afraid to express our
thoughts even to each other: they were too fantastic. We had both
come to discern a period long long ago, long before our ancestors
knew how to write, when those ancestors must have regarded a
mushroom as a divinity or quasi-divinity. We knew not which
mushroom(s) nor why. In the days of Early Man his whole world was
shot through with religious feeling and the unseen powers held
him in thrall. Our sacred &quot;mushroom&quot; must have been
wondrous indeed, evoking awe and adoration, fear, yes, even
terror. When that early cult gave way to new religions and to
novel ways emerging with a literate culture, the emotions aroused
by the old cult would survive, truncated from their roots. In one
area the fear and terror would live on, either of a particular
mushroom (as in the case of <i>A. muscaria</i>); or else, as the
emotional focus through tabu became vague, of
&quot;toadstools&quot; in general; and in another area, for a
reason that we cannot now tell, it was the spirit of love and
adoration that survived. Here would lie the explanation of the
mycophobia vs. mycophilia that we had discovered.
(&quot;Toadstool&quot;, incidentally, was originally the specific
name of <i>A. muscaria</i>, the divine mushroom, of a beauty
befitting its divinity. Through tabu, &quot;toadstool&quot; lost
its focus and came to hover over the whole of the mushroom tribe
that the mycophobe shuns.)</p>

<hr>

<p> It was in Mexico that our pursuit of a hypothetical sacred
mushroom first achieved its goal. On 19 September 1952 we
received in the post two letters from Europe: one from Robert
Graves enclosing a cutting from a pharmaceutical journal in which
there were quotations from Richard Evans Schultes, who in turn
cited a number of with century Spanish friars telling of a
strange mushroom cult among the Indians of Mesoamerica; the
second from Giovanni Mardersteig, our printer in Verona, sending
us his sketch of a curious archaeological artifact from
Mesoamerica. It was exhibited in the Rietberg Museum of Zurich.
The artifact was of stone, about a foot high, obviously a
mushroom, with a radiant being carved on the stem or what
mycologists call the stipe. Here was perhaps the very cult we
were seeking, well within our reach. Earlier we had resolved that
we would avoid the New World and Africa in our inquiries: the
world was too large and our hands were full with Eurasia. But in
a trice we changed our minds and the course of our studies, and
we concentrated on Mexico and Guatemala. We had been postulating
a wild mushroom as a focus of religious devotion, a fantastic
surmise. Now here it was on our doorstep. All that winter we went
racing through the texts of the 16th century Spanish friars, and
what extraordinary narratives they give us! We flew down to
Mexico in that summer of 1953 and for many rainy seasons
thereafter. With wonderful cooperation from everyone in that
country, on the night of 29-30 June 1955 we finally made our
breakthrough: my photographer and friend Allan Richardson and I
participated with our Indian friends in a midnight <i>agape</i>
conducted by a shaman of extraordinary quality. This was the
first time on record that anyone of the alien race had shared in
such a communion. It was a soul-shattering experience. The wild
surmise that we had dared to postulate in a whisper to each other
years before was at last vindicated. And now, nearly a quarter of
a century later, we are prepared to offer another mushroom, <i>Claviceps
purpurea,</i> as holding the secret to the Eleusinian Mysteries. </p>

<p> That there might be a common denominator between the Mexican
mushroom Mystery and the Mystery of Eleusis had struck me at
once. They both aroused an overwhelming sense of awe, of wonder.
I will leave to Professor Ruck the discussion of Eleusis but will
quote one ancient author, Aristides the Rhetor, who in the 2nd
century A. D. pulled aside the curtain for an instant when he
said that what the initiate experienced was &quot;new,
astonishing, inaccessible to rational cognition&quot;, and he
went on: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Eleusis is a shrine common to the whole earth, and of all
    the divine things that exist among men, it is both the most
    awesome and the most luminous. At what place in the world
    have more miraculous tidings been sung, and where have the
    dromena called forth greater emotion, <i>where has there been
    greater rivalry between seeing and</i> <i>hearing?</i>
    [Italics mine.] </p>
</blockquote>

<p> And he goes on to speak of the &quot;ineffable visions&quot;
that it had been the privilege of many generations of fortunate
men and women to behold. </p>

<p> This description point by point tallies with the effect on
the initiate of the Mesoamerican mushroom rite, even to the
&quot;rivalry&quot; between seeing and hearing. For the sights
that one sees assume rhythmical contours, and the singing of the
shaman seems to take on visible and colorful shapes. </p>

<p> There seems to have been a saying among the Greeks that
mushrooms were the &quot;food of the Gods&quot;, <i>broma theon</i>,
and Porphyrius is quoted as having called them &quot;nurslings of
the Gods&quot;, <i>theotrophos</i>. The Greeks of the classic
period were mycophobes. Was this not because their ancestors had
felt that the whole fungal tribe was infected &quot;by
attraction&quot; with the holiness of the sacred mushroom, and
that mushrooms were therefore to be avoided by mortal men? Are we
not dealing with what was in origin a religious tabu? </p>

<p> I would not be understood as contending that only these
alkaloids (wherever found in nature) bring about visions and
ecstasy. Clearly some poets and prophets and many mystics and
ascetics seem to have enjoyed ecstatic visions that answer the
requirements of the ancient Mysteries and that duplicate the
mushroom agape of Mexico. I do not suggest that St. John of
Patmos ate mushrooms in order to write the Book of the
Revelation. Yet the succession of images in his Vision, so
clearly seen but such a phantasmagoria, means for me that he was
in the same state as one bemushroomed. Nor do I suggest for a
moment that William Blake knew the mushroom when he wrote this
telling account of the clarity of &quot;vision&quot;: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>The Prophets describe what they saw in Vision as real and
    existing men, whom they saw with their imaginative and
    immortal organs; the Apostles the same; the clearer the organ
    the more distinct the object. <i>A Spirit and a Vision are
    not, as the modern philosophy supposes, a cloudy vapour, or a
    nothing: they are organized and minutely articulated beyond
    all that the mortal and perishing nature can produce. He who
    does not imagine in stronger and better lineaments, and in
    stronger and better light than his perishing eye can see,
    does not imagine at all.</i> [Italics mine. From The Writings
    of William Blake, ed. by Geoffrey Keynes, vol. III, p. I08] </p>
</blockquote>

<p> This must sound cryptic to one who does not share Blake's
vision or who has not taken the mushroom. The advantage of the
mushroom is that it puts many, if not everyone, within reach of
this state without having to suffer the mortifications of Blake
and St. John. It permits you to see, more clearly than our
perishing mortal eye can see, vistas beyond the horizons of this
life, to travel backwards and forwards in time, to enter other
planes of existence, even (as the Indians say) to know God. It is
hardly surprising that your emotions are profoundly affected, and
you feel that an indissoluble bond unites you with the others who
have shared with you in the sacred agape. All that you see during
this night has a pristine quality: the landscape, the edifices,
the carvings, the animals - they look as though they had come
straight from the Maker's workshop. This newness of everything
--- it is as though the world had just dawned --- overwhelms you
and melts you with its beauty. Not unnaturally, what is happening
to you seems to you freighted with significance, beside which the
humdrum events of everyday are trivial. All these things you see
with an immediacy of vision that leads you to say to yourself,
&quot;Now I am seeing for the first time, seeing direct, without
the intervention of mortal eyes.&quot; </p>

<p> Plato tells us that beyond this ephemeral and imperfect
existence here below, there is another Ideal world of Archetypes,
where the original, the true, the beautiful Pattern of things
exists for evermore. Poets and philosophers for millennia have
pondered and discussed his conception. It is clear to me where
Plato found his &quot;Ideas&quot;; it was clear to those who were
initiated into the Mysteries among his contemporaries too. Plato
had drunk of the potion in the Temple of Eleusis and had spent
the night seeing the great Vision. </p>

<p> And all the time that you are seeing these things, the
priestess in Mexico sings, not loud, but with authority. The
Indians are notoriously not given to displays of inner feelings
--- except on these occasions. The singing is good, but under the
influence of the mushroom you think it is infinitely tender and
sweet. It is as though you were hearing it with your mind's ear,
purged of all dross. You are lying on a <i>petate </i>or mat;
perhaps, if you have been wise, on an air mattress and in a
sleeping bag. It is dark, for all lights have been extinguished
save a few embers among the stones on the floor and the incense
in a sherd. It is still, for the thatched hut is apt to be some
distance away from the village. In the darkness and stillness,
that voice hovers through the hut, coming now from beyond your
feet, now at your very ear, now distant, now actually underneath
you, with strange ventriloquistic effect. The mushrooms produce
this illusion also. Everyone experiences it, just as do the
tribesmen of Siberia who have eaten of <i>Amanita muscaria</i>
and lie under the spell of their shamans, displaying as these do
their astonishing dexterity with ventriloquistic drum beats.
Likewise, in Mexico, I have heard a shaman engage in a most
complicated percussive beat: with her hands she hits her chest,
her thighs, her forehead, her arms, each giving a different
resonance, keeping a complicated rhythm and modulating, even
syncopating, the strokes. Your body lies in the darkness, heavy
as lead, but your spirit seems to soar and leave the hut, and
with the speed of thought to travel where it listeth, in time and
space, accompanied by the shaman's singing and by the
ejaculations of her percussive chant. What you are seeing and
what you are hearing appear as one: the music assumes harmonious
shapes, giving visual form to its harmonies, and what you are
seeing takes on the modalities of music --- the music of the
spheres. &quot;Where has there been greater rivalry between
seeing and hearing?&quot; How apposite to the Mexican experience
was the ancient Greek's rhetorical question! All your senses are
similarly affected: the cigarette with which you occasionally
break the tension of the night smells as no cigarette before had
ever smelled; the glass of simple water is infinitely better than
champagne. Elsewhere I once wrote that the bemushroomed person is
poised in space, a disembodied eye, invisible, incorporeal,
seeing but not seen. In truth, he is the five senses disembodied,
all of them keyed to the height of sensitivity and awareness, all
of them blending into one another most strangely, until the
person, utterly passive, becomes a pure receptor, infinitely
delicate, of sensations. </p>

<p> As your body lies there in its sleeping bag, your soul is
free, loses all sense of time, alert as it never was before,
living an eternity in a night, seeing infinity in a grain of
sand. What you have seen and heard is cut as with a burin in your
memory, never to be effaced. At last you know what the ineffable
is, and what ecstasy means. Ecstasy ! The mind harks back to the
origin of that word. For the Greeks ekstasis meant the flight of
the soul from the body. I am certain that this word came into
being to describe the effect of the Mystery of Eleusis. Can you
find a better word than that to describe the bemushroomed state?
In common parlance, among the many who have not experienced
ecstasy, ecstasy is fun, and I am frequently asked why I do not
reach for mushrooms every night. But ecstasy is not fun. Your
very soul is seized and shaken until it tingles. After all, who
will choose to feel undiluted awe, or to float through that door
yonder into the Divine Presence? The unknowing vulgar abuse the
word, and we must recapture its full and terrifying sense.... A
few hours later, the next morning, you are fit to go to work. But
how unimportant work seems to you, by comparison with the
portentous happenings of that night! If you can, you prefer to
stay close to the house, and, with those who lived through that
night, compare notes, and utter ejaculations of amazement. </p>

<p> I will convey to you the overwhelming impression of awe that
the sacred mushrooms arouse in the native population of the
Mexican highlands. In the Mazatec tribe where I ingested them for
the first time these particular mushrooms are not
&quot;mushrooms&quot;: they stand apart. One word --- <i>thain3</i>
--- embraces the whole fungal tribe, edible, innocuous but
inedible, and toxic, --- the whole fungal world except the sacred
species. The sacred species are known by a name that in itself is
a euphemism for some other name now lost: they are <i>7nti1xi3tho3</i>.
(In Mazatec each syllable must be pronounced in one of four tones
or in slides from one tone to another, 1 being the highest. The
initial <i>7</i> is a glottal stop.) The first element, <i>7nti1</i>,
is a diminutive of affection and respect. The second element, <i>xi3tho3,</i>
means &quot;that which leaps forth&quot;. The whole word is thus:
&quot;the dear little things that leap forth&quot;. But this word
is holy: you do not hear it uttered in the market place or where
numbers of people are assembled. It is best to bring up the
subject at night, by the light of a fire or a <i>vela</i> (votive
candle), when you are alone with your hosts. Then they will
dilate endlessly on the wonders of these wondrous mushrooms. For
this euphemistic name they will probably use yet others, a
further degree of euphemism, the <i>santitos,</i> the
&quot;little saints&quot;, or again the &quot;little things&quot;
in Mazatec. When we were leaving the Mazatec mountains on
horseback after our first visit there, we asked our muleteer
Victor Hernandez how it came about that the sacred mushrooms were
called &quot;the dear little ones that leap forth&quot;. He had
traveled the mountain trails all his life and spoke Spanish
although he could neither read nor write nor even tell time by
the clock's face. His answer, breathtaking in sincerity and
feeling, breathed the poetry of religion and I quote it word for
word as he uttered it and as I put it down in my notebook at the
time: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>El honguillo viene por si mismo, no se sabe de donde, como
    el viento que viene sin saber de donde ni porque. The little
    mushroom comes of itself, no one knows whence, like the wind
    that comes we know not whence nor why. </p>
</blockquote>

<p> Victor was referring to the genesis of the sacred mushrooms:
they leap forth seedless and rootless, a mystery from the
beginning. Aurelio Carreras, town slaughterer in Huautla, when we
asked him where the mushrooms take you, said simply: <i>Le llevan</i>
<i>alli donde dios esta,</i> &quot;They carry you there where God
is&quot;. According to Ricardo Garcia Gonzalez of Rio Santiago,
&quot;To eat the mushrooms you must be clean: they are the blood
of our Lord the Eternal Father.&quot; <i>Hay que ser may limpio,
es la sangre de Nuestro Senor Padre Eterno.</i> These are
Spanish-speaking villagers picked at random. They express
religion in its purest essence, without intellectual content.
Aristotle said of the Eleusinian Mysteries precisely the same:
the initiates were to suffer, to feel, to experience certain
impressions and moods. They were not to learn anything. </p>

<p> As man emerged from his brutish past, thousands of years ago,
there was a stage in the evolution of his awareness when the
discovery of a mushroom (or was it a higher plant?) with
miraculous properties was a revelation to him, a veritable
detonator to his soul, arousing in him sentiments of awe and
reverence, and gentleness and love, to the highest pitch of which
mankind is capable, all those sentiments and virtues that mankind
has ever since regarded as the highest attribute of his kind. It
made him see what this perishing mortal eye cannot see. How right
the Greeks were to hedge about this Mystery, this imbibing of the
potion, with secrecy and surveillance! What today is resolved
into a mere drug, a tryptamine or lysergic acid derivative, was
for him a prodigious miracle, inspiring in him poetry and
philosophy and religion. Perhaps with all our modern knowledge we
do not need the divine mushrooms any more. Or do we need them
more than ever? Some are shocked that the key even to religion
might be reduced to a mere drug. On the other hand, the drug is
as mysterious as it ever was: &quot;like the wind that comes we
know not whence nor why.&quot; Out of a mere drug comes the
ineffable, comes ecstasy. It is not the only instance in the
history of humankind where the lowly has given birth to the
divine. Altering a sacred text, we would say that this paradox is
a hard saying, yet one worthy of all men to be believed. </p>

<p> If our classical scholars were given the opportunity to
attend the rite at Eleusis, to talk with the priestess, what
would they not exchange for that chance? They would approach the
precincts, enter the hallowed chamber, with the reverence born of
the texts venerated by scholars for millennia. How propitious
would their frame of mind be, if they were invited to partake of
the potion! Well, those rites take place now, unbeknownst to the
classical scholars, in scattered dwellings, humble, thatched,
without windows, far from the beaten track, high in the mountains
of Mexico, in the stillness of the night, broken only by the
distant barking of a dog or the braying of an ass. Or, since we
are in the rainy season, perhaps the Mystery is accompanied by
torrential rains and punctuated by terrifying thunderbolts. Then,
indeed, as you lie there bemushroomed, listening to the music and
seeing the visions, you know a soul-shattering experience,
recalling as you do the belief of some early peoples that
mushrooms, the sacred mushrooms, are divinely engendered by
Parjanya, the Aryan God of the Lightning-bolt, in the Soft Mother
Earth. </p>

<p> Someone has called mycology the step-child of the sciences.
Is it not now acquiring a wholly new and unexpected dimension?
Religion has always been at the core of man's highest faculties
and cultural achievements, and therefore I ask you now to
contemplate our lowly mushroom --- what patents of ancient
lineage and nobility are coming its way! </p>

<p> R. GORDON WASSON </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/eleucont.htm"><p>The
    Road to Eleusis Contents Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm"><p>LSD
    and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm"><p>Cliff
    Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>