
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-85</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B007-262</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/commen.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035834 text/html 7786
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:58:24 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:12 GMT
Content-length: 7569
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>California Courts Commentary: Drugs and the Law</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h2>California Courts Commentary: Drugs and the Law </h2>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>by James P. Gray </b></p>

<p><b>Orange County Superior Court</b> </p>

<p>November, 1993 </p>

<p>On April 8, 1992, I did something unusual for a trial judge: I
held a news conference in the plaza behind the Santa Ana
Courthouse. At that time, I publicly set forth my conclusions
that what we are doing through the Criminal Justice System to
combat drug use and abuse in our society, and all of the crime
and misery that accompany them, is not working. Fortunately,
however, we have options. </p>

<p>On February 26, 1993, I was one of a group of nineteen
concerned citizens that met at the Hoover Institution on the
campus of Stanford University and unanimously passed a resolution
which recommends that our country investigate the possibility of
change in the way we handle our drug problems. The Resolution,
which recommends that these medical and social problems be
treated with medical and social solutions, is printed separately
herein. It further recommends that one final blue ribbon
commission be immediately empowered by the President to conduct
this investigation as publicly and fully as possible, and then
recommend revisions of the drug laws of these United States in
order to reduce the harm being caused by our current policies. </p>

<p>The original signers of the Resolution include Dr. Milton
Friedman, the Nobel laureate professor of economics; Dr. Joseph
D. McNamara, author and former Chief of Police of San Jose;
George Shultz, former Secretary of State; Kurt L. Schmoke, Mayor
of the City of Baltimore; Reverends Leonard B. Jackson and J. D.
Moore of the First A.M.E. Church of South Central Los Angeles; a
high school principal and several medical doctors. Since that
meeting, the Resolution has been signed by numbers of judges and
justices in California as well as other state and federal judges
around the country; the Mayors of San Francisco, Oakland and San
Jose: Orange County Supervisor Harriet M. Wieder; the Sheriff of
San Francisco; the Central Conference of American Rabbis; the
Board of Directors of the California Academy of Family
Physicians; all 23 chaplains at Riker's Island Prison in New York
City; and more than two thousand other members of the legal,
medical, law enforcement, entertainment, business and education
communities and concerned citizens and taxpayers. </p>

<p>By pursuing our present course, we have made cocaine the most
lucrative crop in the history of the world. We have funneled
about 70 billion dollars per year of untaxed revenue into
organized crime. We have undermined the work ethic in our society
by making the trafficking or drugs the most lucrative activity
that most of our people can engage in. This has directly resulted
in our youths, both in our inner cities and everywhere else,
having drug sellers as their role models instead of people who
work hard and pursue an education. Our approach has directly
resulted in the continual deterioration of the relationship
between the police and the communities that they are attempting
to service. </p>

<p>The 'war on drugs' in our country in many ways has become war
on our own people, especially our minorities, who have been
incarcerated in vastly disproportionate numbers. Our approach has
directly resulted in the exportation of more money from our
shores than any other single cause, except for oil. Indeed, as a
result of this drug money, we have exported narco terrorism to
the rest of the world. Our approach has resulted in a crime being
committed upon our people by depriving clean needles to addicts -
thus exacerbating the AIDS epidemic. Our approach has
demonstrably resulted in the erosion of our civil liberties set
forth in the Bill of Rights. </p>

<p>As judges, virtually all of us have our own stories of how
corruption from drug monies has touched the Criminal Justice
System. Over the last several decades, we have proved the sheer
impossibility of preventing the sale of drugs for large amounts
of money. The Criminal Justice System simply cannot prevail
against this reality. </p>

<p>Even though street drugs are as illegal as we can make them
under our statues and our Constitution, they are fully available
in any quantity, governed only by price. It truly is time for us
to investigate changing this failed approach. </p>

<p>Several years ago, the San Francisco Chronicle aptly
editorialized that with regard to our nation's drug problem,
&quot;the cure is worse than the disease.&quot;' On April 26,
1993, U.S. News and World Report published an editorial by its
editor-in-chief, entitled 'Fighting the Right Drug War.' It
concludes with the following statement: </p>

<p>&quot;If President Clinton lacks the political courage to
change the old failed program and needs protective cover, let him
at least appoint an independent commission charged with
investigating prevention and treatment and instituting a sweeping
new program. Dr. Kildare, rather than Elliot Ness, is the role
model for banishing our deepest sickness.&quot; </p>

<p>On May 11, 1993, the Los Angeles Times editorialized that
&quot;Perhaps the political climate is becoming more receptive to
a new approach. Certainly the new Administration in Washington
should seize the moment for a fresh and comprehensive look at the
drug laws.&quot; </p>

<p>What we are doing is not working. As judges, we are at the
helm of a sinking ship, and our citizens are not aware of the
hopelessness of the situation. Our group requests that
California's judges, who are aware of the magnitude of the
problem, sign the Resolution and go on record as recommending the
Investigation of viable alternatives to the failed &quot;War on
Drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>