
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-87</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B022-254</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dpf90l.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123647 text/html 40303
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:36:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:15 GMT
Content-length: 40085
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Fallacies and Unstated Assumptions in Prevention and
Treatment</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h1 align="center">FALLACIES AND UNSTATED ASSUMPTIONS IN
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT </h1>

<p align="center"><font size="2">by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD</font>
</p>

<h2>Everything We Need to Know We Learned in Kindergarten. </h2>

<p><font size="2">We think we know almost everything; what we
actually know is almost nothing - and most of that is false. The
most pernicious type of ignorance is belief in falsehood. We are
ignorant, but our minds are filled with <i>something</i>. In the
beginning, our minds begin to be filled by words, which represent
ideas. That's why I shall place so much emphasis on the abuse of
words. Next, our minds begin to be filled with notions, i.e.,
unexamined assumptions, promulgated or inculcated by parents,
teachers, government, business, etc. Some of these notions we
hear repeated every day, but others are buried so deeply that we
are never aware of their existence. In either case they are
prejudices; they have been assimilated without the exercise of
our judgment or our reason. Some are true, but most are false.
Social institutions are willing to go to great lengths to prevent
falsehood from being exposed. Heterodox views are everywhere
repressed. The world stands on the brink of the Orwellian abyss.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">People who are unwilling to examine their
prejudices are said to be closed-minded. The notion that all
fundamental philosophical questions have been answered is the
ultimate mind closer. The world is filled with closed-minded
people and we may never be able to influence most of them by an
appeal to reason, but that does not excuse any one of us as an
individual from being willing to drag out and examine under the
cold light of reason even our most cherished prejudices. The
world may not be ready to give up its myths, but there is no law
of the universe that says we cannot understand something merely
because our ability to make a living depends on our not
understanding it. As soon as one of our assumptions is questioned
or its opposite averred by even one solitary soul, it becomes
incumbent upon us to drop the contested claim as an assumption
and provide for it, instead, a proof. If the claim is
metaphysical, it must be supported by the twin pillars of
reasonableness (aesthetics) and utility. That's what I believe.
None of us is completely open-minded. I am curious to know,
however, why there is such a great disparity between what one can
say to an individual and what one can say to the general public. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Currently, we are moving from a law-enforcement
approach to a prevention-treatment approach to drugs. This change
is resisted by government to whom it represents a loss of power,
but it is supported by business, education, medicine, and other
institutions that stand to gain. The unstated assumption is that,
since prevention and treatment are less repressive than law
enforcement, they are not <i>at all</i> repressive. This is the
fallacy of false consolation, an appeal to peace (<i>ad quietem</i>).
Both law-enforcement and prevention-treatment are characterized
by the notion that one person has a right to regulate the
behavior of another. The prevention-treatment approach puts drugs
under the auspices of the health establishment. People who have
run afoul of both the criminal-justice system and the
mental-health system know that between the two there is not much
to choose. Both enjoy pretty gruesome reputations. The days of
shock therapy, pre-frontal lobotomies, and &quot;One Flew Over
the Cuckoos Nest&quot; are not far behind us, <i>if</i> they are
behind us. The Supreme Court ruled recently that mental health
institutions may force patients to take drugs against their will.
Man's inhumanity to man continues apace. The decriminalized
&quot;addict&quot; may wonder whether he has jumped out of the
frying pan directly into the flame. The jailer knows damn well he
is punishing someone for nonstandard behavior, in which he may
indulge himself. The therapist may be running around with his
head full of what is very likely to turn out to be mush. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">The assumption that some people have a right to
have power over other people is usually justified on the basis
that the dominant people know what's best. Even if we dispose of
the notion that drugs represent a public-health problem, we will
have to contend with those who have the most to gain from the
point of view that drugs represent a spiritual problem, namely,
the clergy. As Bertrand Russell [1] said, &quot;It is possible
that mankind is on the threshold of a golden age; but, if so, it
will be necessary first to slay the dragon that guards the door,
and this dragon is religion.&quot; (I would have said &quot;<i>organized</i>
religion&quot;.) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Eventually we will realize that we have a
political problem resulting from spiritual corruption. That
problem has nothing to do with drugs. An example of spiritual
corruption, in my opinion, is the notion that one should receive
something in return for what one gives. This is supported
indirectly by the so-called Protestant work ethic, which has been
adopted by Catholics and which is accepted in Asia. Only by a
complete change of heart will we be able to recognize the types
of political change required, but we should not look forward to
the assistance of any professional politician alive in this world
today. Enlightenment will come exceedingly slowly and is
contingent upon the survival of the human race. In the meantime,
we must struggle to be allowed to teach our view of things in
contradistinction to the conventional wisdom. Exposing fallacies
and stating unstated assumptions might be helpful.</font> </p>

<h2>A Drug-Free Society is Desirable. </h2>

<p><font size="2">Whether stated or unstated, this represents a
serious fallacy backed up by dozens of other fallacies. In my
previous paper [2], I said what I thought of the idea. It is
based in part on the notion that drugs are what get us high. This
assumption, taken to be so obvious as to require no mention, is
questioned by Andrew Weil [3]. What if we show people how to get
high without drugs, but the subsequent behavior and other
consequences of getting high were the same as they are now with
drugs. Would that be acceptable to prohibitionists? Some of them
believe that pleasure itself is evil. The idea that a drug-free
society is desirable depends, too, on the assumption that genuine
devotees of drugs will submit to tyranny. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Frequently, we are told that taking drugs is
immoral. This is the vague-generalities fallacy, another fallacy
of confusion and an example of <i>ad judicium</i> (to judgment).
Some morals are good, others bad. The proponent implies that the
nature of good morals is understood and that, if we violate his
morals, we are against Morality. Drugs may be bad for the body
but good for the soul. Perhaps the body and the soul are at war
for possession of the will.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In <i>Brave New World</i>, Aldous Huxley
pictured a dreadful totalitarian society, supported by atheism,
free sex, and free drugs. Huxley's fears are well founded, but,
in my opinion, he has precisely reversed the instruments of
repression, perhaps purposely to suggest what he could not
espouse publicly. A drug-free society would expedite the
repression of independent thought. Drug users have been in the
vanguard of the anti-war and other progressive movements,
including the movements for civil rights, women's rights, and gay
rights.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Some believe that LSD and marijuana were
symptoms of &quot;the movement&quot;, but it is easy to make a
good case that they were the prime cause. Whatever else one
thinks of Uspenski, it is difficult to argue against his theory
that drugs provide a conscious shock that enables one to break
through the walls of prejudice that bind us, especially in a
society where we are immersed in propaganda. In any case, those
who use drugs are in a better position than those who don't to
judge the validity of the argument. Finally, many people believe
that drugs themselves are the cause of the drug problem. This
assumption is highly suspect. Apparently, outside of context,
drugs are neutral.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Almost all prohibitionists indulge in Bentham's
[4] dyslogistic and eulogistic fallacies, which consist in
applying a term of either denigration or praise to an item that
is logically neutral. An example is calling drugs
&quot;poison&quot; or &quot;horrible mind-bending chemicals&quot;
[Carl Rowan]. Clearly drugs are good if they are used to remedy
an unpleasant condition or cure a disease; but, for the sake of
argument, they could be considered neutral; i.e., their goodness
or badness depends on how they are used. Referring to drugs as
&quot;poison&quot; is a clear case of the dyslogistic fallacy.
Potassium cyanide is poison! William Bennett, lately, has been
indulging in <i>ad hominem</i> arguments.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Users of drugs are referred to as
&quot;slaves&quot; even though they act more independently than
the average employee of the average American corporation.
Actually, the average religionist, who accepts religious dogma
without reservation is more of a slave than is the most hooked
addict; i.e., the religionist's soul is entirely subjugated
whereas the body only of the addict is under the control of the
addicting drug, as evidenced by the fact that his will remains
free to wish to be free of the addiction. Even this analysis is
granting too much to the use of the word slave. How can one
become the slave of an inanimate substance, which has no will!</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Similarly, we are told that drug enforcers are
the &quot;good guys&quot; and users and dealers are the &quot;bad
guys&quot;. This ignores the fundamental facts of human
existence. Needless to say, the mere taking of drugs does not
automatically elevate people to an elite class of individuals
capable of discerning right from wrong and able to see through
all the illusions and myths perpetuated by society. On the other
hand, many people who are waging the war on drugs employ devious
and underhanded tactics, not the least dishonorable of which is
arranging a highly contrived purchase of drugs near the White
House and then implying, for rhetorical purposes, that the
purchase was routine. Thus, it is not at all clear that those who
are trying to prevent people from taking drugs are the &quot;good
guys&quot; and those who are using drugs are the &quot;bad
guys&quot; as the establishment would have us believe.</font> </p>

<h2>Fallacies and Lies Can Be Used to Prevent Drug Use. </h2>

<p><font size="2">Recently I attended a class given by the
Houston Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse (HCADA) for people who
will speak to students in the Houston Independent School District
(HISD) to prevent them from taking drugs. I attended another
class (to be discussed below) for children referred by the court
and their parents. I will not apologize to the reader for
attending only two classes or for assuming that these classes
were typical. No one is better able to judge than some of my
audience whether the fallacies discussed in the sequel apply or
not. The assumption that falsehood and fallacious reasoning are a
proper means to the end of preventing children from taking drugs
is not specifically stated by the HCADA nor do they acknowledge
it; but, if it is not behind their program, they are very badly
deceived. Under these circumstances, this is the
end-justifies-the-means fallacy (<i>ad judicium</i>).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">&quot;Charles Manson, for example, took drugs,
therefore drugs are bad&quot; is an example of an <i>ad odium</i>
(to hatred) fallacy. It neglects the fact that William Rowan
Hamilton, for example, took drugs. Counselors are advised to tell
the students that marijuana, nowadays, is 1000% more powerful
than formerly rather than 10 times more powerful, despite the
fact that percentages are applied normally only when they lie
between 0 and 100. Whether increase in strength is observed or
not (NORML says &quot;not&quot;), the deception that 1000% seems
more than 10-times reinforces stupidity and is <i>ad metum</i>
(to fear). Again, &quot;the end justifies the means&quot;. The
HCADA neglects to mention that one might simply take 1/10th as
much, which will reduce the trauma to the throat, very much
exaggerated by HCADA. The HCADA does not recommend ingestion by
eating (in hash brownies, say) or the use of a water pipe, which
they might do if they were truly interested in the student's
welfare.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The HCADA says that marijuana is toxic. The
best scientific data places its toxicity below that of potatoes
on the LD-50 scale. Also, marijuana has a therapeutic ratio
immeasurably superior to that of aspirin, for example. HCADA
claims marijuana is often contaminated, sometimes by dried horse
manure. This is unjustified and <i>ad metum</i>. They describe
horrible effects of smoking pot, which, in real life, are never
seen. They give data for exceptionally heavy smoking and for
tests done on animals with absurdly heavy doses. They describe an
isolated case as though it were common, failing to give
statistics. <i>Ad metum</i>, again and again. They show
photographs of damaged nerves in a videotape by AIMS Media of Van
Nuys, California, which refuses to supply literature citations
for the purported research. Lester Grinspoon thinks it's faked.
The AIMS tape features a narrator dressed in a white lab coat
with a stethoscope hanging around his neck. The more astute
students will recognize that this man is not likely to need a
stethoscope during the narration of this tape. This is an
appeal-to-authority fallacy, an example of <i>ad verecundiam</i>
(to modesty).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Reported side-effects of marijuana are listed
in dyslogistic terms, whereas they might have been listed in
eulogistic terms by a devotee of pot or in neutral terms by an
unbiased reporter. Examples: &quot;lethargic&quot; (dyslogistic)
instead of &quot;meditative&quot; (eulogistic), &quot;loss of
interest in school&quot; instead of &quot;able to see through the
stupidity of the curriculum and the teachers&quot;,
&quot;absenteeism&quot; instead of &quot;unwilling to tolerate
the inhospitable atmosphere in which we work and learn&quot;,
&quot;chaotic&quot; thinking instead of &quot;creative&quot; (or
&quot;imaginative&quot;) thinking, and so on. In a perverse abuse
of language, many anti-drug people try to detach the word
&quot;square&quot; from non-users and attach it to users.
&quot;Hip&quot; and &quot;square&quot; are the words coined by
users to differentiate themselves from others.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The HCADA employs the gateway fallacy.
Epidemiological evidence seems to point to marijuana as a
&quot;gateway&quot; to &quot;harder&quot; drugs. The evidence can
be explained by the behavior of individuals who cannot obtain
their drug of choice <i>due to the laws against drugs</i>. The
HCADA employs a poster that indicates one might go to jail for
smoking pot without mentioning that many people believe that the
laws against smoking pot should be repealed. They claim that
smoking marijuana impairs one's sense of time without mentioning
the great musicians who smoked marijuana when they played. It is
intellectually dishonest to report only half of the story, but
that's what HCADA does at every point. They divide drugs
improperly into stimulants and depressants.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Two charts were employed showing drugs that are
not abused and drugs of abuse. Nyquil, which can be abused, if
the word is to have any meaning, was on the first chart, and
alcohol and cigarets as well as the usual illegal drugs were
shown on the second chart. I asked if moderate use of alcohol or
any of the illegal drugs constituted drug abuse. I was told that
any use whatsoever was considered abuse. This is the
excluded-middle fallacy and illustrates that the Houston Council
of Alcohol and Drug <i>Abuse</i> doesn't know the meaning of the
word &quot;abuse&quot;. I could go on and on, but I will finish
by noting that the teacher commented in passing that, &quot;with
kids, honesty is best&quot;! </font></p>

<p><font size="2">After the class, I reminded the teacher that
exaggerating the danger had been tried and failed. When I pointed
out the factual and logical errors in her presentation, she
&quot;refuted&quot; my objections on the basis that (i) she had
many years experience in this field and I had very little (<i>ad
verecundiam</i>), (ii) her presentation was consistent with the
latest &quot;scientific&quot; research, and (iii) the HCADA was a
highly respected United-Way institution. These are fallacious
appeals to authority and the use of the term
&quot;scientific&quot; is a vague generality. I pointed out that
it is intellectually dishonest not to present both sides. Even
when I reminded her that it was not I who was disseminating
questionable facts in the public schools, she insisted that the
burden of proof was on me. Students don't have to prove we are
lying, they need only <i>know</i> it, after which they discount
everything we have said even though some of it may be true.
&quot;Falsehood is so unexacting, [it] needs so little help to
make itself manifest!&quot; [Proust] If I wished, I was told, I
could bring my argument to the director, but the director refused
to meet with me and review the evidence I had assembled. So much
for truth in the public schools of Houston. My letters to the
school board and the United Way are still in my head. They will
be written but probably to no avail. </font></p>

<h2>Drug Abuse and Drug Addiction Are Diseases. </h2>

<p><font size="2">The effect of this assumption, whether stated
or unstated, is to bring &quot;drug abuse&quot; and &quot;drug
addiction&quot; under the purview of the medical profession. We
wish to investigate under what circumstances this may be done
legitimately. Peele [5], Schaler [6], and others make an
excellent case that it cannot be done at all. But, placing drug
treatment under the auspices of the medical profession
constitutes an appeal to respect for authority and to fear.
Leading authorities support prevention and treatment, therefore,
if we are against prevention and treatment, we are against
Science. In the preface of <i>Ceremonial Chemistry</i> [7], Szasz
states, essentially, that &quot;everyone&quot; is against drugs,
but different drugs depending on era and culture. The use of
acceptable drugs is a popular pastime, while the use of
unacceptable drugs is considered &quot;drug abuse&quot; and
&quot;drug addiction.&quot; &quot;Drug abuse is not a regrettable
medical disease but a repudiated religious observance.
Accordingly, our options with respect to the 'problem' of drugs
are the same as our options with respect to the 'problem' of
religions: that is, we can practice various degrees of tolerance
and intolerance toward those whose religions - whether theocratic
or therapeutic - differ from our own.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I believe that terms such as
&quot;disease&quot;, &quot;epidemic&quot;, &quot;treatment&quot;,
and &quot;recovering&quot; in the context of drug (mis)use
originated in metaphor but continue to be used to confuse the
public because it is advantageous to the health professions to do
so, in which case the use of these terms is the impostor-terms
fallacy (<i>ad judicium</i>), a fallacy of confusion. Even the
use of the word &quot;illness&quot; in the phrase &quot;mental
illness&quot; probably originated as a metaphor but became
confused with actual illness almost immediately. In any case, it
is not at all clear that mental illness exists in the sense that
the health profession would like us to believe it exists. Szasz
[8] thinks not. Behind the disease model of conflicts in living
is the unstated assumption that &quot;social intercourse would be
harmonious, satisfying, and the secure basis of a good life were
it not for the disrupting influences of mental illness.&quot;</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><i>The Random House Dictionary of the English
Language</i> [9] defines disease as (i) a condition of the body
in which there is incorrect function resulting from the effect of
heredity, infection, diet, or environment and (ii) any deranged
or depraved condition, as of the mind, society, etc. The
definition in <i>The Mosby Medical Encyclopedia </i>[10] agrees
with (i) but doesn't include (ii). Health professionals can
remove people from environment or society temporarily at some
cost, but they, the people, must return eventually to an
environment or society about which the health profession can do
nothing. Therefore, we may dismiss society and environment from
the discussion for the time being. We must then inquire as to the
meaning of &quot;deranged&quot; and &quot;depraved&quot; and
whether they might not be dyslogistic terms for behavior of which
we do not approve, behavior that might just as well be described
in eulogistic terms, such as &quot;divinely inspired&quot; or
&quot;impelled by a vision&quot;, or neutral terms such as
&quot;nonstandard&quot;.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The effect of infection can be ruled out; there
are no germs, viruses, etc. If we may consider drugs part of our
diets, we recognize that some discomfort due to having taken
drugs might be considered disease, but we wonder if that is what
is being treated by physicians and other members of the health
professions. The effects of heredity have been discussed in
connection with alcohol. Many researchers still believe in a gene
for alcoholism; but, as shown by Peele [5], undesirable responses
to alcohol can be explained in other ways. In any case, we hope
researchers identify the gene for drug addiction soon, if it
exists, so that those of us who don't carry it can use drugs
casually without fear of becoming addicted! </font></p>

<p><font size="2">I have not encountered definitions of drug
abuse or drug addiction. As discussed above, HCADA does not
distinguish between use and abuse. Mathre [11] dissociates casual
users and people &quot;who choose to alter their state of
consciousness through drugs&quot; from abusers and addicts. Peele
[5] states that &quot;the administration's own statistics
disprove the link between recreational drug use and
addiction&quot;. Mathre seems to exempt drug (or chemical)
dependence from her disease model of addiction, but she does not
say what addiction is.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I have compiled a short list of phenomena that
are sometimes referred to as (or mistaken for) drug addiction:
(1) self-medication for chronic depression or chronic pain, (2)
taking a drug that causes a symptom that can be relieved only by
taking more of the drug or by the passage of a few hours, (3)
acute withdrawal symptoms that last several days, (4) dedication
to the repetition of a pleasurable experience regardless of
long-range consequences, (5) taking a drug to perform a task,
which might have to be performed several times a week, perhaps to
make a living, (6) obligatory daily performance of a task that
cannot be performed during withdrawal from a drug, (7) using
drugs to isolate oneself from the painful realities of life in a
bad world, (8) unwillingness to pass an opportunity to take drugs
because the law may cut off one's supply, (9) the case of a drug
that, like valium or blood-pressure medication, poses a health
risk if one forgets to take it in the absence of a craving that
(blessedly) reminds one to take it. In Case 1, a physician may
prescribe another drug, Case 2 is normal and involves a conscious
choice between two alternatives on the part of the individual,
Case 3 might require supervised tapering off or the prescription
of other drugs, Cases 4-8 are behavioral choices in the face of
circumstances that are beyond a therapist's control. I do not
believe any of the cases correspond to what we normally call a
disease. Case 9 is a normal medical situation and stretches the
meaning of addiction seriously, but may not be omitted as it
constitutes a requirement to take the drug, which, in this case
and in this case alone, is strictly medical.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Drug abuse usually refers to some type of
behavior of which other people do not approve but which is
consistent with the goals of the user, who might be a criminal or
only an oddball. The term &quot;denial&quot; is a fallacious
appeal to the authority of the treatment community in a dispute
with a user who is insufficiently articulate to defend his values
and motives. The term &quot;denial&quot; is an impostor. When the
user himself disapproves of his own behavior, the term &quot;drug
abuse&quot; might make sense, unless the user is a victim of
anti-drug propaganda. Many people who have tried to stop taking
drugs might benefit from the friendship and advice of other drug
users. As suggested by Henman [12], drug use must be looked at
from the perspective of the user.</font> </p>

<h2>Ex-Users and Non-Users Are Competent to Counsel. </h2>

<p><font size="2">Occasionally a person who has never used drugs
but is possessed of great sensitivity and penetrating insight
might be able to offer useful advice to drug users, but normally
a non-user simply does not know what's going on. Ex-users are
usually failed users. If they didn't understand drugs when they
were using them, why should they be expected to understand them
now? </font></p>

<p><font size="2">In my many years of experience in the drug
culture (1954-1963 and 1969-1980), I have observed very few
people whose drug taking was troublesome to themselves or other
users. Ex-users were sometimes more troublesome within the drug
community than were users. If a member of the set was out of
line, the other members could usually bring social pressure to
bear upon the transgressor and things would soon return to
normal. Many of the people with whom I associated during those
years have died short of their 70s, but there is much to be said
for quality of life. Most people, when they are born, have no
right to expect to live as interesting a life as some of my
friends have lived. The reader might protest that I was not
living in the inner-city ghetto of 1990. It is widely assumed
that the greatest problem in the inner city ghetto is drugs, but
isn't it more likely that racism and the other institutions that <i>created</i>
the ghetto are the central problem?</font> </p>

<h2>We Can Predict Human Behavior. </h2>

<p><font size="2">Only mathematics is unconditionally true.
Physicists employ mathematics to provide provisional solutions to
easy problems. The difficult problems are referred to chemists
unless they involve the mystery of life, in which case they are
referred to biologists. Since World War II, social scientists,
particularly economists, have tried to apply the techniques of
physics to the behavior of people. Despite some successes, the
likelihood of continued progress in this direction is open to
doubt, especially now that the phenomenon of chaos has been
observed in systems as simple as a dripping water faucet! For the
purposes of treating drug users, it is insufficient to predict
the behavior of people in statistical aggregates and even that is
suspect. The twentieth century has been distinguished by
revealing what can <i>not</i> be done by science. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">As one might expect from the name, The Houston
Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse attempts to exploit the
parallel between alcoholics and people who use drugs excessively
(according to someone). In particular, they employ the word
&quot;sober&quot; to mean &quot;not high on drugs&quot;. This is
an impostor term as many drugs, e.g., pot, make one abnormally
sober. The comparison with alcohol breaks down because, whereas
alcoholics might not avail themselves of other drugs to
counteract the effects of alcohol or to substitute for alcohol
when alcohol is not indicated, free drug users could employ a
large slate of drugs, including alcohol, to adjust their body
chemistry appropriately under most circumstances; i.e., they
might use one drug to work, another to play, another to have sex,
a fourth to drive home, and a fifth to go to sleep. With more
research, this might be accomplished safely.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">At the second class at the HCADA, referred to
above, the class leader claimed he could always recognize a kid
from a dysfunctional family. According to Bertrand Russell [13],
the family has been dysfunctional since men began to work away
from the homestead, and it has become less functional with each
change in modern society. Why blame dysfunctionality on drugs
when both parents work? Also, why must it be assumed always that
the behavioral choices of the drug user are incorrect? Often the
members of the family who are troubled by a person taking drugs,
although convinced of the rectitude of their conduct, are not
well-behaved themselves, nor do they always have the best motives
for wishing to restrict the user's activities. How many wives of
musicians complain about the behavior of their husbands without
understanding the importance of the musician's quest! We have a
problem of conflicting values, not a drug problem.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The thrust of the class was an explication (as
fact) of the victim-enabler-hero-scapegoat-loner-mascot theory
wherein &quot;volunteers&quot; were asked to simulate the various
roles, holding up poster-size signs with lists of psychological
attributes. Oversimplifications aside, it is clear that this
theory cannot predict. The class leader did not indicate that the
theory was conjectural and unproven. The term &quot;victim&quot;
is clearly an impostor, used to signal the disease theory of
nonstandard behavior. The term &quot;enabler&quot; ignores the
impediments created by most spouses of alcoholics and drug users.
Also, the theory totally ignores the possibility that the school,
the workplace, or the political system in which we live is the
&quot;culprit&quot;. Political theory seems to be missing from
almost all approaches to social problems in the United States.
Since &quot;substance abuse&quot; seems to be a symptom of a
deeper problem, why should we not expect abstinence to shift the
problem elsewhere?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">While watching the class, I could not help but
be struck by the wide disparity of backgrounds of those present.
This must be reflected in a wide disparity in values. As
suggested by Szasz [8], why should a single approach fit
everyone?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The self-esteem fad was very much in evidence,
but why should people feel good about doing bad? Children have
only to turn on the TV to realize how unimportant they are in a
society where only famous people count, an abuse perpetuated by
ourselves, today, in the conference for which this paper was
prepared. This business of applauding themselves and each other
at the tiniest provocation and standing up and saying &quot;Hi,
I'm Darrell&quot; is brainwashing and gets the respect it
deserves among children. The group leader referred to God and
quoted Proverbs (but not Proverbs 31:6,7) in violation of the
First Amendment, as discussed by Luff [14]. The Tough Love theory
was introduced. Although there may be a little truth to the idea,
truth suffers when one tries to turn tough love into a business.
The unstated assumption is that one can package wisdom.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Nevertheless, some people <i>do</i> stop taking
drugs. Does that mean treatment has been successful? This is the <i>post-hoc-ergo-propter-hoc</i>
fallacy (after this, therefore because of this). Perhaps subjects
have merely exchanged one form of deviance for another. Perhaps
subjects have invested a great deal of money and don't want to
admit they have wasted it. (Charter Hospital of Sugarland, Texas,
charges $825/day for 30 days and employs some pretty hard sell.)
This is not a cure; it's self-deception. And this is the main
point: Do people who stop taking drugs and enter a lifelong
abstinence program along the lines of Alcoholics Anonymous really
improve their lives? Are they not simply exchanging one bad habit
for another, or, perhaps, exhibiting the same character defect in
a new way? Perhaps people in treatment &quot;cults&quot; are
saving the body at the expense of the soul. &quot;I'd rather be a
drunk than belong to AA.&quot; Perhaps, though, as in the case of
Marcel's friend Saint-Loup, who stopped taking cocaine to become
a war hero in <i>Remembrance of Things Past</i>, they have simply
found something better to do. I believe that nearly anyone will
stop using drugs if he has an opportunity to do something
worthwhile with which drugs are incompatible.</font> </p>

<h2>The Primary Function of a Human Being Is to Serve the
Economy. </h2>

<p><font size="2">The most important unstated assumption in the
thinking of William Bennett and other prohibitionists is that the
individual serves some higher purpose other than himself, usually
the needs of the economy. In a paper, &quot;Drug Abuse in the
Workplace&quot;, by Walsh and Gust of the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA) [15], this tacit assumption stands behind every
conclusion. It is interesting that they viewed as an intolerable
circumstance of drug use the discovered fact that &quot;marijuana
and cocaine users 'skipped work' two to three times as often as
nonusers, simply because they 'didn't want to be there'.&quot;
[Shuster C.R., Testimony Before the House Select Committee on
Narcotics Abuse and Control, May 7, 1986.] Walsh and Gust were
unable to recognize that drugs might have helped users realize
their true feelings and that the difficulty might lie with the
workplace rather than with drugs. &quot;The number one problem in
the workplace is drugs,&quot; they tell us. But, according to
Husch [16], &quot;Work is not the arena to which problems are
brought, rather work may be the forum within which problems
arise.&quot; </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Walsh and Gust assume obliquely that drug use
leads to impairment, neglecting cases where it leads to improved
performance. They refer to occupations &quot;where it is
essential that the individual be free of any and all effects of
all drugs at all times&quot;, without naming even one such
occupation. <i>I challenge</i>. The assumption is that the
individual should adjust to the workplace rather than the other
way around. NIDA advocates Tough But Fair drug policies, but is
it likely that business will be fair when faced with values that
conflict with its own? Why is it that, according to business,
drugs are harmful but pesticides are not? </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Houston, Texas</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">September 19, 1990 </font></p>

<hr>

<h1 align="center">References </h1>

<p><font size="2">1. Russell, Bertrand, &quot;Has Religion Made
Useful Contributions to Civilization?&quot; in <i>Why I Am Not a
Christian and Other Essays</i>, Paul Edwards, Editor, Simon and
Shuster, New York (1957) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">2. Wayburn, Thomas L., &quot;No One Has a Right
To Impose an Arbitrary System of Morals on Others&quot; in <i>Drug
Policy 1889-1990</i>, A<i> Reformer's Catalogue</i> (Abbreviated
as DPFC), Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B. Zeese, Eds., The Drug
Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1989).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">3. Weil, Andrew, &quot;The Only Solution to the
Drug Problem,&quot; <i>The Truth Seeker</i>, <b>116</b>, No. 5
(1989). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">4. Bentham, Jeremy, <i>Bentham's Handbook of
Political Fallacies</i>, Ed. Harold A. Larrabee, Johns Hopkins
Press, Baltimore (1952). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">5. Peele, Stanton, &quot;Does Addiction Excuse
Thieves and Killers from Criminal Responsibility&quot; in DPFC
(See Ref. 1) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">6. Schaler, Jeffrey A., &quot;Truth, <i>Traynor
and McKelvey</i>: Politics and the Alcoholism Controversy&quot;
in DPFC. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">7. Szasz, Thomas, <i>Ceremonial Chemistry</i>,
Anchor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y. (1975). (Now available
from Lassez-Faire Books, New York.) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">8. Szasz, Thomas, &quot;The Myth of Mental
Illness&quot; in <i>Ideology and Sanity</i>, Doubleday Anchor,
Garden City, NY (1970). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">9. <i>The Random House Dictionary of the
English Language</i>, Lawrence Urdang, Editor in Chief, Random
House, New York (1968). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">10. <i>The Mosby Medical Encyclopedia</i>, Eds.
Walter D. Glanze, Kenneth N. Anderson, and Lois E. Anderson, New
American Library, New York (1985). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">11. Mathre, Mary Lynn, &quot;New Treatment
Options after Repeal: Variety and Availability of Treatment for
Clients&quot; in DPFC. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">12. Henman, Anthony Richard, &quot;Coca: An
Alternative to Cocaine,&quot; in DPFC. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">13. Russell, Bertrand, &quot;The new
Generation&quot; in <i>Why I Am Not a Christian and Other Essays</i>,
Paul Edwards, Editor, Simon and Shuster, New York (1957) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">14. Luff, Ellen, &quot;The First Amendment and
Drug Alcohol Treatment Programs&quot; in DPFC. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">15. Walsh, J. Michael and Steven W. Gust,
&quot;Drug Abuse in the Workplace&quot;, Seminars in Occupational
Medicine, <b>1</b>, No.4 (1986). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">16. Husch, Jerri, &quot;Of Work and Drugs:
Notes on Prevention&quot; in DPFC.</font> <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>