
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B020-246</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncchp4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123100 text/html 63284
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:30:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:40 GMT
Content-length: 63066
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Social Response to Marihuana Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<p><b>Chapter IV</b> </p>

<h1>social response to marihuana use</h1>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&quot;I find the great thing in this world is not so much
where we stand, as in what direction we are moving: To reach the
port of heaven, we must sail sometimes with the wind and
sometimes against it-but we must sail and not drift, nor lie at
anchor.&quot; </p>

<p>Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table
(1858) </p>

<hr>

<p>A general interpretation of the National Survey indicates that
roughly one-quarter of the American public is convinced that
criminal sanctions should be withdrawn entirely from marihuana
use. Another fourth of the public is equally convinced that
existing social and legal policy is appropriate, and would
ordinarily jail possessors, with the exception of young first
offenders. Approximately half of the citizenry is confused about
what marihuana means and ambivalent about what society ought to
do about its use. This half of the population is unenthusiastic
about classifying the marihuana user as a criminal, but is
reluctant to relinquish formal control over him. </p>

<p>In considering social and legal policy alternatives, the
Commission has analyzed the pattern of social response to
marihuana use. <br>
</p>

<p><b>The Initial Social Response</b> </p>

<p>As we noted in Chapter I, the initial social reaction to
marihuana use was shaped by the narcotics policy adopted by the
Federal Government. In the early legislation, marihuana was
officially characterized as a narcotic on the basis of the widely
shared assumption that it was a habit-forming drug, leading
inevitably to a form of dependence. Although the medical
community was aware that marihuana was distinguishable from the
opiates in that it did not produce physical dependence, no
functional distinction was drawn; it was assumed that most users
were psychologically compelled to continue using the drug. As one
psychiatrist noted in 1934, the marihuana &quot;user wants to
recapture over and over again the ecstatic, elated state into
which the drug lifts him . . . The addiction to cannabis is a
sensual addiction: it is in the services of the hedonistic
elements of the personality.&quot; </p>

<p>The notion of psychological dependence is still ill-defined,
and was understood even less in the early days of American
marihuana use. The Commission has concluded that the automatic
classification of marihuana as &quot;addictive&quot; was derived
primarily from an underlying social perception of the substrata
of society which used the drug: aliens, prostitutes, and persons
at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder. </p>

<p>Additional characteristics of the opiates were also
transferred to marihuana. Particularly important in this regard
was the association of marihuana with aggressive behavior and
violent crime. One district attorney in New Orleans, where
marihuana use was particularly common, wrote in 1931: </p>

<p>It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly . . . At
the present time the underworld has been quick to realize the
value of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts to
that of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and to
its influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes.
It has been the experience of the Police and Prosecuting
Officials in the South that immediately before the commission of
many crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged in
by criminals so as to relieve themselves from the natural
restraint which might deter them from the commission of criminal
acts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit the
contemplated crime. </p>

<p>By 1931, those states in which marihuana use was at all common
had formally responded with a total eliminationist policy. They
generally amended the preexisting narcotics legislation to
include marihuana. Meanwhile, in 1929, the Federal Government
already had classified marihuana officially as a
&quot;habit-forming drug along with the opiates and cocaine, in
the legislation which established two federal &quot;farms&quot;
for treating narcotics addicts in Fort Worth, Texas, and
Lexington, Kentucky. </p>

<p>During the 1930's, the remaining states criminalized marihuana
use by adopting the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, in which the drug
was included (optionally) in the definition of narcotic drugs.
Then, in 1937, Congress adopted the Marihuana Tax Act, completing
the initial period of official response to marihuana use. </p>

<p>A difference of opinion among historians still exists as to
why policymakers thought national legislation was necessary at
that time. Whatever the reason, however, Congress responded
swiftly, without much attempt to learn the facts about the drug
and its use. The assumptions underlying that legislation were
summarized in the Report of the House Ways and Means Committee: </p>

<p>Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and all
power of directing and controlling thought is lost. Inhibitions
are released. As a result of these effects, it appeared from
testimony produced at the hearings that many violent crimes have
been and are being committed by persons under the influence of
this drug. Not only is marihuana used by the hardened criminals
to steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is also being
placed in the hands of high-school children in the form of
marihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were cited
at the hearings of school children who have been driven to crime
and insanity through the use of this drug. Its continued use
results many times in impotency and insanity. </p>

<p>When Congress escalated penalties for narcotics offenses in
1951 and again in 1956, marihuana was included, with the
following effects: </p>

<p>Possession Minimum sentence </p>

<p>First offense ------------------------------------------ 2
years </p>

<p>Second offense ---------------------------------------- 5
years </p>

<p>Third and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10
years </p>

<p>Fine ------------------------------------------------- $20,000
</p>

<p>Sale Minimum sentence </p>

<p>First offense ------------------------------------------ 5
years </p>

<p>Second and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10
years </p>

<p>Sale to minor by adult ---------------------------------- 10
years </p>

<p>Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except first
offenders in the possession category. </p>

<p>The perceptions of 1937 were perpetuated in the comments of
Senator Price M. Daniel, Chairman of the Senate subcommittee
considering the 1956 Act, although by now an important new factor
had been added: </p>

<p>Marihuana is a drug which starts most addicts in the use of
drugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some of
the worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to the
habit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then to
the final destruction of the persons addicted. </p>

<p><b>The Change</b> </p>

<p>With the adoption of marihuana use by middle and upper class
college youth in the mid-60's, the exaggerated notion of the
drug's dangers and the social tension so widespread during this
period combined to reopen the question of the impact of marihuana
use. But governmental policy held to the appropriateness of
existing law. </p>

<p>Arrests, prosecutions, convictions and sentences of
imprisonment all increased at both the federal and state levels.
Marihuana arrests by the U.S. Bureau of Customs increased
approximately 362% from fiscal year 1965 to 1970. Arrests by the
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, an agency which concerns
itself primarily with sale, rose 80% from 1965 to 1968. Because
major responsibility for enforcing the possession laws lies at
the state level, state arrests rose dramatically (1,000%) during
the five years from 1965 to 1970. Although the data compiled by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation are not comprehensive, the
FBI sample tracks the continuing increase of state arrests (Table
6). </p>

<p>Table 6.-STATE MARIHUANA ARRESTS </p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td>Year</td>
        <td>Arrests</td>
        <td>Percentage increase</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1965</td>
        <td>18,815</td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1966</td>
        <td>31,119</td>
        <td>65.39</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1967</td>
        <td>61,843</td>
        <td>98.73</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1968</td>
        <td>95,870</td>
        <td>55.02</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1969</td>
        <td>118,903</td>
        <td>24.02</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1970</td>
        <td>188,682</td>
        <td>58.68</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>In the wake of this upsurge in marihuana arrests, the criminal
justice system faced a far from usual &quot;criminal&quot;
population. Nonetheless, judging from federal figures, the number
of people prosecuted, convicted, and incarcerated did rise
substantially as prosecutors and judges attempted to carry out
the law. </p>

<p>Beginning in 1966, however, the proportion of defendants
ultimately convicted declined gradually, as did the percentage of
defendants who were incarcerated, and the average length of their
sentences. This response reflected an attempt to -mitigate the
harshness of the law as applied to this new user population. By
1968, the trend toward leniency seemed to have temporarily
leveled off, before it accelerated again in 1969 (Table 7). </p>

<p>Paralleling the vigorous law enforcement effort between 1965
and 1968 was a punitive reaction in the schools and large numbers
of students using marihuana were suspended, expelled or referred
to the police. Similarly, the military's first reaction to the
surge of marihuana use took the form of court-martial,
administrative punishment, or discharge from the service.<br>
</p>

<p>Table 7.-DISPOSITION OF FEDERAL MARIHUANA ARRESTS </p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td>Year</td>
        <td>Total defendants</td>
        <td>Percent convicted </td>
        <td>Percent incarcerated</td>
        <td>Average length of sentence (in months) </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1964</td>
        <td></td>
        <td>85</td>
        <td>49</td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1965</td>
        <td>523</td>
        <td>90</td>
        <td>52</td>
        <td>58.2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1966</td>
        <td>746</td>
        <td>87</td>
        <td>45</td>
        <td>53.7</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1967</td>
        <td>941</td>
        <td>80</td>
        <td>38.5</td>
        <td>51.0 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1968</td>
        <td>1,433</td>
        <td>79</td>
        <td>39.4</td>
        <td>51.2 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1969</td>
        <td>2,189</td>
        <td>76</td>
        <td>34.3</td>
        <td>52.6 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1970</td>
        <td>2,082</td>
        <td>73</td>
        <td>27.4</td>
        <td>46.7 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1971</td>
        <td>3,323</td>
        <td>60</td>
        <td>28.5</td>
        <td>39.9 </td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>The family, however, suffered the most from the sudden
conflict between accepted norms and this expression of youthful
independence. The use of drugs, particularly marihuana, became a
significant barrier between parent and child. Many young people
adopted marihuana as a symbol of their uneasiness with society's
prevailing norms. </p>

<p>As noted in Chapter 1, the sudden increase in marihuana use
precipitated extensive research by the medical and scientific
communities. By 1969, a consensus emerged holding that many of
the earlier beliefs about the effects of marihuana were
erroneous. Available U.S. data seemed to indicate that dependence
on the drug was rare, as was the incidence of psychosis among
marihuana users. Particularly important was the recognition that
there was little, if any, convincing proof that marihuana caused
aggressive behavior or crime. As such findings accumulated,
public attention was drawn increasingly to the consequences of
existing policy: soaring arrests, convictions and in some states,
lengthy sentences. </p>

<p>Policy-makers, in social institutions and government, as well
as the public began to believe that the harshness of the criminal
penalties was far out of proportion to the dangers posed by the
drug. As users were incarcerated, newspapers and television
stations often brought the matter to public attention,
particularly when the arrested youngster came from a prominent
family. </p>

<p>Official response to this development was twofold: a trend
toward leniency in marihuana cases within the legal system, and a
recognition by policy-makers of widespread uncertainty regarding
the effects of marihuana. </p>

<p>Reflecting the first response, the courts, prosecutors and
police applied existing law more leniently, and the law-makers in
most states and at the federal level changed the letter of the
law, reducing the penalties for possession of marihuana,
generally to a misdemeanor (up to a year in jail). In the
process, they repealed the mandatory minimums which had been of
major concern to the judiciary. </p>

<p>By June 1970, 24 states and the District of Columbia had
reduced the penalties, although 34 states and the District still
classified marihuana as a narcotic. Meanwhile, on the federal
level, Congress had been considering the Nixon Administration's
comprehensive proposal to overhaul the national government's
patchwork of drug legislation. </p>

<p>Since the passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act in 1914,
federal drug laws had taken the form of tax measures, an approach
compelled for constitutional reasons. The Marihuana Tax Act of
1937 followed the same format. The result, however, was a complex
set of offenses involving order forms and registrations. When the
Supreme Court declared certain aspects of the Tax Act
unconstitutional in 1969, revision of the law became essential.
Taking up the challenge, the Administration proposed a major
piece of legislation which tightened control over pharmaceutical
distributions and also reappraised the penalty structure for
narcotics and dangerous drug offenses. </p>

<p>Possession of all drugs, including marihuana, was reduced to a
misdemeanor. Special treatment for first offenders was provided,
allowing expungement of the record upon satisfactory completion
of a probationary period. Casual transfers of marihuana were
treated in the same manner as possession. After a series of
wide-ranging hearings, Congress passed the Comprehensive Drug
Abuse Prevention and Control Act, and on October 27, 1970, the
President signed it into law. </p>

<p>After passage of the new federal drug law, the Conference of
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws adopted a Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, conforming in structure and emphasis to the
federal law. Although the Uniform Act specifies no penalties, the
Commissioners recommended that possession of all drugs be a
misdemeanor. </p>

<p>At this writing, 42 of the states and the District of Columbia
classify possession as a misdemeanor or have adopted special
provisions so classifying possession of small amounts of
marihuana. In half of the remaining eight jurisdictions, the
courts have discretion to sentence possessors as misdemeanants. </p>

<p>In 11 jurisdictions, casual transfers are treated in the same
manner as possession, and in 27 jurisdictions, conditional
discharge is available to certain classes of offenders. </p>

<p>The second characteristic of the 1969-70 official response was
its acknowledgment of uncertainty. No longer perceived as a major
threat to public safety, marihuana use had now become primarily
an issue of private and public health. Scientific researchers
were asked to define the nature and scope of the health concern.
In a sense, lawmakers took the minimum official action dictated
by social and scientific realities, but were uncertain where to
go from there. The need to know more about the effects of the
drug, particularly its chronic, long-term effects, became the
core of official response. </p>

<p>Many states appointed special task forces and commissions to
report on marihuana and drug abuse in general. Congress directed
the Department of Health, Education and Welfare to file annual
Reports on Marihuana and Health and, in the Comprehensive Drug
Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, established this
Commission. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Current Response</b> </p>

<p>In addition to an objective appraisal of the effects of
marihuana use, this Commission was directed to evaluate the
efficacy of existing law. The marihuana laws were and still are
the focus of much public debate. We have recognized from the
outset that a meaningful evaluation of the law is dependent upon
an understanding of objectives and the social context in which
the law operates. Particularly important in this connection are
the attitudes and practices of society's non-legal institutions
and the general direction of public opinion. </p>

<p>In order to comprehend the entire range of contemporary social
response, the Commission launched a threefold inquiry. First, we
designed a series of projects designed to ascertain opinion and
behavior within the criminal justice system. Included were an
analysis of all marihuana arrests during the last six months of
1970 in six metropolitan jurisdictions, a similar study of all
federal marihuana arrests during 1970, an opinion survey of all
local prosecuting attorneys, and a similar survey of attitudes
among a representative sample of Judges, probation officers, and
court clinicians. </p>

<p>We next focused on the practice and opinion of the medical,
clerical, educational, and business communities. To this end, we
solicited written responses from representative groups, invited
various spokesmen to testify before us, made numerous field
visits to secondary schools, colleges and universities and
surveyed opinion in free clinics and university health services.
We also launched a study of drug use and abuse in industry which
will be covered in our second Report on drug abuse. </p>

<p>Finally, we commissioned the National Survey of public opinion
about marihuana to which we have previously referred. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM<br>
</b></p>

<p>How does the criminal justice system respond when an enormous
increase in an illegal conduct, of a primarily private nature,
makes full enforcement of the law impossible, and when there is
widespread doubt about the rationale for making the conduct
illegal? This question guided our analysis of the responses and
opinions from members of the criminal justice system.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Law Enforcement Behavior</b> </p>

<p>On the basis of a detailed study of all federal marihuana
arrests during 1970 and of a sample of state arrests during the
last half of 1970 in Cook County, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; Omaha,
Nebraska; Tucson, Arizona; San Mateo County, California; and the
Washington, DC Metropolitan Area, we present the following
findings. </p>

<p>FEDERAL The federal authorities make little or no effort to
seek out violators of laws proscribing possession of marihuana.
The Federal Government ceded responsibility for enforcement of
possession laws to the states several years ago. However, in the
course of general enforcement activity, the Federal authorities
do make possession arrests. If a person is arrested at the
Federal level for possession or casual transfer of small or
moderate amounts of marihuana, the case generally is either
dropped or turned over to the states for prosecution. </p>

<p>The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs does not
concentrate much of its energy on marihuana. By its own estimate,
approximately 6% of its investigative efforts are directed at
marihuana offenses. Most BNDD marihuana arrests occur as a result
of the agency's general investigation into the commercial
distribution of all drugs. </p>

<p>The overwhelming majority of all federal marihuana arrests
occur at or near the borders, as the Bureau of Customs, sometimes
in cooperation with the Border Patrol of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, attempts to interdict the importation of
the drug. </p>

<p><b>State</b> </p>

<p>At the state level, where enforcement of the possession laws
is focused, about 93% of the arrests in our sample were for this
offense. Yet, there was little formal investigative effort to
seek out violators of the possession laws. Instead, 69% of all
marihuana arrests arose from spontaneousor accidental situations
where there had been no investigation at all. Well over half of
these spontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped an
automobile and saw or smelled marihuana. The remaining
spontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped persons on the
street or in a park and discovered marihuana. </p>

<p>In an additional 16% of the cases, the marihuana arrest
resulted from police follow-up of a phoned tip or similar lead.
In less than 11% of all the cases was there any significant
police involvement. (Scope of investigation was unknown in about
4% of the cases). </p>

<p>Because of this enforcement pattern, arrests were concentrated
among the young. Typically the arrestee was a white male, in
school or employed in a blue collar job, without a prior record.
Of those arrested at the state level: </p>

<p>* 58% were under 21; 30% were between 21 and 26; 10% were over
26 (2% unknown) </p>

<p>* 85% were male; 15% were female </p>

<p>* 77% were white; 21% were black; 2% were Spanish speaking </p>

<p>* 27% were students, 2% were military; 28% were employed in
blue collar jobs; 15% were employed in white collar jobs; 11%
were unemployed (16% unknown) </p>

<p>* 44% had not been arrested previously; 31% had been arrested
previously (in 25% of the cases, the extent of prior contact was
unknown) ; only 6% of the arrestees had been previously
inearcerated </p>

<p>Such arrestees generally possessed only small amounts of
marihuana. Of our entire sample of 3,071 arrests: </p>

<ul>
    <li>67% were for possession of less than one ounce (18% were
        for less than one gram; 23% were for between one and 5
        grams; 26% were for between 5 and 30 grams) </li>
    <li>7% were for possession of between one ounce and 4 ounces </li>
    <li>8% were for possession of over 4 ounces </li>
    <li>13% were for possession of unknown quantities </li>
    <li>3 % were for transfer of less than one ounce </li>
    <li>3% were for transfer of over one ounce,* </li>
</ul>

<p>Offenders at the state level were generally arrested in
groups. </p>

<p>* 29 % were arrested alone </p>

<p>* 24% were arrested with one other person </p>

<p>* 43% were arrested with two or more other persons (4%
unknown) Faced with this population of offenders, the criminal
justice System responded often by dismissing or diverting to a
noncriminal institution the young first-offense possessor of
small amounts. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Adult Cases</b> </p>

<p>At least 48% of the cases were terminated in the defendant's
favor: </p>

<p>The police themselves disposed of l0% of the cases, refraining
from filing charges, or diverting the case, to some other
institution. </p>

<p>The prosecution declined to file complaints in an additional
7% of the cases. </p>

<p>An additional 28% of the cases were dismissed in the course of
pretrial judicial proceedings. </p>

<p>In 3% of the cases, the defendant was acquitted at trial. </p>

<p>*Because the figures have been rounded off, the total is not
always 100%.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Juvenile Cases</b> </p>

<p>At least 70% of the cases were terminated in the youth's
favor: </p>

<p>The police themselves disposed of 21% of the cases, refraining
from referring the youth to juvenile authorities or diverting the
case to some other agency. </p>

<p>An additional 48% of the cases were dismissed either because
the juvenile officer responsible for filing a delinquency
petition refused to do so, or because the judge dismissed the
case prior to trial. </p>

<p>in 1% of the cases, the juvenile was found innocent. </p>

<p>Of the entire sample of arrests, both adult and juvenile, 33%
of those apprehended were ultimately sentenced,, after pleading
guilty or being found guilty. (Since 11% of the 3,071 cases -were
still pending at the time of our study, and disposition was
unknown in 2% of the cases, the figure may be as high as 40% of
all arrests). </p>

<p>Of those convicted for possession of marihuana, 24% were
incarcerated, usually for a year or less. Most of the remaining
persons were put on probation, although some were fined only. By
comparison, of those convicted of sale (5% of the convicted
individuals), 65% were incarcerated, usually for over a year. </p>

<p>In short, in the 2,610 cases where disposition was final and
was available to 6% of those apprehended were ultimately
incarcerated. </p>

<p>From this analysis of enforcement behavior. it appears that
the law enforcement community has adopted a policy of
containment. Although effort is sometimes expended to seek out
private marihuana use, the trend is undoubtedly to invoke, the
marihuana possession laws only when the behavior (possession)
comes out in the open. We were told by police officials in some
cities, for example, that arrests are made only when marihuana
use is flaunted in public. </p>

<p>The salient feature of the present law has become the threat
of arrest for indiscretion. The high percentage of cases which,
after arrest, are disposed of by dismissal or informal diversion
attests to the ambivalence of police officials, prosecutors and
judges about the appropriateness of existing law. Anyone
processed through the entire system does run a risk of
incarceration, especially when the individual had a prior record
and the offense was sale or possession of a significant amount. </p>

<p><b>Law Enforcement Opinion</b> </p>

<p>Prosecutorial opinion toward the existing system suggests both
a containment objective and a, flexible, response. As to
prosecution policy: </p>

<p>31% of the prosecutors state that they would not prosecute
anyone one arrested at a private, social gathering of marihuana
users who are passing a cigarette. </p>

<p>Large numbers of prosecutors admit that they consider factors
other than strength of the evidence in deciding whether or not to
prosecute a possession case; 41% cite age, 38% cite lack of prior
record, 36% consider the amount of marihuana seized and 26% take
into account the family situation of the accused; 31% thought one
or another of these non-legal factors was most important in his
decision </p>

<p>29% of the prosecutors acknowledge that they use informal
probation in lieu of prosecution in some cases. </p>

<p>As to the efficacy of existing law, a majority of the
prosecutors agree that the marihuana laws do not deter, or deter
only minimally: </p>

<p>Persons under 30 from initiating use (53%) </p>

<p>Users from using regularly (56%) </p>

<p>Users from transferring small amounts for little or no
remuneration (55%) </p>

<p>From the studies made by the Commission of enforcement
practices, we consider this to be a realistic assessment. </p>

<p>Conversely, however, the prosecutors agree that the laws have
a significant effect in deterring users from smoking marihuana
openly (62%) and persons over 30 from initiating use (44%). </p>

<p>We also asked the district attorneys for their views on an
appropriate legal policy concerning marihuana use. Their opinions
tend to fall in three groups. One group, representing about 25%
of the prosecutors, favors the status quo, and does not want any
further reduction in penalties. A fifth of the prosecutors
conclude, on the basis of their experience, that possession of
marihuana, and perhaps sale of the drug, should be removed
entirely from the criminal justice system. </p>

<p>The remaining prosecutors, a majority, is willing to consider
mitigation of the harshness of the law either by legislation or
by benign exercise of discretion, but is reluctant to relinquish
formal, criminal control. These prosecutors doubt the deterrent
value of the law and are willing to be lenient in appropriate
cases, but they believe some use of the legal system is necessary
to prevent all increase in marihuana use. </p>

<p>Underlying these opinions are diverse attitudes about
marihuana use and the efficacy of existing law. For example,
prosecutors who doubt the efficacy of existing law and reject the
&quot;escalation&quot; and &quot;aggressive behavior&quot;
hypotheses, are generally willing to modify the laws by their
enforcement policies and by legislative reform (Table 8). </p>

<p>The same general pattern of practice and opinion emerges at
the judicial and dispositional level. Only 13% of the responding
judges would jail an adult for possession of marihuana and only
4% said they would incarcerate a minor. Lesser proportions of
probation officers and clinicians would imprison adults (8% and
1%) and minors (2% and %). Conversely, 11% of the Judges, 15.5%
of the probation officers and 63.5% of the clinicians noted that
they would assess no penalty for possession by adults. For
minors, the proportions are 3%, 5%, and 35% respectively. </p>

<p>Table 8.-DISTRICT ATTORNEYS, OPINIONS </p>

<p>Percent who </p>

<p>Percent who Percent who believe the </p>

<p>believe believe marihuana Percent </p>

<p>Change favored marihuana marihuana laws do not who utilize </p>

<p>leads to leads to deter persons informal </p>

<p>hard drug aggressive under 30 probation </p>

<p>use behavior from initi- </p>

<p>ating use </p>

<p>None 87.1 47 51.3 28.5 </p>

<p>Reduction of possession </p>

<p>penalties 68.8 35.1 63.2 34.3 </p>

<p>Preclusion of incarceration. . 64.7 33 59 33.2 </p>

<p>Decriminalization of </p>

<p>possession of small </p>

<p>amounts 41.5 21.9 67.2 37.4 </p>

<p>Legalization of marihuana. .. 32.2 11.1 69 37.8<br>
</p>

<p>How to read table: 87.1%, of the prosecutors who favor no
change in existing law believe that marihuana leads to the use of
hard drugs; in contrast, 32.2% of the prosecutors who favor
legalization believe that marihuana leads to the use of hard
drugs. </p>

<p>With regard to appropriate legal policy, the judges exhibit
the same inclination as the prosecutors to look for alternatives
within a formal control system which would avoid the use of
criminal penalties. We asked essentially the same question in two
ways and received similar responses (Table 9). </p>

<p>The judges, as a group, are less enthusiastic about criminal
control than the prosecutors, but are equally unwilling to
relinquish formal control. By contrast, the probation officers
and clinicians, who have more personal contact with these
offenders and are perhaps more intensively aware of the control
potential of the criminal justice systern, are highly skeptical
about formal control (Tables 10, -and 11). </p>

<p>In conclusion, as one proceeds through the criminal justice
system, from district attorneys to court clinicians, the people
responsible for the functioning of that system seem to be
decreasingly enthusiastic about the appropriateness of criminal
control and decreasingly insistent on any technique for formal
control. </p>

<p>Table 9.*-JUDGES, OPINIONS </p>

<p>Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent </p>

<p>control for adult users who for possession who </p>

<p>favored favored </p>

<p>Informal Personal choice 11 Control outside 24.3 </p>

<p>control Informal social 22 criminal justice </p>

<p>control system </p>

<p>Non-criminal Required treatment 21 Expungement of 57.9 </p>

<p>formal Other 11 criminal record </p>

<p>control </p>

<p>Criminal Criminal law 25 Control within 11.5 </p>

<p>control criminal justice </p>

<p>system </p>

<p>'Because of a small percentage of non-responses, figures do
not always total 100%. </p>

<p>How to read table: When asked to identify the appropriate
means of control for adult users, 33% of the judges opted for
informal control (1 1% would rely on personal choice and 22%,
would rely on informal social control). Similarly, when asked
about the appropriate statutory scheme for possession, 24.3% of
the judges preferred control outside the criminal justice system,
a functional equivalent of &quot;informal control.&quot; </p>

<p>Table 10.*-PROBATION OFFICERS' OPINIONS </p>

<p>Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent </p>

<p>control for adult users who for possession who </p>

<p>favored favored </p>

<p>Informal Personal choice 21 Control outside 35.5 </p>

<p>control Informal social 32.7 criminal justice </p>

<p>control system </p>

<p>Non-criminal Required treatment 11.8 Expungement of 54.5 </p>

<p>formal Other 10 criminal record </p>

<p>control </p>

<p>Criminal Criminal law 15.5 Control within 9 </p>

<p>control criminal justice </p>

<p>system </p>

<p>*Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures do
not always total 100%. </p>

<p>To supplement our survey of behavior and opinion within the
criminal justice system, we also solicited the views of the
American Bar Association. The President of the A13A in turn urged
the respective Committees of the Association to submit their
views to us. The two Committees directly concerned with the drug
area, the Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Reform of the Section
oNn Individual Rights </p>

<p>Table ll.*-CLINICIANS, OPINIONS </p>

<p>Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent </p>

<p>control for adult users who for possession who </p>

<p>favored favored </p>

<p>Informal Personal choice 61.7 Control outside 74 </p>

<p>control Informal social 21 criminal justice </p>

<p>control system<br>
</p>

<p>Non-criminal Required treatment 1 Expungement of 22.6 </p>

<p>formal Other 10 criminal record </p>

<p>control<br>
</p>

<p>Criminal Criminal law 3.5 Control within 0 </p>

<p>control criminal justice </p>

<p>system </p>

<p>'Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures do
not always total 100%. </p>

<p>and Responsibilities, and the Committee on Drug Abuse of the
Section on Criminal Law, were in essential agreement regarding
the appropriate course of action. </p>

<p>Both Committees expressed doubt about the wisdom and
legitimacy of existing policy and about the, capacity of the
criminal justice system to deal with marihuana use. They both
urged the Commission to recommend the removal of criminal
penalties from possession of the drug for personal use and casual
non-profit transfers. Both Committees suggested that a regulatory
approach to distribution of the drug be given serious
consideration. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE NON-LEGAL INSTITUTIONS</b> </p>

<p>Law enforcement authorities, given available and prospective
resources, cannot possibly enforce the existing marihuana laws
fully. The best they can do is keel) marihuana use contained and
out of sight. In addition, many officials within the criminal
justice system are reluctant to enforce the marihuana laws, being
either uncommitted to the usefulness of this particular law or
opposed to the law itself. The net result is for the legal system
to leave much of the responsibility for social control to other
social institutions such as family, schools, churches, and the
medical profession. Since these other institutions themselves
have relied heavily on the legal system for control, caution and
confusion now dominate the social response to marihuana use. </p>

<p>The diminishing severity of the law enforcement response may
not have occurred if the other institutions of society had
continued to regard the marihuana user as a criminal. However,
many of these institutions have come to view the marihuana user
primarily in social or medical terms, and to recommend a form of
social control in accord with their respective self-interests or
orientations. In many cases, the ,attitudes of these other
institutions mirror that of the criminal justice system:
uncertainty about the proper role of formal legal control.<br>
</p>

<p><b>The Family</b> </p>

<p>The most important institution for instilling social norms is
the family. Parental attitudes generally parallel public opinion,
and specific responses in our National Survey suggest an
inclination among parents and non-parents to deal with youthful
marihuana users through discussion and persuasion rather than
harsh or punitive measures. When asked what action they would
take upon discovering that one of their teenage children was
smoking marihuana with friends, 47% of the adults responded that
they would use persuasion and reason. Twenty-three percent
favored a punitive approach. Interestingly, 9% of the latter
group felt so strongly about the matter that they were willing to
report their own child to the police. A considerable number, 35%
indicated that they were uncertain about what to do, or failed to
respond to this multiple response question. </p>

<p>The non-punitive trend was also apparent when the adults were
asked what they would do if their teenage child was arrested for
a marihuana offense. A substantial number (58%) indicated they
would attempt to extricate their child from the situation, many
not wishing their child to have a police record, while 34%
expressed the sentiment that the child's arrest would help him
learn a lesson. </p>

<p><b>The Schools</b> </p>

<p>Marihuana use continues to increase among high school and
college students. The National Survey reveals that 30% of the
high school juniors and seniors have used marihuana. The National
Survey also reveals that 44% of those currently attending college
at the graduate or undergraduate levels have used it, while other
surveys indicate this figure is significantly higher in some
major universities. </p>

<p>Not surprisingly, there has been, during the last two years,
ail appreciable change in the attitudes of school administrators,
faculty and even of the boards of education and trustees toward
marihuana use, Administrators at the secondary and college levels
are generally more relaxed and tolerant toward marihuana, use
than they were during the mid-1960's, when support for a punitive
response was common. After the initial shock of widespread use
dissipated, many school officials came to believe that strong
disciplinary action, including suspension and arrest, was
counterproductive. In addition, as the evidence accumulated that
marihuana, was not as dangerous as had once been thought,
parental and community pressures were sometimes brought to bear
on school administrators to be less punitive and more
understanding of marihuana use. </p>

<p>At the secondary level, the policies very somewhat from state
to state and even within states. Nevertheless, school boards
generally seem to have become less enthusiastic about suspension
and arrest as an appropriate response to marihuana use. One
school administrator in Philadelphia noted sarcastically that if
all users were suspended or arrested, the high schools would
become empty cells, with their entire clientele turned out onto
the streets. </p>

<p>A West Coast official emphasized that student alcohol use was
a much more serious problem than marihuana use; he even suggested
that legalization of marihuana might reduce alcohol use among the
young. The Commission ascertained that no suspensions for
marihuana use had occurred during 1971 in the entire school
system of a southern metropolitan area. Although security
officers in that system did make 20 arrests, they were all for
selling marihuana and other drugs. </p>

<p>At the secondary level, then, increased reliance is being
placed on persuasion rather than discipline, as a means of
discouraging marihuana use. Drug education programs, now being
instituted in almost every school system, often include
information about alcohol and tobacco. We will explore the
various pedagogical techniques employed in such programs and will
attempt to evaluate them in our next Report. </p>

<p>At the college level, the response is even more lenient. In
many cases official neutrality or even protection against police
intervention substitutes for the restraint common at the
secondary level. Under formal or informal arrangements with local
law enforcement officials, many schools bar on-campus arrests for
marihuana use. Apparently they have concluded that enforcement of
the marihuana laws causes more harm. than does use of the drug.
In some cases, college authorities have substituted their own
policy for society's official policy. The Commission learned at
one of its hearings in Chicago, for example, that a major
Midwestern university explicitly declared that students would be
subject to university disciplinary action if they were found in
possession of more than one week's supply of marihuana. </p>

<p>Control at the college level is usually considered a medical
Concern and is handled either through the university health
centers or free clinics. The trend toward leniency is also
apparent in the policy responses of the representative sample of
university health service and free clinic physicians. whose
profession presumably brings them into contact with the
population most it risk from marihuana. Among personnel of the
free clinics, 62% of the respondents favor legalization; 5% would
continue the present policy, and the remainder would either
reduce penalties (11%) or await further research (22%). </p>

<p>Even among the &quot;establishment-oriented&quot; health
service personnel, similar attitudes prevail. Nineteen percent
would continue the present policy, and 16% would legalize. Of the
remaining 55% (10% did not respond), 38% would reduce, penalties
and 17% would await further research. This pattern of views bears
a striking resemblance to that of the prosecuting attorneys, and
indeed of the public at large. The large majority indicates
uneasiness with the present system and opposition to
legalization, but is uncertain about exactly what to do. </p>

<p><b>The Churches</b> </p>

<p>The nation's churches play a major role in the process by
which society's norms and values are transmitted to the young.
Moral education, through individual and family counseling by
church personnel, is influential in the process of social
control, particularly for adolescents. Consequently, the
Commission sought to learn the attitudes, responses and
recommendations of the clergy. </p>

<p>The larger societal uncertainty about the social and moral
implications of marihuana use is also reflected in the attitudes
of religious institutions. For example, Dr. Thomas E. Price,
speaking for the National Council of Churches of Christ in the
U.S.A. before the Commission, referred to marihuana as a
&quot;tightly drawn moral knot.&quot; This uncertainty has led
many religious groups to minimize a punitive and repressive
response to marihuana use in their official statements and formal
programs. Instead, they have concentrated on educational and
rehabilitative programs. </p>

<p>Many church spokesmen have urged a reconsideration of social
and legal policy. The range of their suggestions for change
reflects, once again, widespread uncertainty. Some ask for some
form of &quot;adequate&quot; punishment or supervision so as to
discourage marihuana use. Others say &quot;reform or
elimination&quot; of penalties for possession would be
appropriate. And there are those who suggest legalization with
some government regulation. Some church spokesmen have defended
existing policy, recommending only that the law be more strictly
and uniformly enforced. </p>

<p><b>The Medical Community</b> </p>

<p>In contrast to the mixed opinions of other segments of
society, the medical profession has a rather broad consensus at
the present time. In a series of responses from various medical
societies, associations and committees, we found certain
recurrent themes. Every medical group emphasized the need for
more research into the effects of marihuana. There was uniform
emphasis on how marihuana, as a &quot;drug,&quot; affects heart,
head, blood, brain and so on, but not on how it affects society
as a behavior. The consensus was that marihuana, the drug, poses
some danger for the individual, physically or psychologically.
The only major disagreement is about the degree of such danger. </p>

<p>The second recurrent theme was that marihuana should
definitely not be legalized. Legalization would imply sanction,
medical groups said, with a probable, increase in use as a
result. One doctor compared legalization with the failure of
Prohibition: &quot;The fact [that] Prohibition was a failure
doesn't make alcoholism a good thing and the six million or so
(alcoholics) we have are no bargain. Therefore, since there is no
legitimate use for marihuana it seems rather silly to legalize
its use to initiate a second headache.&quot; Another reason
commonly given by physicians for opposing legalization is that
such a step should be taken if and when it is proven that
marihuana is not dangerous. </p>

<p>The third common theme of medical opinion was a call for a
more. lenient approach toward users, again a position reflected
in almost every quarter of society. One officer of a public
health association told a convention: &quot; (Our committee)
deplores the strong punitive measures suggested by some because
we feel that a jail sentence for the offense of smoking marihuana
is not likely to solve the problem of eliminating marihuana use.
On the contrary, a prison sentence is likely to do great damage
to a young person's personality as well as to his future
career.&quot; Another group called for prosecutors to use
discretionary powers in handling youthful first offenders. </p>

<p>When discussing penalties, the medical community begins to
take, a look at marihuana use as a form of social behavior rather
than simply a drug which produces certain physical and
psychological effects. One doctor wrote: &quot;Because marihuana
in present patterns of use is, by and large, a relatively
innocuous drug and because its use has many motivations from
simple curiosity to symbolism of hostility to the
'establishment', the legal penalties in many jurisdictions
throughout the United States are excessively punitive.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Summary</b> </p>

<p>Social institutional spokesmen now commonly recognize that
control of marihuana is only partially a law enforcement problem.
Opinions cluster around the propositions that society should not
be punitive on the one hand, but should not make the drug
available, at least for now. Beyond these points, however,
uncertainty prevails. There is no common vision of an appropriate
social control policy. </p>

<p>Each institution is going about the business of control in its
own way. Parents emphasize mutual communication. The secondary
schools emphasize health education. The colleges recognize
personal freedom so long as it does not jeopardize the
educational enterprise. Churches emphasize uncertainty about the
moral implications of marihuana use. The medical fraternity
stresses the need for further research into the health
consequences of marihuana use. Uncertainly is the common
denominator. </p>

<p><b>THE PUBLIC RESPONSE</b> </p>

<p>For most Americans marihuana use is not an abstract
phenomenon. Fifteen percent of the adult population, the National
Survey revealed, has tried the drug and 44% of the non-trying
adults personally know someone who has used the drug. Fourteen
percent of the youth have tried the drug and 58% of the
non-triers personally know someone who has used the drug. Indeed,
six percent of the non-trying youth indicated that half or more
of their friends used marihuana. </p>

<p>The public is also aware of the consequences of the existing
system and concerned about its impact. Ninety-seven percent of
the adults know that selling marihuana is against the law. Only a
few less, 94%, know that possession is against the law. In fact,
one fourth of the adults know someone who has been arrested on a
possession charge. Ninety-two percent of the youth know that sale
is prohibited, and four out of five know that possession is
against the law. Fifty-three percent of the 16- and 17-year-olds
actually know someone who has been arrested for possession. </p>

<p>Acutely aware of the legal consequences of use, the public is
also cognizant of the difficulties encountered by the criminal
justice system in its attempt to enforce a widely-violated law,
Adults were asked whether they mostly agreed or mostly disagreed
with a series of 12 selected propositions regarding the
desirability of maintaining or altering the present system of
marihuana control. The two propositions which received the most
support relate to problems inherent in the existing laws. </p>

<p>Eighty-three percent of the adults mostly agreed with the
statement that &quot;because of marihuana a lot of young people
who are not criminals are getting police records and being put in
jail.&quot; And 76% agreed that &quot;laws against marihuana are
very hard to enforce because most people use it in private.&quot;
</p>

<p>Marihuana use is more personal than most public issues, but it
is also more confusing. Bombarded in recent years -with
contradictory &quot;findings&quot; and statistics about the
effects of marihuana, and with conflicting arguments about public
policy, the public tends to believe everything, whether pro or
con. Particularly important in this regard is the widespread
acceptance of beliefs which have little basis in fact. </p>

<p>Approximately half of the adult public believes that
&quot;many crimes are committed by persons who are under the
influence of marihuana,&quot; and that &quot;some people have
died from using it.&quot; Seven of every 10 adults believe that
&quot;marihuana makes people want to try stronger things like
heroin.&quot; Although the probability that a person believes
these statements increases with age, a significant percentage of
all groups are represented. </p>

<p>The underlying confusion is strongly indicated in the
contradictory attitudes toward various reasons for maintaining or
changing the law. For example, 43% of the adults thought, in the
context of an argument for making marihuana legal, that &quot;it
should be up to each person to decide for himself, like with
alcohol or tobacco.&quot; Yet 75% of the adults agreed, in the
context of an argument for keeping the laws the way they are,
that &quot;there are already too many ways for people to escape
their responsibilities. We don't need another one.&quot; </p>

<p>Youth tend to be less convinced than adults that marihuana use
may be fatal to the user, or cause him to commit crime or lead
him to use other drugs; but young people as a group also are
noticeably more uncertain about these matters. One of every four
young people indicated that they were unsure whether marihuana
caused death or crime, and one of every six expressed uncertainty
regarding the progression to other drugs. Similarly, young people
were more than twice as likely as adults to have &quot;no
opinion&quot; about the various propositions regarding the need
for legal change. </p>

<p>Public attitudes toward marihuana exhibit both doubt and
tension. On the one hand, we note an acute awareness of the legal
consequences of marihuana use and an appreciation of the adverse
impact of processing users through the criminal justice system.
On the other hand, we note some misconceptions about the dangers
of marihuana and confusion about the consequences of changing or
maintaining the present system. </p>

<p>Public responses on the basic questions of social and legal
policy reflect the underlying ambivalence. The overwhelming
majority of the public does not want to treat the marihuana user
harshly. This attitude appeared repeatedly through the entire
Survey. When asked &quot;For the good of the country, which of
the following courses of action would be the best thing to do
about [marihuana use] ?&quot; the public responded in the
following manner:<br>
</p>

<p>Percentage Youth Adults* 12-17 </p>

<p>Handle the problem mostly through the police and courts: </p>

<p>the process of arrest, conviction, punish- </p>

<p>ment ------------------------------------------ 37 90 </p>

<p>Handle the problem mostly through medical clinics: </p>

<p>the process of diagnosis, treatment, care ----------- 51 48 </p>

<p>Don't worry about the use of marihuana, but spend time and
money on preventing and solving other crimes </p>

<p>No opinion --------------------------------------- 5 20 </p>

<p>*Some adults gave more than one answer. </p>

<p>Adults and youth were also asked to look at marihuana use from
the perspective of the system, and to identify the appropriate
penalty for possession of marihuana. Both groups were reluctant
to put users in jail, especially for a first offense.
Eighty-three percent of the adults and 64% of the youth would not
incarcerate a youthful first offender; 54% of the adults and 41 %
of the youth would not even give the young offender a police
record (Table 12). </p>

<p>Table 12.-ADULTS' VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES </p>

<p>If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult </p>

<p>Penalty </p>

<p>First Previous First Previous </p>

<p>offense conviction offense conviction </p>

<p>(percent) (percent) (percent) (percent)<br>
</p>

<p>No penalty 20 Total 6 Total 13 Total 7 Total </p>

<p>Fine (no police record).. 34 83 11 37 28 64 6 24 </p>

<p>Probation 29 20 23 11<br>
</p>

<p>Jail sentence </p>

<p>Up to a week 8 Total 20 Total 11 Total 14 Total </p>

<p>Up to a year 3 13 24 56 12 32 24 70 </p>

<p>More than a year 2 12 9 32<br>
</p>

<p>No opinion 4 7 4 6<br>
</p>

<p>YOUNG PEOPLES, (age 12-17) VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES </p>

<p>If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult </p>

<p>Penalty </p>

<p>First Previous First Previous </p>

<p>offense conviction offense conviction </p>

<p>(percent) (percent) (percent) (percent)<br>
</p>

<p>No penalty 13 Total 6 Tota I 11 Tota 1 7 Total </p>

<p>Fine (no police record).. 28 64 9 35 21 50 7 27 </p>

<p>Probation 23 20 18 13<br>
</p>

<p>Jail sentence </p>

<p>Ur, to a week 8 Total 13 Tota 1 16 Total 12 Tota I </p>

<p>Up to a year 6 19 21 51 11 36 18 59 </p>

<p>More than a year 5 17 9 29<br>
</p>

<p>No opinion 17 14 14 14 </p>

<p>Interestingly, the youth population as a whole was less
lenient than the adult population as a whole. Within each group,
however, the older teenagers and young adults were the most
tolerant in all respects. </p>

<p>These statistics suggest that the I public generally prefers
leniency when responding to questions specifically directed to
marihuana use. But when asked about &quot;control&quot; or
&quot;the law&quot; in general, the response often appears quite
harsh. For example, when asked to consider a range of five
alternative control schemes, most adults tended to resist change.
</p>

<p>Thirty-one percent of the adults thought that making marihuana
legally available through regulated channels (like alcohol) was
acceptable but 67% thought it was unacceptable. Although 23%
thought the removal of criminal sanctions from possession was
acceptable, 74% thought this approach was unacceptable. On the
other hand, 56% of the adults thought that the existing laws
were, acceptable; yet 41% found the present law unacceptable.
Finally, 72% thought &quot;stricter laws&quot; would be
acceptable, while only 26% thought such a change would be
unacceptable. Indeed 43% thought stricter laws were the
&quot;ideal solution&quot; and 62% thought this was the best of
the alternatives. </p>

<p>These responses seem to be contradictory. We are puzzled about
what the respondents thought they meant when they expressed a
preference for stricter laws. </p>

<p>They probably did not mean stricter penalties for possession.
Such an interpretation would be entirely inconsistent with
responses to questions aimed directly at appropriate policy
toward users. Under existing law some states still treat first
offenders as felons and most states treat multiple offenders as
felons. But, only a third of the adult respondents would put an
adult multiple offender in jail for more than a year. </p>

<p>The preference for stricter laws might be interpreted to mean
heavier penalties for sale, or better enforcement of existing
proscriptions against trafficking. Two-thirds of the adults did
indicate that they preferred heavier penalties for sale than for
possession. But penalties for selling for profit are already
quite heavy in every jurisdiction. </p>

<p>We suspect that a majority of the public, including many of
those favoring &quot;stricter laws,&quot; is actually disturbed
about the increase in marihuana use and would like a system which
would work better than the existing system to discourage use. A
majority of the adult public seeks a better system of control,
albeit one which is not punitive toward the user. Apparently
uneasy about the individual and social consequences of the
present system, the large center of public opinion is nonetheless
reluctant to relinquish formal control. </p>

<p>This insistence on maintenance of formal controls over the
user rests upon two interrelated factors: respect for law and
faith in the efficacy of legal control. First, the public does
not believe the, legal order should wither away simply because
many people choose to violate the laws against marihuana use.
Obedience, of the, law is highly valued in our society. </p>

<p>This factor is illustrated clearly by the widespread public
disagreement with the following arguments for changing the law:
76% of the adults disagreed with the statement that &quot;young
people would have more respect for the law if marihuana were made
legal;&quot; and four out of five adults disagreed with the
statement that &quot;so many people are using marihuana that it
should be made legal.&quot; </p>

<p>Second, most adults believe that legal remedies, even though
not punitive, are necessary to discourage use of the drug. This
belief is tied largely to their understanding of the effects of
the drug and is reflected in the response to the question about
&quot;the best way&quot; to handle the use of marihuana. As we
noted earlier, 51% of the public thought that marihuana use ought
to be handled as a medical problem. </p>

<p>Also, the substantial majority of people who are reluctant to
incarcerate possessors do prefer the imposition of fines without
a police record or probation. Both of these alternatives retain
formal control over the user and indicate faith in the deterrent
value of the law. The public responses in this respect bear a
striking resemblance to those of the judges and probation
officers, who repeatedly indicated a preference for non-punitive
formal control. </p>

<p>This interpretation of dominant opinion was drawn from
ostensibly inconsistent responses to a long series of questions
on appropriate social and legal policy. A substantial minority of
the public, however, exhibited a consistent pattern of response
to all questions. About a quarter of the public is convinced that
the criminal sanction should be withdrawn entirely from marihuana
use. Another quarter of the public prefers the criminal approach,
even for the user. </p>

<p>In sum, the existing system is not supported by the consensus
of public opinion that once existed. There is a consensus that
punitive measures are generally inappropriate. There is also a
predominant opinion that the legal system should not abandon
formal control.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>