
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B28-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B020-43</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed2e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135209 text/html 43134
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:52:00 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:18 GMT
Content-length: 42916
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - LSD</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h2>LSD </h2>

<p> </p>

<p>105. One of the most remarkable and controversial drugs known
today is d-lysergic acid diethylamide-25, better known as LSD or
simply 'acid'. LSD is capable of producing profound and unusual
psychological changes in almost infinitesimal doses, with
relatively little general physiological effect and, along with
other related drugs, has exerted noticeable influence in a
variety of aesthetic, scientific, philosophic, religious and
social areas over the past two decades. LSD is often considered
the prototype of the drug class we have labelled
Psychedelic-Hallucinogens, although there are a great number of
less potent synthetic and naturally occurring substances with
somewhat similar psychopharmacological properties. To date,
almost 3,000 articles on LSD have been published in scientific
journals, although many of these reports do not meet adequate
scientific standards. </p>

<p>106. LSD was developed in 1938 by Hofmann and Stoll, in
Switzerland, as part of a research programme investigating
potential therapeutic uses of certain ergot compounds. LSD is a
semi-synthetic derivative of lysergic acid, an ergot alkaloid
produced by a parasitic fungus, or 'rust', sometimes found on rye
or other grains. Closely related substances are also produced in
the seeds of certain varieties of morning glory. Most ergot
alkaloids are not particularly psychoactive, although some may
have a variety of powerful, and often toxic, physiological
actions, and have been used for centuries for medical purposes. </p>

<p>107. Since LSD appeared to be relatively uninteresting,
physiologically, in animal studies, it received little attention
until Hofmann unwittingly ingested a minute quantity some years
after its original synthesis. He subsequently described his
experience as follows:102 </p>

<p>In the afternoon of 16 April 1943, when I was working on this
problem, I was seized by a peculiar sensation of vertigo and
restlessness. Objects, as well as the shape of my associates in
the laboratory, appeared to undergo optical change. I was unable
to concentrate on my work. In a dreamlike state I left for home,
where an irresistible urge to lie down overcame me. I drew the
curtains and immediately fell into a peculiar state similar to
drunkenness, characterized by an exaggerated imagination. With my
eyes closed, fantastic pictures of extraordinary plasticity and
intensive colour seemed to surge towards me. After two hours this
state gradually wore off. </p>

<p>To confirm his suspicion that LSD was responsible for this
effect, Hofmann investigated further: </p>

<p>However, I decided to get to the root of the matter by taking
a definite quantity of the compound in question. Being a cautious
man, I started my experiment by taking 0.25 mg of d-lysergic acid
diethylamide tartrate, thinking that such an extremely small dose
would surely be harmless, and bearing in mind that the natural
ergot alkaloids produce toxic symptoms in man only with doses
exceeding several milligrams. After 40 minutes I noted the
following symptoms in my laboratory journal: slight giddiness,
restlessness, difficulty in concentration, visual disturbances,
laughing. </p>

<p>And later: </p>

<p>I lost all count of time. I noticed with dismay that my
environment was undergoing progressive changes. My visual field
wavered and everything appeared deformed as in a faulty mirror.
Space and time became more and more disorganized and I was
overcome by a fear that I was going out of my mind. The worst
part of it being that I was clearly aware of my condition. My
power of observation was unimpaired. . . . Occasionally I felt as
if I were out of my body. I thought I had died. My ego seemed
suspended somewhere in space, from where I saw my dead body lying
on the sofa.... It was particularly striking how acoustic
perceptions, such as the noise of water gushing from a tap or the
spoken word, were transformed into optical illusions. I then fell
asleep and awakened the next morning somewhat tired but otherwise
feeling perfectly well. </p>

<p>108. Since various aspects of the experience were thought to
resemble symptoms of naturally occurring schizophrenia, many
investigators became interested in using LSD as a tool for
producing an artificial or 'model psychosis' in the laboratory.
The possibility of gaining insight into psychiatric disorders by
the study of the LSD-induced state stimulated considerable
activity in medical and scientific communities, and the terms <i>psychotomimetic
</i>(psychosis-mimicking) and <i>psychotogenic </i>(psychosis-producing)
were coined. The subsequent discovery that the LSD experience is,
in fact, generally different from natural psychoses has lessened
interest in this aspect of its use. The descriptive label <i>hallucinogenic
</i>(hallucination-producing) has gained wide acceptance, in
spite of the fact that true hallucinations do not commonly occur
with LSD. The term <i>illusinogenic</i> (illusion-producing) is
probably more appropriate. </p>

<p>In the 1950s the exploration of LSD as an aid to psychotherapy
began. Much of the early work, in Canada, investigating the use
of LSD in the treatment of alcoholics, was conducted under the
direction of Dr A. Hoffer at the University of Saskatchewan, In
1957, after reviewing the various descriptive names given LSD and
related drugs, Dr H. Osmond, then Superintendent of the
Saskatchewan Hospital, suggested the terms <i>psycholytic </i>(mind-releasing)
or <i>psychedelic </i>(mind-manifesting) as more appropriate
general labels.174 For various reasons the latter has gained
world-wide usage, although its common application has strayed
considerably from its original context, and it may now denote
general styles of art, fashion and music which are, in some
sense, felt to reflect, enhance, or substitute for the
psychedelic drug experience. </p>

<p>109. While LSD has had a rather short, and somewhat stormy
history, numerous naturally occurring substances with apparently
similar psychological effects have been used in the Western
Hemisphere for centuries. Perhaps the most widely known are
mescaline, from the peyote cactus (lophophora williamsii),
psilocybin, one of the active principles in 'sacred mushrooms'
(teonanactl), and the Mexican morning-glory 'ololiuqui' (Rivea
Corymbosa). In addition, DMT (dimethyltryptamine) and the related
DET (diethyltryptamine) are found in special snuffs used for
centuries by certain South American Indians. Some of these
botanical substances were considered divine by the ancient Aztecs
and played an important role in religious ceremonies long before
the Spanish invaded the land. In spite of the Conquistadors'
attempts to destroy the culture and its historical and religious
underpinnings, the sacramental use of peyote spread to the
Mexican Indians and, later, in the nineteenth century to certain
North American tribes. Today, peyote is used in religious
ceremonies by the Native American Church which has over 200,000
Indian members in Canada and the United States. </p>

<p>110. Until recently, psychedelic drugs received little general
public attention, even though some had been intensively explored
over the past century by various writers, scientists and
'adventurers'. Based on his mescaline experimentation, Aidous
Huxley106 presented, in his twin volumes <i>The Doors of
Perception</i> and<i> Heaven and Hell, </i>one of the most lucid
and perceptive analyses of some of the possible personal,
philosophical and social implications of the psychedelic
experience. </p>

<p>Non-medical interest in LSD and related drugs began to grow
during the 1950s, although such use was apparently largely
restricted to a few professional, academic, and artistic
experimenters. The drug gained continental notoriety in the early
1960s as a result of experimentation by two Harvard University
psychology professors, Drs Alpert and Leary, who invited other
'explorers' to 'Turn on, tune in, and drop out' of the existing
social institutions. Their unorthodox religious orientation to
the LSD experience is presented in <i>The Psychedelic Experience</i>128<i>
</i>(a manual based on the <i>Tibetan Book of the Dead), </i>which
became one of the 'bibles' of the psychedelic drug movement.
Another significant influence, with considerably less religious
orientation was writer Ken Kesey's group, the adventures of which
are well documented in <i>The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test</i>
.247 </p>

<p>111. Since 1963, the Canadian Government has controlled the
medical and scientific use of LSD, and in 1969 the possession of
LSD without governmental authorization was made a criminal
offence. Regulation of the legal supply of LSD has apparently had
little effect on 'street' use, however, since essentially all of
the drug so used has come from clandestine laboratories. Although
the constituent chemicals are not readily available and some
sophisticated apparatus is necessary for its proper synthesis,
LSD can be produced by individuals without extensive training in
chemistry. Since it is odourless, colourless and tasteless in
solution, and active in almost invisible quantities, effective
legal control of its transportation, distribution and use has
been extremely difficult. </p>

<p>In recent years, several new synthetic drugs with effects
similar to LSD have appeared on the black market. These include
MDA (alphamethyl-3,4-methylene - dioxyphenethylamine), STP or DOM
(2,5-ditnethoxy-4-methyl-amphetamine), and PCP or Sernyl*
(phencyclidine). </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Medical
Use </h3>

<p>112. There is currently no widely accepted medical use of LSD,
although it may be employed experimentally for therapeutic
purposes. There have been numerous impressive reports of LSD
successes in the treatment of alcoholics, opiate narcotic
dependents, criminals and various psychiatric patients.101, 129
LSD has also been used with patients dying of cancer, to
alleviate their anxiety and pain, and to help them adjust to the
prospects of death.176 Many of these leads have not been followed
up with adequate scientific investigation, however, and several
recent controlled studies have not substantiated the claim that
LSD adds to the effectiveness of conventional psychotherapy.205 </p>

<p>113. Two basic forms of psychological treatment with LSD have
developed: <i>psycholytic </i>therapy, which uses small or
moderate doses on repeated occasions, sometimes over a period of
several months; and <i>psychedelic </i>therapy which calls for
higher doses and a more profound acute effect and is, as a rule,
given only once or twice. While some investigators claim that
LSD, itself, is more effective than psychotherapy, others claim
that its usefulness is mainly limited to the removal of
therapeutic 'blocks' which may occur at times in the course of
psychotherapy, and still others feel that LSD has no useful
contribution to make to psychiatric treatment. Most clinicians
who have had experience with this form of therapy, stress the
need for a careful selection of patients and for special
qualities and experience in the therapist. </p>

<p>More sophisticated scientific investigations of possible
therapeutic uses of LSD are now underway and may help clarify
some of these issues. It seems justified to say at this time,
however, that the general medical effectiveness of LSD has not
yet been adequately demonstrated. It may well be another decade
before definitive evidence will be available. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Administration,
Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate </h3>

<p>114. LSD is usually taken orally, and may be sniffed in
powdered form or injected in solution. While it is available in
ordinary capsules or tablets, LSD is often impregnated in such
innocuous substances as sugar cubes, candies, biscuits, and cloth
or blotter sections for oral use. It is well absorbed from the
gastro-intestinal tract, is distributed in the blood and easily
diffuses into the brain, and in pregnant females crosses the
placental barrier into the foetus. Although only a tiny portion
actually reaches the central nervous system, LSD is one of the
most potent biologically active substances known and, in some
individuals, exerts a noticeable psychological effect with
quantities as low as 20 to 30 micrograms (millionths of a gram).
Customary doses are usually around 200 mcg and some individuals
have taken up to several thousand micrograms. </p>

<p>Taken orally, LSD effects usually occur within an hour but may
be much faster; response to intramuscular injection usually
appears within ten minutes; and if the intravenous route is used,
the latency may be only a few minutes or less. The duration of
the action depends to a certain extent on the amount taken, and
with a customary dose, major effects usually last 8-12 hours or
more with gradual recovery over a similar period. Essentially all
of the LSD in the body is metabolized into an inactive substance
in the liver and excreted. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Psychological
Effects </h3>

<p>115. The psychological effects of LSD are not readily
predictable, and are determined to a considerable degree by
various personality factors in the individual, his past history
and experiences, his attitudes, expectations, and motivations,
the general setting in which the drug is taken, persons
accompanying the 'trip' and external events occurring during the
experience. While the psychological response is to some extent
dose-related, certain effects appear to be relatively independent
of dose over a considerable range. Increased quantities often
seem to affect the duration more than the intensity or quality of
the 'trip'. </p>

<p>116. Subjective psychological effects of LSD are extremely
difficult to describe and many scientists are quite pessimistic
about the possibility of presenting an objective list of
responses which in any way communicates the essence of the
experience. The intensely personal nature of the effects further
limits description and generalization. Pahnke and Richards177
have described several major types of psychological experience
which have been reported with psychedelic drugs. The outline
presented below is based on, but is not identical to, that
proposed by these researchers. While the list is certainly not
exhaustive and does not describe necessarily discrete or
non-overlapping categories, it provides a convenient basis for
the discussion of LSD effects. It should be noted that not all of
the experiences listed happen in all sessions or in all
individuals, although several may occur in varying degrees, in
sequence or simultaneously, within a 'trip'. </p>

<p>117. First is the <i>psychotic adverse reaction, </i>or
'freak-out' which may be characterized by an intense negative
experience of fear or nightmarish terror to the point of panic,
complete loss of emotional control, paranoid delusions,
hallucinations, catatonic features, and, perhaps, profound
depression and sense of meaninglessness. Such states are usually
acute, although pro1onged reactions have been noted. </p>

<p>118. Second is the <i>non-psychotic adverse reaction </i>in
which the person may experience varying degrees of tension,
anxiety and fear, unpleasant illusions, depression and despair.
Inappropriate or disordered social behaviour may occur. This kind
of reaction may differ from the first in the intensity of the
experience and in the degree of control and 'reality contact'
expressed by the individual. Such unpleasant experiences are
commonly labelled 'bad trips' or 'bummers'. </p>

<p>119. Third is the <i>psychodynamic psychedelic experience </i>characterized
by a dramatic emergence into consciousness of material which had
previously been unconscious or suppressed. Strong emotional
feelings can accompany what may be experienced subjectively as a
reliving of incidents from the past or a symbolic portrayal of
important conflicts. Such effects are often sought in LSD
psychotherapy. </p>

<p>120. Fourth is the <i>cognitive psychedelic experience </i>characterized
by an impression of astonishingly lucid thought. Problems may be
seen from a novel perspective and the interrelationships of many
levels of meaning and dimensions may be sensed simultaneously.
The relationship between this experience and naturally occurring
insight and creativity has been the subject of considerable
interest and speculation. </p>

<p>121. Fifth is the <i>aesthetic psychedelic experience </i>characterized
by a change and intensification of all sensory impressions, with
vision often most affected. Fascinating alteration in sensation
and perception may occur; <i>synaesthesia </i>or crossing-over of
sensory modalities may be produced (music and other sounds may be
'seen'); objects such as flowers or stones may appear to pulsate
or 'become alive'; ordinary things may seem imbued with great
beauty; music may take on an incredible emotional power; and
visions of beautiful colours, intricate geometric patterns,
architectural forms, landscapes and 'almost anything imaginable'
may occur. </p>

<p>122. The sixth type of psychedelic experience has been called
by such names as <i>psychedelic-peak, cosmic, transcendental, or
mystical. </i>Some of the psychological phenomena which are said
to characterize this experience, are: a sense of unity or 'cosmic
oneness' with the universe; a feeling of transcendence of time
and space; a deeply felt positive mood of joy, blessedness, love,
and peace; a sense of sacredness,<b> </b>awe and, wonder; a
feeling of profound theological or religious awareness; a feeling
of insight into reality at an intuitive, nonrational level; an
awareness of things which seem logically contradictory and
paradoxical; and a belief that the experience is beyond words,
non-verbal and impossible to describe. The full peak experience,
in its entirety, does not occur in the majority of individuals,
is usually transient, and does not last for long in its full
intensity, although it may have persisting effects on attitudes
and behaviour. </p>

<p>123. With few exceptions, little general information can be
given as to the relative frequency of occurrence of these various
types of psychedelic drug reaction, since the response is largely
determined by such variable factors as the particular individual
involved, his set and the setting. As is often the case in
science, techniques designed to measure the effects of LSD may
greatly influence or distort the phenomenon under study.
Savage198 has pointed out that unless the LSD experience takes
place '. . .<b> </b>in a secure setting, with sufficient
emotional support where S (the subject) feels safe to encounter
the bizarre and often powerful manifestations of his own mind
unharassed by tests, interpretations, and the coldly precise
scientific analytic attitudes, the only result can be confusion
and paranoia'. </p>

<p>Reports of 'objective' study of LSD's subjective effects
considerably in content and often appear to be as much a function
of the individual scientist's conceptual orientation and
experimental methods as they are of the subjects and the drug
itself. Some researchers report that LSD experiences in their
subjects, are definitely unpleasant and anxiety-ridden, and that
subsequent sessions are uniformly avoided, while other scientists
claim that anxiety is infrequent and that subjects generally
enjoy the sessions and are eager to participate further.228
Experiences in non-supervised and indiscriminate settings are
undoubtedly even more variable. </p>

<p>124. It is generally reported that LSD has deleterious effects
on performance in tests requiring a high degree of attention,
concentration or motivation. It is often difficult to get
meaningful data from such measurements, since subjects frequently
become engrossed in the subjective aspects of the drug experience
and lose interest in the tasks presented by the investigators.
Psychological tests are often seen as absurd or irrelevant by the
subjects. Performance on standard tests of intelligence,
learning, memory and other cognitive functions, as well as
certain psychomotor tasks generally show impairment and sometimes
lack of change and, rarely, improvement.205 Certain types of
conduct by some persons under the influence of LSD indicate gross
impairment of judgement. Recall of events occurring during the
drug experience is generally good, however. Effects on driving
skills have not been systematically investigated, although
available related data, and reports by users, as well as certain
eye witness accounts, suggest that driving ability is usually
drastically reduced by the acute effects of LSD. There is no
evidence that the drug has been a significant factor in
automobile accidents, however. </p>

<p>True hallucinations, where false sensory signals are believed
to be physically real, are rarely reported, although
pseudohallucinations and other perceptual distortions and
illusions are frequently noted. One of the most uniformly cited
and significant subjective effects is the alteration of ordinary
temporal perception, or time-sense. Moments may seem like hours,
and time may seem to be transcended. Pleasant experiences may
extend indefinitely or, on the other hand, bad trips can become
an interminable horror. </p>

<p>125. Current arguments as to whether LSD is truly
'consciousness-expanding' as its proponents contend or
'consciousness-constricting' as its opponents assert, will
probably not be resolved by science in the near future, since it
seems unlikely that such hypotheses can be put to adequate
empirical test given the current state of technology. </p>

<p>Contentions are often made that LSD can elicit new levels of
spontaneity, insight, problem-solving and creativity.214 These
claims are very difficult to assess, since the effects described
are often highly subjective and personal, and are hardly amenable
to empirical validation. The problems of studying creativity in
the laboratory are considerable, and little is known of the basic
psychology of such cognitive processes. A generally agreed upon
definition of the concept of creativity has eluded investigators
so far, and few meaningful tests are available. Studies of the
effects of psychedelic drugs on allegedly creativity-related
behaviours have produced inconsistent results. Often performance
does not reflect the subjective impressions of the drug
experience. Although sophisticated scientific investigation in
this area is only just beginning, it is already obvious that LSD
will not perform the miracle of turning an uninspired and
untalented individual into a creative genius. The question of
more subtle effects on creative activity in certain individuals
must be answered by future research. </p>

<p>126. Most authorities agree that LSD does not have a specific
aphrodisiac or sex-drive stimulating effect. Some users indicate
an enhanced appreciation of sexual experience, while many others
report a total disinterest in sex while on a 'trip'. Some
increase in sexual behaviour may occur as a result of a lessening
of inhibitions and an increase in emotionality, tactile
appreciation, and interpersonal contact. LSD has been used in the
treatment of sexual disorders of psychological origin (e.g.
frigidity and impotence) although its general usefulness has not
been clearly demonstrated in this area. </p>

<p>127. An LSD-induced 'bad trip' may range from a mildly
negative or ambivalent experience to an episode of intense terror
and nightmarish panic. Such adverse reactions often seem to focus
on the fear of death, fear of permanent insanity, basic sexual
conflicts, and fear of legal repercussions in illicit users, or
may be precipitated by an objective 'hassle' or problem of real
or imagined significance. Under the influence of LSD, it is often
difficult to cope with immediate problems which arise, and
emotional vulnerability may be increased. 'Bad trips' seem to
occur most often when the individual is poorly prepared, alone,
or in an otherwise unprotected or unsupervised setting. While an
experienced 'guide' or therapist can often help prevent or
alleviate negative reactions, this is no guarantee against an
unpleasant experience. Neither are earlier positive experiences -
severe 'bad trips' have been noted in individuals who had
previous long histories of unequivocally pleasant psychedelic
experiences. Certain tranquillizers can be of assistance in
reducing the unpleasantness of the experience, often by
terminating the drug effect<b> </b>non-chemical, personal
supportive guidance is most important in treating negative
reactions. </p>

<p>Although most negative LSD experiences appear to be of short
duration, prolonged psychotic episodes lasting months or even
years have been elicited by LSD.50 Many investigators contend
that such extreme experiences occur only in individuals already
predisposed to psychotic reaction, and are simply precipitated by
the stress of a 'bad trip'. On the other hand, numerous examples
have occurred in persons without obvious prior pathology, and it
would appear that there is no satisfactory method for predicting
who might suffer a serious adverse reaction. </p>

<p>128. Prolonged psychoses are quite rare in clinical or
experimental settings, even when psychiatric patients are used as<b>
</b>subjects. Cohen49 surveyed 44 investigators who had given LSD
or mescaline to approximately 5,000 persons a total of about
25,000 times, and found that psychotic reactions lasting over 48
hours occurred in 0.18 per cent of the psychiatric patients
studied and 0.08 per cent of the experimental subjects. There
were four suicides in the patients, all occurring months after
the LSD experience, and none among the experimental subjects.
Whether these deaths can be attributed to LSD use is not certain.
Similar incidents of adverse reaction under controlled
circumstances have been reported by others and the use of LSD in
medically supervised settings has been considered by many
investigators to be comparatively safe from a psychiatric point
of view.65, 132 </p>

<p>These findings do not provide a<b> </b>satisfactory basis for
estimating the effects of illicit use, however, since set,
setting, purity and quantity of drug, and consequently, the
quality of the trip, are all apt to be quite different in these
situations. The frequency of bad trips among street LSD users is
unknown, although many such cases have come to the attention of
medical authorities and certainly cannot be considered uncommon.
Solursh2l3 reports that in one series of street users studied
retrospectively, 'freak-outs' occurred in 24 of 601 'acid trips',
Furthermore, impressionistic accounts from individuals in close
contact with the 'drug-scene' suggest that the incidence of 'bad
trips' is steadily increasing. Ungerleider229 studied 70
individuals who required hospitalization in a Los Angeles Medical
centre after illicit LSD use. One-third of these admissions were
diagnosed psychotic and two-thirds were hospitalized for more
than a month. </p>

<p>129. Usually neither the therapist nor the patient is certain
as to the identity, purity or quantity of the drug involved in
'street' cases and records are further complicated by the fact
that there is considerable discrepancy among reporters as to what
exactly constitutes an adverse reaction. Furthermore, it would
appear that many 'bad trips' are treated by friends and never
come to the attention of the medical authorities. In addition to
personal support and assistance in these situations,
tranquillizers (and niacinamide) are available legally and on the
black market for such emergencies. Even if some accurate estimate
could be made of the number of negative reactions occurring, it
would not be possible to assess the relative significance of the
figures, since we have little idea as to the overall frequency of
illicit LSD use in the general population. </p>

<p>130. Illicit users of LSD commonly voice the opinion that bad
trips are caused by bad drugs and that 'pure acid' is relatively
free from adverse reactions. These claims are rarely based on
chemical analysis, and although contaminants and other drugs
reported to appear in black market LSD can undoubtedly affect the
experience, it is uncertain what proportion of the negative
reactions can be accounted for by contaminants. It is certain
that well-documented 'freak-outs' have occurred with clinically
pure LSD. </p>

<p>131. Although suicide may be rare among illicit as well as
medically supervised LSD users, a few cases have been documented.
Attempts at self-mutilation have also been reported on rare
occasions. Accidental deaths are somewhat more common and a
number of cases of fatality or serious injury have been noted as
a result of a loss of critical judgement or attentional
processes. For example, some individuals have jumped from
buildings or trees apparently under the delusion that they could
fly<b> </b>or were indestructible. Stories of numerous persons
who had become permanently blind while staring at the sun during
LSD trips were generated by a state official in the United States
and widely circulated in the public media. These reports were
subsequently shown to be a hoax and no such cases are on
record.170'b' </p>

<p>132. Although fear, panic and aggression may result from a
'freak-out', homicides associated with LSD use are rare and only
a few have been documented. Reports of violence occurring while
under the influence of LSD have generally not been supported,78
although there may be some significant exceptions. The majority
of non-drug arrests associated with LSD use seem to be in the
order of 'disturbance of the peace' offences and there is little
evidence that LSD plays a significant role in major crimes. </p>

<p>Recurrence of certain aspects of LSD experiences ('flashbacks'
or 'echoes') of varying duration and intensity have been reported
over periods ranging from a few months to more than a year after
last (or only) LSD use.189 The quality of these experiences,
which usually last only a few minutes or less, may depend on as
many factors as the original trip. They may be triggered or
precipitated by seemingly irrelevant stimuli or events, by other
drugs, or may appear spontaneously. We have no good information
as to frequency of these recurrences, although they appear to
occur most often in heavy users and could clearly be unpleasant
or dangerous in certain circumstances. </p>

<p>133. The possible religious significance of psychedelic drug
experiences has been the subject of heated controversy for
centuries. While many authorities have pointed out basic
similarities between drug-induced feelings of transcendental or
mystical awareness and the <i>satori or kensho </i>of Zen
Buddhism, <i>the samadhi </i>of Hinduism or the <i>beatific
vision </i>of Christianity, others have been outraged<b> </b>by
the suggestion that such 'instant mysticism' could be produced
chemically. It is quite apparent, however, that a considerable
degree of religiosity has pervaded the psychedelic drug movement
of the 1960s and has played a major role in the use of such drugs
in other cultures. </p>

<p>The major theoretical positions and scientific research in
this area have been reviewed by several investigators208, l47 and
these reports provide experimental support for the notion that
drug-evoked experiences may have religious significance for
certain individuals. Perhaps the most rigorous scientific
evidence comes from Pahnke's175 controlled psilocybin experiment
with seminary graduate students conducted in the setting of a
Good Friday religious service. He notes that: 'Those subjects who
received psilocybin experienced phenomena which were
indistinguishable from, if not identical with, the categories
defined by our typology of mysticism.' The religious aspects of
the psychedelic experience apparently depend a great deal on the
individual, his values and expectations, and the setting
involved, and do not normally occur with great intensity in most
persons or in most situations. Masters and Houstonl47 report that
6 out of 206 of their subjects attained a mystical experience,
while other researchers report no such events and still others, a
much higher incidence. Differences in semantic meaning,
definition and criteria may account for part of these
discrepancies. The 'objective validity' of drug-elicited
religious experiences, however, is by nature untestable in the
scientific sense, and the area will doubtless remain in a storm
of controversy. </p>

<p>134. Numerous claims have been made by various LSD users,
psychotherapists and scientists that LSD can produce long-lasting
beneficial effects on personality and behaviour. On the other
hand, many observers feel that chronic use of LSD may result in a
lessening of work output and a deterioration of social behaviour,
a general 'amotivational syndrome' in some individuals. Both
types of allegation are difficult to evaluate, since few
adequately controlled investigations have been done on the
long-term effects of either medically supervised or non-medical
LSD use. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Physiological
Effects </h3>

<p>135. LSD exerts its most significant physiological effects on
and through the central nervous system, although the exact
mechanism by which this occurs is not yet known. As a result of
its potent general arousal or activation capacity. LSD may
produce a variety of autonomic nervous system (sympathomimetic)
actions, considered to be of little clinical significance at
normal doses. Commonly reported are: widened pupils, increased
heart rate and blood pressure, sweating, increased body
temperature, chills, increased blood sugar level, 'goose
pimples', flushing of the facial skin, increased urination,
headache, and rarely nausea and vomiting. It generally increases
the activation of the brain (as indicated by the EEG), produces
alertness, blocks sleep, decreases appetite, may induce tremors
and reduce coordination, changes respiration patterns, and
facilitates certain simple reflexes.138 In a few instances
convulsions have occurred. LSD has remarkably low physiological
toxicity and, to date, no human deaths have been reported due to
overdose. Although the evidence is not clear, psychological
indications of minor brain damage may be present in chronic heavy
users of LSD.152 </p>

<p>l36. In the past few years, considerable controversy and
sensational publicity has arisen around the possibility that LSD
may affect hereditary transmission through chromosomal
alterations, produce changes in white blood cells resembling
leukemia and adversely affect the developing human focus.48
Relevant studies involving test-tube preparations of human live
animal and insect experiments, and examinations of illicit LSD
users, have been contradictory to date and provide no clear
answers to these important questions.105 The relationship between
<i>in vitro </i>(test-tube) and <i>in vivo </i>(living organism)
effects is rarely straightforward, and generalizations from one
species to another are difficult. Furthermore, studying the users
of 'street' drugs gives little information regarding specific
compounds, since such individuals may use a variety of drugs and
neither the investigator nor the subject can be sure of the
purity, quantity or identity of substances obtained from the
illicit market. In the few controlled studies in which
chromosomes were examined in humans before and after clinically
supervised administration of known doses of pure LSD, little
evidence of significant change was noted.125,58 The effects of
prolonged regular use of LSD have not been carefully
investigated, however, and the presence or absence of alterations
under such conditions can not be completely predicted on the
basis of present information. </p>

<p>Research in this area is complicated by the fact that
temporary or permanent chromosome breakage is not an uncommon
response to a variety of non-drug experiences, and can be
produced by nuclear radioactivity, many pollutants, X-rays, fever
and a number of virus infections. Furthermore, there is evidence
that such frequently used drugs as caffeine and aspirin may cause
chromosome breaks in certain cells.122 It should be noted that
chromosome damage <i>per se </i>does not necessarily affect
either the individual or his offspring, although the possibility
must be considered. </p>

<p>137. High doses of LSD administered at certain times early in
pregnancy have been shown to produce deformities in the offspring
of some animal species and not others. No unequivocal evidence of
such teratogenic LSD effects in humans has been reported,
although there have been a few widely publicized instances of
abnormalities in babies born of mothers who had used LSD. Whether
such anomalies occur more frequently in LSD users than in the
normal population is uncertain. Most investigators feel that the
possibility of chromosome or foetal damage in humans forbids the
use of LSD for either medical or non-medical purposes, by women
who are either pregnant or expect to become so in the near
future. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Tolerance
and Dependence </h3>

<p>138. Tolerance to the psychological and physiological effects
of LSD develops on repeated use, although the form of
psychological tolerance is unusual in several respects. Tolerance
to most drugs can be overcome and effects of full intensity
obtained by simply increasing dosage. With LSD, often a period of
three or four days or longer must separate 'trips' if the full
effects are to be obtained, regardless of dose. A second unusual
quality of LSD tolerance is the rapidity with which it develops
and dissipates. A reduction in effects may occur after only one
or two consecutive administrations. Furthermore, when LSD is used
intermittently many users report, a 'reverse' tolerance, or
increased sensitivity to the drug and may, after experience, use
less to achieve the desired effects. These factors suggest that
the pharmacological mechanism underlying LSD tolerance may be
quite different from those seen with most other psychoactive
drugs. </p>

<p>139. Physical dependence does not develop to LSD, even in
cases in which the drug has been used more than two hundred times
in a single year.51 Psychological dependence has been reported to
occur in certain individuals who become preoccupied with the drug
experience and feel emotionally depressed and unsatisfied without
it. Normally, however, LSD use is intermittent and periods of
weeks or months may separate 'trips' in even 'confirmed' users, </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">LSD
and Other Drugs </h3>

<p>140. It appears that many LSD users will also experiment with
other psychedelic drugs. Cross-tolerance occurs among some of
these substances and an individual who has recently taken LSD
will generally show reduced response to mescaline and psilocybin,
but not to cannabis or phencyclidine (PCP). It should be noted
that mescaline and psilocybin are rarely found in Canada and no
such black market samples have been verified by chemical
analysis. </p>

<p>Other drugs, such as atropine or amphetamines, are reported to
be sometimes added to LSD to intensify, prolong or otherwise
alter the experience. Strychnine (a stimulant once commonly used
in medical practice) is rumoured to have also been employed for
such effects. In spite of such stories, black market products
purported to contain mixtures of LSD and other drugs have rarely
been found on analysis to be as represented. Such combinations
appear to be infrequent in Canada. Unsuccessful attempts at LSD
synthesis may produce a variety of other ergot alkaloids with
possibly unpleasant or dangerous pharmacological properties in
high doses. Samples of such concoctions have been obtained from
black market sources.144 </p>

<p>Chlorpromazine (Largactil*), a major tranquillizer, usually
blocks LSD effects, although in rare instances it paradoxically
potentiates the original drug response. In addition certain
sedatives and niacinamide (nicotinamide) may also reduce some of
the effects of LSD. </p>

<p>- <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>