
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B015-217</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/incident.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051400 text/html 12163
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:06:04 GMT
Content-length: 11945
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>An Incident in Kansas -- Medical Marijuana</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<h1>AN INCIDENT IN KANSAS</h1>

<p><b>An interview with ELVY MUSIKKA and RICHARD DAVIS </b></p>

<p><b>by R Givens c 1995 </b></p>

<p><b>Note to the Reader: </b>Elvy Musikka, interviewed in the
story below is one of only eight people in the United States
legally allowed to use marijuana as medicine. She obtained her
status after being arrested for cultivating marijuana to treat
her glaucoma. Her trial judge ruled that she would be insane
under the circumstances NOT to break the law and that she should
do whatever is required, legal or illegal, to maintain her sight.
She receives a supply of marijuana cigarettes on a regular basis
from the Federal Government. She is also a tireless and quite
vocal activist for the cause of a sensible drug policy toward
sick people. It is in this context that the following incident
occurred. Richard Davis runs the Hemp Museum, a mobile
educational exhibit which demonstrates the history and uses of
hemp. </p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"><br>
</p>

<p>On 21 June 1994 around 7:30pm, RICHARD DAVIS and ELVY MUSIKKA,
a legal marijuana user, were heading west in the Hemp Museum on
I-70 near Salina, Kansas when a Kansas Highway Patrol (KHP) car
began following them. </p>

<p><b>RICHARD DAVIS: </b>He stayed on my tail or came up beside
the truck looking at the stickers for 15 or 20 minutes. When he
stopped me, he said I wasn't driving so good, but he followed me
for a long time and a lot of traffic went by, so he wasn't too
concerned until he decided to stop me. He came over all steamed
up, accusing me, &quot;Look at you. You're all fucked up. Your
eyes are red......&quot; He had an attitude right from the start.
He had me stand behind the truck and went to talk to Elvy. </p>

<p><b>ELVY MUSIKKA: </b>Officer Patrick introduced himself and
said, &quot;I stopped you because your boyfriend has to be
stoned. He's driving 60mph.&quot; It was a 65mph zone and Richard
was driving slower because the wind was blowing the truck around.
A minute later Officer Patrick was telling me that Richard was
being arrested because &quot;He told me that he smoked
marijuana.&quot; (laughs) As though I was fool enough to believe
Richard would ever say something so stupid to a highway
patrolman. (laughs) I knew right then we were dealing with liars.
</p>

<p>As soon as we stopped, I pulled out the Parade Magazine (12
June 1994) with my picture on the cover, so Officer Patrick and
the rest of them knew from the very beginning that I receive
LEGAL MARIJUANA from the government. He asked what the maximum I
can carry is and I told him I can have a three-month supply,
which is a lot, because I'm expected to smoke 300 joints a month.
Then Officer Patrick wanted to check my pouch, so I showed him my
prescription bottle. He smelled the weed and said it smelled very
good. He thought it was too good to be government pot. I guess he
had read enough to know that the government only gives out trash.
He wondered about them being hand-rolled, but the government
marijuana is freeze dried and I have to wet it and re-roll it
because it's too harsh. </p>

<p>Officer Patrick never questioned that I was a legal smoker,
but he was determined to arrest Richard no matter what. He was
upset because Richard chose to exercise his 1st Amendment Rights
with his bumper stickers and the hemp plant on top of the truck.
Cops like Officer Patrick think they are above the law. This was
proven by the way they harassed us for the next five hours. </p>

<p><b>RICHARD DAVIS:</b> Within 20 minutes four squad cars were
there. Patrick started out threatening me with jail and they kept
asking for consent to search the back of the truck. Every once in
a while they would come over in a group and seriously discuss
getting permission to search. They asked several times, but I
refused. They said they were going to take me to jail anyway.
Officer Patrick was convinced that he was going to get in the
back and nail me for 200 pounds of weed he seemed to think I had
in there. (laughs) They kept saying, &quot;Let us take a look. If
it's only a little bit for personal use, we don't care.&quot;
They hinted that they would just take the weed and let us go, but
they weren't giving any guarantees. They finally decided to get a
drug dog. If the dog got a positive response for marijuana, that
would be their probable cause. </p>

<p><b>ELVY MUSIKKA:</b> (laughs hard) There I was dressed in
HEMP, we are driving a HEMP museum, they already know I'm a LEGAL
MARIJUANA USER (laughs), and they needed a drug dog to determine
there was some HEMP there. (laughs) As soon as the dog arrived,
it was time for my medicine, so I lit up and smoked a whole
joint. By then we had been detained four hours. </p>

<p><b>RICHARD DAVIS:</b> We told them over and over that we would
not approve a search. They knew full well that they were doing an
ILLEGAL SEARCH. Elvy even asked if they had a warrant signed by a
judge. Their answer was &quot;No, but we can get one.&quot; They
never did though. </p>

<p>We were a couple of hours into this before Officer Patrick
snapped and read me my rights. He said I had the right to remain
silent, so I shut up. Until then I was very cooperative and tried
to educate them about hemp. All they did was threaten me with
jail and constantly ask to search the truck. </p>

<p>After they got the dog they decide they could search the back
of the truck. They thought I had the keys even though they patted
me down right after they stopped us. One of the troopers took a
one bladed swiss army type knife the Hemp Rope People gave me. I
guess he liked the knife until he found out I wasn't going to
jail. We had to wait an extra hour while the officer brought the
knife back. Anyway, the keys were in the ignition, so they got in
without breaking the lock. </p>

<p>Once they got in back, they went through Elvy's stuff and
found a half pound of good bud and some very good leaf a dealer
GAVE her because the government shorted Elvy a month's supply on
her prescription. When they found that they said, &quot;we've got
him on sales!&quot; </p>

<p><b>ELVY MUSIKKA:</b> They were in MY suitcase threatening
Richard with &quot;sales.&quot; My suitcase was totally locked.
They destroyed the zipper and went through ALL of my personal
belongings. It was a violation of my privacy in every way. </p>

<p>They were opening sealed containers and poking through
EVERYTHING. They had the audacity to open my government marijuana
can, which was sealed exactly the way I get it. I purposely keep
it sealed so if anybody gets in there it has to be an ILLEGAL
SEARCH. </p>

<p>I had a few government joints on top and some good bud and
some very good leaf for baking. I like cookies because of the
hassle of smoking on the road. Anyway, according to the court
order of Judge Markey Bolin, I am entitled to do WHATEVER it
takes LEGAL or ILLEGAL to preserve my sight. That's in the
Judge's decision. </p>

<p>They took the good marijuana and left me a few days supply of
government trash. they even stole my government prescription
marijuana container. Officer Patrick and the rest of them may be
interested to know that they definitely put my vision at risk by
stealing my medicine. I have a tolerance to the standard glaucoma
medicines and if my doctor hadn't arranged an emergency shipment,
I would have been in real trouble. The stuff the troopers left
only lasted a few days. </p>

<p><b>RICHARD DAVIS:</b> Now, let's get this straight. Elvy had
that bud because she was shorted a month's supply by the
government. THEY admitted as much when they Federal Expressed 300
joints to a Motel 6. Those highway patrolmen weren't satisfied
with harassing us for five hours in the middle of the night; they
had to take a glaucoma patient's medicine before they were happy.
</p>

<p>I feel sorry for people like Officer Patrick because this War
on Drugs completely compromises their morality. It absolutely
destroys their integrity going around lying and abusing citizens
rights. I would be amazed if all the pot they took ended up in
the DA's office. The property receipt they gave us was so
illegible that it says absolutely nothing about what they took.
You can't read a word. Maybe that's their idea of honesty. </p>

<p>They know damn well that marijuana isn't dangerous. At no time
did these cops act as though they thought we were a threat. They
never handcuffed me and they left me alone several times while
they badgered Elvy. They thanked us over and over for being so
courteous. After being detained for five hours and being robbed
by a gang of thieves with badges, all they did was give me a
warning citation for a cracked windshield that doesn't require
any action. </p>

<p>They took over a half pound of marijuana, but they never
arrested ANYBODY for ANYTHING. How can they do that??? </p>

<p>They broke a bunch of stuff in the Hemp Museum during their
search. They offered to put everything back, but they made it
pretty clear that they would wreck everything they could if they
had to clean up their own mess. So I stood out there in the
middle of the night trying to get everything back in the truck. </p>

<p><b>ELVY MUSIKKA:</b> Officer Patrick and the other highway
patrolmen might be interested to know that they made me feel like
I was in some foreign police state where you don't have any
rights. Those troopers made me feel I was in a very different
country than the one where I took an oath to defend and uphold
the Constitution. I became a citizen by choice, not chance, and I
know my rights. Seeing these Kansas highway patrolmen trample on
the Constitution made me feel very bad. They knew our rights, but
they didn't care if they violated them. Officer Patrick and the
rest of them knew right from the beginning that I have a legal
right to have marijuana, but they didn't let that stop them. I'm
considering a civil rights suit.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>