
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B23-46</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B027-112</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om15.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141220 text/html 13157
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:12:07 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:22 GMT
Content-length: 12939
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>History of the Opium Trade in China</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>XV -- HISTORY OF THE OPIUM TRADE IN CHINA</h2>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>IN a vague way, we are familiar with the &quot;opium
evil&quot; in China, and some of us have hazy ideas as to how it
came about. The China Year Book for 1916 has this to say on the
subject: &quot;The poppy has been known in China for 12
centuries, and its medicinal use for 9 centuries. . . . It was
not until the middle of the 17th century that the practice of
mixing opium with tobacco for smoking purposes was introduced
into China. This habit was indulged in by the Dutch in Java, and
by them taken to Formosa, whence it spread to Amoy and the
mainland generally. There is no record to show when opium was
first smoked by itself, but it is thought to have originated
about the end of the 18th century. Foreign opium was first
introduced by the Portuguese from Goa at the beginning of the
18th century. In 1729, when the foreign import was 200 chests,
the Emperor Yung Ching issued the first anti-opium edict,
enacting severe penalties on the sale of opium and the opening of
opium-smoking divans. The importation, however, continued to
increase, and by 1790 it amounted to over 4,000 chests annually.
In 1796 opium smoking was again prohibited, and in 1800 the
importation of foreign opium was again declared illegal. Opium
was now contraband, but the fact had no effect on the quantity
introduced into the country, which rose to 5,000 chests in 1820;
16,000 chests in 1830; 20,000 chests in 1838, and 70,000 chests
in 1858.&quot; </p>

<p>The China Year Book makes no mention of the traders who
carried these chests of opium into China. The opium came from
India, however, and the increase in importation corresponds with
the British occupation of India, and the golden days of the East
India Company. &quot;Opium was now contraband, but that fact had
no effect on the quantity introduced into the country,&quot;
smuggled in wholesale by the enterprising British traders. </p>

<p>China was powerless to protect herself from this menace,
either by protests or prohibition. And as more and more of the
drug was smuggled in, and more and more of the people became
victims of the habit, the Chinese finally had a tea-party, very
much like our Boston Tea Party, but less successful in outcome.
In 1839, in spite of the fact that opium smoking is an easy habit
to acquire and had been extensively encouraged, the British
traders found themselves with 20,000 chests of unsold opium on
their store-ships, just below Canton. The Chinese had repeatedly
appealed to the British Government to stop these imports, but the
British Government had turned a persistently deaf ear. Therefore
the Emperor determined to deal with the matter on his own
account. He sent a powerful official named Lin to attend to it,
and Lin had a sort of Boston Tea Party, as we have said, and
destroyed some twenty thousand chests of opium in a very drastic
way. Mr. H. Wells Williams describes it thus: &quot;The opium was
destroyed in the most thorough manner, by mixing it in parcels Of
200 chests, in trenches, with lime and salt water, and then
drawing off the contents into an adjacent creek at low
tide.&quot; </p>

<p>After this atrocity, followed the first Opium War, when
British ships sailed up the river, seized port after port, and
bombarded and took Canton. Her ships sailed up the Yangtsze, and
captured the tribute junks going up the Grand Canal with revenue
to Peking, thus stopping a great part of China's income. Peace
was concluded in 1843, and Great Britain came out well. She
recompensed herself by taking the island of Hongkong; an
indemnity Of 21 million dollars, and Canton, Amoy, Foochow,
Ningpo and Shanghai were opened up as &quot;treaty
ports&quot;-for the importation of opium and the
&quot;open-door&quot; in general. </p>

<p>Mr. Wells, in his &quot;Middle Kingdom&quot; describes the
origin of this first war with England: &quot;This war was
extraordinary in its origin as growing chiefly out of a
commercial misunderstanding; remarkable in its course as being
waged between strength and weakness, conscious superiority and
ignorant pride; melancholy in its end as forcing the weaker to
pay for opium within its borders against all its laws, thus
paralyzing the little moral power its feeble government could
exert to protect its subjects. . . . It was a turning point in
the national life of the Chinese race, but the compulsory payment
of six million dollars for the opium destroyed has left a stigma
upon the English name.&quot; </p>

<p>He also says, &quot;The conflict was now fairly begun; its
issue between the parties so unequally matched --one having
almost nothing but the right on its side, the other assisted by
every material and physical advantage-could easily be
foreseen&quot; and again, after speaking of it as being unjust
and immoral, he concludes &quot;Great Britain, the first
Christian power, really waged this war against the pagan monarch
who had only endeavored to put down a vice harmful to his people.
The war was looked upon in this light by the Chinese; it will
always be so looked upon by the candid historian, and known as
the Opium War.&quot; </p>

<p>Within fifteen years after this first war, there was another
one, and again Great Britain came off victorious. China had to
pay another indemnity, three million dollars, and five more
treaty ports were opened up. By the terms of the Treaty of
Tientsin, the sale of opium in China was legalized in 1858. </p>

<p>From a small pamphlet, &quot;Opium: England's Coercive Policy
and Its Disastrous Results in China and India&quot; by the Rev.
John Liggins, we find the following: &quot;As a specimen of how
both wars were carried on, we quote the following from an English
writer on the bombardment of Canton: 'Field pieces loaded with
grape were planted at the end of long, narrow streets crowded
with innocent men, women and children, to mow them down like
grass till the gutters flowed with their blood.' In one scene of
carnage, the Times correspondent recorded that half an army of
10,ooo men were in ten minutes destroyed by the sword, or forced
into the broad river. &quot; The Morning Herald &quot; asserted
that &quot;a more horrible or revolting crime than this
bombardment of Canton has never been committed in the worst ages
of barbaric darkness.&quot; </p>

<p>Naturally, therefore, after the termination of these two wars,
China gave up the struggle. She had fought valiantly to protect
her people from opium, but the resources of a Christian nation
were too much for her. Seeing therefore that the opium trade was
to be forced upon her, and that her people were doomed to
degradation, she decided to plant poppies herself. There should
be competition at least, and the money should not all be drained
out of the country. Thus it came about that after 1858 extensive
tracts of land were given over to poppy production. Whole
provinces or parts of provinces, ceased to grow grain and other
necessities, and diverted their rich river bottoms to the raising
of opium. Chinese opium, however, never supplanted Indian opium,
being inferior to that raised in the rich valley of the Ganges.
The country merely had double quantities of the drug, used
straight or blended, to suit the purse or taste of the consumer. </p>

<p>Then, in 1906, the incredible happened. After over a hundred
years of steady demoralization, with half her population opium
addicts, or worse still, making enormous profits out of the
trade, China determined to give up opium. In all history, no
nation has ever set itself such a gigantic task, with such a
gigantic handicap. China, a country of immense distances, with
scant means of communication; with no common language, a land
where only the scholars can read and write, suddenly decided to
free herself from this vice. The Emperor issued an edict saying
that in ten years' time all opium traffic must cease, and an
arrangement was made with Great Britain whereby this might be
accomplished. To the honor of America be it said that we assisted
China in this resolution. We agreed to see her through. </p>

<p>A bargain was then made between China and Great Britain, in
1907, China agreeing to diminish poppy cultivation year by year
for a period of ten years, and Great Britain agreeing to a
proportional decrease in the imports of Indian opium. A three
years' test was first agreed to, a trial of China's sincerity and
ability, for Great Britain feared that this was but a ruse to cut
off Indian opium, while leaving China's opium alone in the field.
At the end of three years, however, China had proved her ability
to cope with the situation. Thus, for a period of ten years, both
countries have lived up to their bargain, the amount of native
and foreign opium declining steadily in a decreasing scale. April
1, 1917, saw the end of the accomplishment. </p>

<p>China's part was most difficult. In the remote, interior
provinces, poppies were grown surreptitiously, connived at by
corrupt officials who made money from the crops. However, drastic
laws were enacted and severe penalties imposed upon those who
broke them. If poppy cultivation could not be stopped, England
would not hold to her end of the bargain. Not only was there a
nation of addicts to deal with, but these could obtain copious
supplies of opium from the foreign concessions, over which the
Chinese had no control. We shall show, in another article, to
what extent this was carried on. Yet somehow, in some manner, the
impossible happened. Year by year, little by little, one province
after another was freed from poppy cultivation, until in 1917,
China was practically free from the native-grown drug, and
foreign importation had practically ended. </p>

<p>In this manner, first by large smuggling, then by two opium
wars, was China drugged with opium. And in this manner, and to
this extent, has she succeeded in freeing herself from the curse.
But in one way, she is not free. She has no control over the
extra-territorial holdings of European powers, for in each treaty
port are the foreign concessions already mentioned-German,
Austrian, British, French, Russian. And in these concessions,
opium may be procured. Simply by crossing an imaginary line, in
such cities as Shanghai and Hongkong, can the Chinese buy as much
opium as they choose. China will never be rid of this menace till
she is rid of these extraterritorial holdings. Opium shops,
licensed by foreign governments, are always ready to supply her
people with the forbidden drug. </p>

<p>We say that the China market is closed. So it is, in one way.
But the British Opium Monopoly is not ended. The year 1917 saw a
tremendous blow dealt to the British opium dealers, but other
markets will be found. There are other countries than China whose
inhabitants can be taught this vice. The object of this
discussion is to consider these other countries, and to see to
what extent the world is menaced by this possibility. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>