
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-275</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf61_70.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043556 text/html 39512
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:46 GMT
Content-length: 39294
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp facts 61 to 70</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #61- Atl. Mthly-5 </p>

<p>Date: 95-03-16 11:27:48 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 5</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Criminalized, Decriminalized, Recriminalized </p>

<p>The first American law pertaining to marijuana, passed by the
Virginia Assembly in 1619, required every farmer to grow it. Hemp
was deemed not only a valuable commodity but also a strategic
necessity; its fibers were used to make sails and riggings, and
its by-products were transformed into oakum for the caulking of
wooden ships. Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Maryland eventually
allowed hemp to be exchanged as legal tender, in order to
stimulate its production and relieve Colonial money shortages.
Although a number of the Founding Fathers, including George
Washington and Thomas Jefferson, later grew hemp on their
estates, there is no evidence that they were aware of the plant's
psychoactive properties. The domestic production of hemp
flourished, especially in Kentucky, until after the Civil War,
when it was replaced by imports from Russia and by other domestic
materials. In the latter half of the nineteenth century marijuana
became a popular ingredient in patent medicines and was sold
openly at pharmacies in one-ounce herbal packages and in
alcohol-based tinctures as a cure for migraines, rheumatism, and
insomnia. </p>

<p>The political upheaval in Mexico that culminated in the
Revolution of 1910 led to a wave of Mexican immigration to states
throughout the American Southwest. The prejudices and fears that
greeted these peasant immigrants also extended to their
traditional means of intoxication: smoking marijuana. Police
officers in Texas claimed that marijuana incited violent crimes,
aroused a &quot;lust for blood,&quot; and gave its users
&quot;superhuman strength.&quot; Rumors spread that Mexicans were
distributing this &quot;killer weed&quot; to unsuspecting
American schoolchildren. Sailors and West Indian immigrants
brought the practice of smoking marijuana to port cities along
the Gulf of Mexico. In New Orleans newspaper articles associated
the drug with African-Americans, jazz musicians, prostitutes, and
underworld whites. &quot;The Marijuana Menace,&quot; as sketched
by anti-drug campaigners, was personified by inferior races and
social deviants. In 1914 El Paso, Texas, enacted perhaps the
first U.S. ordinance banning the sale or possession of marijuana;
by 1931 twenty-nine states had outlawed marijuana, usually with
little fanfare or debate. Amid the rise of anti-immigrant
sentiment fueled by the Great Depression, public officials from
the Southwest and from Louisiana petitioned the Treasury
Department to outlaw marijuana. Their efforts were aided by a
lurid propaganda campaign. &quot;Murder Weed Found Up and Down
Coast,&quot; one headline warned; &quot;Deadly Marijuana Dope
Plant Ready For Harvest That Means Enslavement of California
Children.&quot; Harry J. Anslinger, the commissioner of the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics, at first doubted the seriousness of
the problem and the need for federal legislation, but soon he
pursued the goal of a nationwide marijuana prohibition with
enormous gusto. In public appearances and radio broadcasts
Anslinger asserted that the use of this &quot;evil weed&quot; led
to killings, sex crimes, and insanity. </p>

<p>He wrote sensational magazine articles with titles like
&quot;Marijuana: Assassin of Youth.&quot; In 1937 Congress passed
the Marijuana Tax Act, effectively criminalizing the possession
of marijuana throughout the United States. A week after it went
into effect, a fifty-eight-year-old marijuana dealer named Samuel
R. Caldwell became the first person convicted under the new
statute. Although marijuana offenders had been treated leniently
under state and local laws, Judge J. Foster Symes, of Denver,
lectured Caldwell on the viciousness of marijuana and sentenced
him to four hard years at Leavenworth Penitentiary. </p>

<p>Part 6. Tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #62- Atl. Mthly-6 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-17 11:17:16 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 6</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Harry J. Anslinger is a central figure in the history of
American drug policy. He headed the Federal Bureau of Narcotics
from its inception through five presidential Administrations
spanning more than three decades. Anslinger had much in common
with his rival, J. Edgar Hoover. Both were conservative,
staunchly anti-communist proponents of law and order who imbued
nascent federal bureaus with their own idiosyncracies (Poster's
Note: The big question is --Did they both wear skirts?).
Anslinger did not believe in a public-health approach to drug
addiction; he dismissed treatment clinics as &quot;morphine
feeding stations&quot; and &quot;barrooms for addicts.&quot; In
his view, strict enforcement of the law was the only proper
response to illegal drug use; he urged judges to &quot;jail
offenders, then throw away the key.&quot; Anslinger's outlook was
consistent with that of most Americans, though his opinions
proved more resistant to new scientific evidence. When the New
York Academy of Medicine--after years of research--issued a
report in 1944 concluding that marijuana use did not cause
violent behavior, provoke insanity, lead to addiction, or promote
opiate use, Anslinger angrily dismissed its authors as
&quot;dangerous&quot; and &quot;strange.&quot; </p>

<p>America's drug problem often seemed the work of foreign
powers: during the Second World War, Anslinger accused the
Japanese of using narcotics to sap America's will to fight; a few
years later he asserted that Communists were attempting the same
ploy. The Boggs Act, passed by Congress at the height of the
McCarthy era, specified the same penalties for marijuana and
heroin offenses--two to five years in prison for first-time
possession. As justification for the long sentences contained in
that act and in the Narcotic Control Act, which followed in 1956,
Anslinger stressed marijuana's crucial role as a
&quot;stepping-stone&quot; to narcotics addiction. Like Hoover,
he maintained dossiers on well-known entertainers whose behavior
seemed un-American. Anslinger disliked jazz and kept a special
file, &quot;Marijuana and Musicians,&quot; filled with reports on
band members who played with Cab Calloway, Louis Armstrong, Les
Brown, Count Basie, Jimmy Dorsey, and Duke Ellington, among
others. For months Anslinger planned a nationwide roundup of
popular musicians--a scheme that was foiled by the inability of
FBN agents to infiltrate the jazz milieu. Although Anslinger's
opposition to drug use was both passionate and sincere, he made
one notable exception. In his memoir, The Murderers, Anslinger
confessed to having arranged a regular supply of morphine for
&quot;one of the most influential members of Congress,&quot; who
had become an addict. Anslinger's biographer believes that addict
was Senator Joseph R. McCarthy (Poster's Note: Look at his
(McCarthy's) personallity. It FITS). </p>

<p>By 1962, when Harry J. Anslinger retired, many states had
passed &quot;little Boggs Acts&quot; with penalties for marijuana
possession or sale tougher than those demanded by federal law. In
Louisiana sentences for simple possession ranged from five to
ninety-nine years; in Missouri a second offense could result in a
life sentence; and in Georgia a second conviction for selling
marijuana to minors could bring the death penalty. As the
political climate changed during the 1960s, so did attitudes
toward drug abuse. A series of commissions appointed by
Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson repudiated some of
the basic assumptions that had guided marijuana policy for more
than fifty years, denying a direct link between the drug and
violent crime or heroin use. As marijuana use became widespread
among white middle-class college students, there was a
reappraisal of marijuana laws that for decades had imprisoned
poor Mexicans and African-Americans without much public dissent. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #63- Atl. Mthly-7 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-18 11:09:51 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 7</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Drug-abuse policy shifted from a purely criminal-justice
approach to one also motivated by interests of public health,
with more emphasis on treatment than on punishment. In 1970 the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act finally
differentiated marijuana from other narcotics and reduced federal
penalties for possession of small amounts. As directed by
Congress, President Richard Nixon appointed a bipartisan
commission to study marijuana. In 1972 the Shafer Commission
issued its report, advocating the decriminalization of marijuana
for personal use--a recommendation that Nixon flatly rejected.
Nevertheless, eleven states, containing a third of the country's
population, decriminalized marijuana in the 1970s, and most other
states weakened their laws against it. President Jimmy Carter
endorsed decriminalization, and it seemed that long prison
sentences for marijuana offenders had been consigned to the
nation's past. </p>

<p>But they had not. One of the seminal events in the creation of
the modern American anti-drug movement was a backyard barbecue
held in Atlanta, Georgia, during August of 1976. In the aftermath
of their daughter's birthday party, Ron and Marsha Manatt combed
through the wet grass in their pajamas, at one in the morning,
with flashlights, finding dozens of marijuana roaches,
rolling-paper packets, and empty bottles of Mad Dog 20/20
fortified wine discarded by their twelve- and thirteen-year-old
guests. Alarmed by these discoveries, the Manatts gathered local
parents in their living room and formed what was soon known as
the Nosy Parents Association, a group dedicated to preventing
teenage drug use. Marsha Manatt wrote to Robert DuPont, the head
of the National Institute on Drug Abuse; he helped arrange her
introduction to Thomas Gleaton, a professor of health education
at Georgia State University. There soon arose the Parents'
Resource Institute for Drug Education and the National Federation
of Parents for Drug-Free Youth, two organizations backed by top
officials at NIDA and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
which would exert tremendous influence on the nation's drug
policies. Thousands of other parents' groups soon formed
nationwide, and Ross Perot helped launch the Texans' War on
Drugs. </p>

<p>Marijuana use seemed epidemic: a survey in 1976 found that one
out of twelve high school seniors smoked pot on a daily basis. In
the 1960s the youth counterculture had celebrated marijuana's
reputation as a drug for outcasts and freaks. One Yippie leader
had confidently predicted that the slogan of the coming
revolution would be &quot;pot, freedom, license.&quot; The
conservative parents' groups took such words to heart and
similarly invested marijuana with great meaning. Robert DuPont,
who at NIDA had once supported decriminalization, later decried
the &quot;tumultuous change in values&quot; among the
young--their pursuit of pleasure, their lack of responsibility to
society--and argued that &quot;the leading edge of this cultural
change was marijuana use.&quot; </p>

<p>Part VIII Tomorrow (or maybe Mon. if my computer at the house
is still screwed up. Plus it's gonna be in the upper 80's here
tomorrow and I'm headed for the lake.) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #64- Atl. Mthly-8 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-20 11:33:54 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Back again. Sure was nice at the lake. Now back to the
Atlantic Monthly article. </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 8</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>The election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency brought the
war on drugs to the White House. In June of 1982 President Reagan
signed an executive order creating a new post in his
Administration--head of the White House Drug Abuse Policy
Office--and appointed a chemist, Carlton Turner, to the job.
Turner had for many years directed the Marijuana Research Project
at the University of Mississippi, running the government's only
marijuana farm. Turner believed that marijuana was an extremely
dangerous drug--one that, among other things, might have the
power to induce homosexuality. In 1977 the DEA had acknowledged
that decriminalization was a policy worth considering; three
years later it called marijuana the most urgent drug problem
facing the United States. Richard Bonnie, a professor at the
University of Virginia Law School who was an influential member
of the Shafer Commission staff, believes that advocates of
marijuana-law reform were pushed out of the mainstream by the
growing stridency and power of the parents' groups. Political
moderates soon abandoned the issue. Amid their silence,
philosophies of &quot;zero tolerance&quot; and &quot;user
accountability&quot; revived the notion that what drug offenders
deserved most was punishment. The Comprehensive Crime Control Act
of 1984, the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, and the Anti-Drug Abuse
Amendment Act of 1988 raised federal penalties for marijuana
possession, cultivation, and trafficking. Sentences were to be
determined by the quantity of the drug involved;
&quot;conspiracies&quot; and &quot;attempts&quot; were to be
punished as severely as completed acts; and possession of a
hundred marijuana plants now carried the same sentence as
possession of a hundred grams of heroin. </p>

<p>The Caprice of Geography </p>

<p>Marijuana is currently classified as a Schedule I controlled
substance, implying that it has a high potential for abuse, no
officially accepted medicinal uses, and no safe level of use
under medical supervision. Heroin, LSD, and peyote are other
Schedule I drugs; cocaine and phencyclidine (PCP) are listed in
Schedule II, allowing doctors to prescribe them. Under federal
law it is illegal to buy, sell, grow, or possess any amount of
marijuana anywhere in the United States. Penalties for a first
offense range from probation to life imprisonment, with fines of
up to $4 million, depending on the quantity of marijuana
involved. Moreover, it is illegal to use the U.S. Postal Service
or other interstate shippers for the advertisement, import, or
export of such marijuana paraphernalia as roach clips, water
pipes, and, in some instances, cigarette papers--a crime that can
lead to imprisonment and fines of up to $100,000. Under
civil-forfeiture statutes real estate, vehicles, cash,
securities, jewelry, and any other property connected with a
marijuana offense are subject to immediate seizure. The federal
government need not prove that the property was bought with the
proceeds of illegal drug sales, only that it was involved in the
commission of a crime--that marijuana was grown on certain land
or transported in a particular vehicle. Property may be forfeited
even after a defendant has been found innocent of the offense,
since the burden of proof that applies to people--&quot;beyond a
reasonable doubt&quot;--does not apply in accusations against
inanimate objects. Property can be forfeited without its owner's
ever being charged with a crime. On top of fines, incarceration,
and forfeiture, a convicted marijuana offender may face the
revocation or denial of more than 460 federal benefits, including
student loans, small-business loans, professional licenses, and
farm subsidies. In international smuggling cases the offender's
passport can be revoked. </p>

<p>Part 9 of this never ending saga tomorrow. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #65- Atl. Mthly-9 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-21 11:28:03 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 9</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>State marijuana laws were also toughened during the 1980s and
now vary enormously. Some states classify marijuana with drugs
like mescaline and heroin, while others give it a separate legal
category. In New York state possessing slightly less than an
ounce of marijuana brings a $100 fine, rarely collected. In
Nevada possessing any amount of marijuana is a felony. In Montana
selling a pound of marijuana, first offense, could lead to a life
sentence, whereas in New Mexico selling 10,000 pounds of
marijuana, first offense, could be punished with a prison term of
no more than three years. In some states it is against the law to
be in a room where marijuana is being smoked, even if you don't
smoke any. In some states you may be subject to criminal charges
if someone else uses, distributes, or cultivates marijuana on
your property. In Idaho selling water pipes could lead to a
prison sentence of nine years. In Kentucky products made of hemp
fibers, such as paper and clothing, not only are illegal but
carry the same penalties associated with an equivalent weight of
marijuana. In Arizona, where marijuana use is forbidden, the
crime can be established by the failure of a urine test: a person
could theoretically be prosecuted in Phoenix for a joint smoked
in Philadelphia more than a week before. </p>

<p>Crossing an invisible state line with marijuana in your car
can result in vastly different punishments. If you are caught
with three ounces of marijuana in Union City, Ohio, you will
probably be fined $100. But if you are caught in the town of the
same name literally across the road in Indiana, you could face
nine months to two years in prison, a fine of up to $10,000, a
felony record, suspension of your driver's license, forfeiture of
your car, and charges of marijuana possession, of possession with
intent to distribute, and of &quot;maintaining a common
nuisance&quot; (for the criminal use of an automobile). That one
arrest in Indiana might cost you the $10,000 fine and at least
$5,000 in legal fees, plus the value of your forfeited car. Wide </p>

<p>discrepancies in punishment occur not just between states but
also from county to county within a given state. In La Salle
County, Illinois, a first-time offender arrested with 300 pounds
of marijuana might be sentenced to four months in boot camp.
Sixty-five miles to the south, in McLean County, the same person
convicted of the same crime would more likely receive a prison
sentence of four to eight years. </p>

<p>In 1992 more than 340,000 people were arrested nationwide for
violating marijuana laws. Almost three quarters of those arrests
were for simple possession, a crime that generally does not lead
to incarceration. But possession of more than an ounce--roughly
equal to the amount of tobacco in a pack of cigarettes--is in
many states a felony. Conviction may lead to a few months or a
few years behind bars and the loss of a house or a job. People
who use marijuana as medicine must either buy it from drug
dealers or grow it themselves, often in violation of the law.
James Cox, a cancer patient in St. Louis, was found guilty of
growing marijuana and sentenced to fifteen years in prison; after
the verdict both he and his wife attempted suicide. Orland
Foster, an AIDS patient in North Carolina, served fifteen months
for growing marijuana; one of his cellmates served less time for
killing a woman. Now on probation, Foster must either give up
marijuana and risk losing weight, or violate the terms of his
release and risk going back to prison. </p>

<p>Part 10 Tomorrow. If anyone wants this article in its
entirety, please email your request and specify text or Microsoft
Word format. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #66- Atl. Mthly-10 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-22 11:36:32 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>CAUTION--Reading this section may lead to a bad attitude. :-( </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 10</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>In perhaps the most extraordinary case of this kind, Jim
Montgomery, a paraplegic immobilized from the waist down, who
smoked marijuana to relieve muscle spasms, was arrested in Sayre,
Oklahoma, when sheriffs found two ounces of pot in the pouch on
the back of his wheelchair. Montgomery was tried and convicted in
1992, by a jury, for possession of marijuana with intent to
distribute, for possession of paraphernalia, for unlawful
possession of a weapon during the commission of a crime (two
handguns inherited from his father, a police officer), and for
maintaining a place resorted to by users of controlled
substances. His sentence was life in prison, plus sixteen years.
Both the judge and the local prosecutor were disturbed by the
sentence chosen by the jury; the judge subsequently reduced it to
ten years. Montgomery spent ten months in a prison medical unit,
where he developed a life-threatening infection, before being
released on bond. His appeal is now pending. &quot;I'll never go
back to that prison,&quot; he says. &quot;I'd rather put a bullet
in my head.&quot; His case has already cost him more than $30,000
in legal fees. The government's effort to seize Montgomery's
home, shared with his widowed mother, proved unsuccessful. </p>

<p>Oklahoma today has a well-deserved reputation for being the
worst place in the United States to be caught with marijuana. On
June 11, 1992, Larry Jackson, a small-time crook with a lengthy
record of nonviolent offenses, was arrested at a friend's Tulsa
apartment. On the floor near Jackson's right foot a police
officer noticed a minuscule amount of marijuana--0.16 of a gram,
which is 0.005644 of an ounce. Jackson was charged with felony
possession of marijuana, convicted, and given a life sentence. In
Oklahoma City, Leland James Dodd was given two life sentences,
plus ten years, for buying fifty pounds of marijuana from
undercover officers in a &quot;reverse sting.&quot; Oklahoma is
not alone in handing out life sentences for buying marijuana from
the government. In Tuscaloosa County, Alabama, William Stephen
Bonner, a truck driver, was sent away for life without
possibility of parole after state narcotics agents delivered
forty pounds of marijuana to his bedroom. Raymond Pope, a
resident of Georgia, was lured to Baldwin County, Alabama, in
1990 with promises of cheap marijuana; he bought twenty-seven
pounds from local sheriffs in a reverse sting, was convicted, and
was sentenced to life without possibility of parole. Pope's
criminal record consisted of prior convictions for stealing
televisions and bedspreads from Georgia motels. He is now
imprisoned 400 miles from his family. He has three young
children. </p>

<p>Although the penalties for buying, selling, or possessing
marijuana are often severe, the penalties for growing it can be
even more severe. In Iowa cultivating any amount can lead to a
five-year prison sentence, in Colorado to an eight-year sentence,
in Missouri to a fifteen-year sentence. In the state of Virginia
the recommended punishment for growing a single marijuana plant
is a prison term of five to thirty years. </p>

<p>Part 11 Tomorrow. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #67- Atl. Mthly-11 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-23 11:15:07 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 11</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>A Farm in Morgan County </p>

<p>In November of 1988 Claude Atkinson and Ernest Montgomery met
at a Denny's near the airport in Indianapolis to discuss setting
up a large-scale marijuana-growing operation. Atkinson, a
fifty-nine-year-old Indiana native, was by all accounts
charismatic and highly skilled at cultivating marijuana.
Ostensibly a used-farm-implements dealer, Atkinson had organized
huge marijuana farms in Illinois, Indiana, and Kentucky. His
knowledge of growing techniques was much more impressive than his
skill at eluding capture. In 1984 law-enforcement authorities had
linked him to a pot farm in Paragon, Indiana; the following year
he was caught growing marijuana with artificial light in an
immense Indianapolis warehouse; and in 1987 a deer hunter
stumbled upon thousands of his marijuana plants in an Indiana
field. Claude Atkinson had cut a series of deals with the
government, informing on others after each arrest and serving
brief terms in prison, where he recruited employees for future
ventures. Now fresh out of custody and broke, he was ready to get
back into the growing business. Ernest Montgomery was an
unemployed truck driver in his early forties who wanted to make
big money. They agreed to form a partnership, with Montgomery
supplying the capital and Atkinson the expertise. Soon after
their meeting Claude Atkinson went to the Indiana statehouse and
formed a dummy corporation, R.P.Z. Investments, using one of his
many pseudonyms, Arno Zepp. </p>

<p>That fall Atkinson supervised the construction of a large
&quot;grow room&quot; in the basement of a secluded cabin that
Montgomery owned in Gosport. Montgomery enlisted his younger
brother, Jerry, a gravedigger with a slight drinking problem, to
help with the task. Together the three men drilled holes in the
concrete floor for drainage, built a cooling system, assembled
ballasts and reflectors, suspended grow lights with thousand-watt
halide bulbs from the ceiling, and planted marijuana seeds in
small pots. They installed a generator so that the operation
would not be detected through an incongruously high electric
bill. Montgomery invited David Lee Haynes, a young lumberyard
ripsaw operator from Louisville, Kentucky, and the son of an old
friend, to come live at the cabin and tend the plants. After
digging graves all day, Jerry Montgomery would visit the dark
basement in the evenings. By spring the group had approximately
12,500 seedlings of marijuana, contained in sixteen plywood
flats. What they needed next was a farm. </p>

<p>In May of 1989 Martha Brummett, an elderly woman hard of
hearing, agreed to lease her farmhouse halfway between Eminence
and Cloverdale, in Morgan County, to R.P.Z. Investments. It came
with about forty acres, a barn, and an option to buy. Martha
Brummett was surprised that when a &quot;Charlie Peters&quot;
arrived to sign the lease, the woman with him remained in the car
and never entered the house. Nevertheless, Brummett innocently
signed over her farm for $10,000 in cash, which she then took
straight to her bank. </p>

<p>Part 12 next </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #68- Atl. Mthly-12 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-24 10:41:43 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 12</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>A Farm in Morgan County (cont.) </p>

<p>After Ernest Montgomery and his wife, Cindy, obtained the
house, David Haynes moved into it, to babysit the operation,
having obtained a sham rental agreement from R.P.Z. Investments
as a legal buffer against what was about to happen on the land.
The group plowed and tilled the field, fertilized it, and planted
corn. Once the corn had reached a good height, they planted
marijuana, hiding it amid the stalks. Over the summer they walked
the fields, &quot;sexing&quot; the marijuana--eliminating all the
males. The females, left unpollinated, would produce a much
higher level of delta-9-THC in their buds, and would thus become
a much more valuable crop: sensimilla. In late September, before
the corn leaves turned golden, the group harvested the marijuana
and then cured it in the barn for two weeks and cut it into
&quot;books&quot; about a foot wide and three feet long. The
books were hauled into the farmhouse or driven to the cabin in
Gosport for manicuring: the stems, orphan leaves, and fan leaves
were separated from the precious buds. So far the operation had
gone smoothly. Soon there would be about 900 pounds of
high-quality marijuana to sell. Now the group needed buyers.
Ernest Montgomery thought that Mark Young, a man whom he had met
a few times with Cindy, might know the right people to call. </p>

<p>Mark Young was thirty-six and had been smoking marijuana on a
daily basis since his late teens. He grew up in Christian Park
Heights, a middle-class neighborhood on the east side of
Indianapolis. His father left the family when Mark was two; he
and his sister, Andrea, were raised by their mother, Mary, who
worked as a waitress or a hostess to pay the bills. Young was a
willful, stubborn, charming boy, always getting into trouble. He
seemed to have, throughout his pranks and petty thefts, the sort
of bad luck that is almost uncanny--often he would get caught
while his friends got away. Young dropped out of high school
after a year, became a father at the age of sixteen, married to
give the child his name, divorced, worked as a carpet-layer,
washed dishes, laid concrete, tended bar, sold used cars, and
rebuilt Harley-Davidson motorcycles. He kept an album filled with
pictures of his favorite Harleys. He knew all the local biker
gangs, but remained apart; Young seemed to get into enough
trouble on his own. He dated many attractive women, lived a fast
life, and slowly acquired a criminal record--nothing violent,
just misdemeanors for driving without a license, for possession
of marijuana, for taking a girlfriend's stereo. He also earned
two felony convictions: one at the age of twenty-one, for
attempting to pass a fraudulent prescription, and the other at
the age of twenty-five, for possession of a few amphetamines and
Quaaludes. Each felony brought a suspended sentence, probation,
and a one-dollar fine. When Ernest Montgomery called, Mark Young
was rebuilding motorcycles, selling used cars wholesale, and
looking for new income. He had held a financial interest in a
number of massage parlors, which were now closed. His dream was
to get some money, move to Florida, build custom Harleys, and
work part-time as a fishing guide on Lake Okeechobee. </p>

<p>Part 13 comin' atcha tommory </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #69- Atl. Mthly-13 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-25 10:52:57 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>And now -- Hot of the Cut 'n Paste Press it's </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 13</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>A Farm in Morgan County-cont. </p>

<p>Claude Atkinson, Ernest Montgomery, and Mark Young met in the
family room of Young's house in early October. The price of the
marijuana was set at $1,200 a pound. If Young found buyers, he
would receive a commission of $100 for every pound sold. Not long
after, Atkinson and Montgomery returned to Young's house, where
they were introduced to two men from Florida who were acting on
behalf of someone seeking to buy all the marijuana the group
could supply. Atkinson offered a hundred pounds a week; the
marijuana was still being manicured and could not be delivered
all at once. Within days a man from New York arrived at Young's
house with $120,000 in a cardboard box. While the New York buyer
inspected the marijuana at Montgomery's Indianapolis house,
Atkinson remained behind, counting the money. The deal was
completed, and Young was handed $10,000 in cash. The New York
buyer eventually paid for 600 more pounds, in transactions that
took place at Montgomery's house. By Christmas all the
high-quality marijuana was gone, the last 200 pounds either
distributed to workers who had helped with various tasks or sold
to an acquaintance of Montgomery's in Illinois. </p>

<p>The town of Eminence, Indiana, is about twenty-five miles west
of Indianapolis. Near its only intersection is a Citizens Bank, a
small church, a convenience store, and a post office built of
concrete blocks and painted royal blue. The town boasts 180
inhabitants and looks as though it has not seen much new
construction since the interval between the world wars. There are
countless small towns like Eminence across the Midwest, slightly
faded but still eulogized as the heartland of this country. To
reach the farm used by R.P.Z. Investments, one must leave
Eminence on a narrow country road and then turn onto a dirt road
and drive for a long stretch, past fields of fifty to a hundred
acres where corn, hay, soybeans, and wheat are grown, past modest
farms with collapsing outbuildings, an occasional trailer home,
and rusted cars on cinder blocks. Farther west the land is flat,
the acreage of each plot enormous, but here the countryside feels
long settled, with hedges and trees marking boundary lines. After
cleaning out the barn, Atkinson and Montgomery allowed the lease
on Martha Brummett's property to expire. The one-story farmhouse
has been painted beige by its latest occupants; the barn remains
bright red. There is a porch on the front of the house, an
enclosed patio on one side, and a swing set on the lawn. Looking
at this humble farm, one would hardly believe that more than a
million dollars' worth of marijuana had been grown there in the
space of about three months. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #70- Atl. Mthly-14 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-27 11:19:14 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>O.K. Back again. Got the hail damage claim to my car turned in
this a.m. Whatta storm we had in Dallas Saturday. Looked like a
hurricane blowing through. </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 14</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Inside The Industry </p>

<p>Steve White looks like an ordinary Indiana farmer, with
slightly unkempt hair, a graying beard, teeth stained by
nicotine, and strong hands. The day we met, he wore an old
flannel shirt, gray pants, and battered work boots. His voice has
a low rural twang. He seems to belong in an old pickup, riding
through a vast dusty field. White is the Indiana coordinator for
the Drug Enforcement Administration's Cannabis
Eradication/Suppression Program. Of his twenty-six years in
federal law enforcement, twenty-one have been spent in Indiana,
working undercover. He knows the state backwards and
forwards--has walked it, driven it, and flown low over it every
summer, scrutinizing hills and farmland. Nobody ever thinks he is
a cop. He gets along well with rural people. He grew up in New
York City and attended P.S. 20; his father worked on Wall Street.
He travels to London each year to indulge a passion for
collecting English antique toy soldiers. Special Agent White
would be an implausible character in any work of fiction. Savvy,
articulate, self-deprecating, and blunt, he defies easy
categorization and probably knows more about growing marijuana
than most of the people he arrests. </p>

<p>Claude Atkinson was an extremely talented grower with a
&quot;good product,&quot; White says--and &quot;a super
salesman.&quot; The operation near Eminence was of average size
for its time. It is difficult, even from the air, to find
marijuana hidden in corn: &quot;Remember North by
Northwest?&quot; White says. &quot;Cary Grant in the cornfield?
We don't have cornfields like that anymore, with wide rows. They
broadcast the stuff, and it's just thicker than hell.&quot;
Sometimes patches of marijuana will be distributed here and there
amid hundreds of acres. Discovering one may not lead to the
others. Growers tend to be much more concerned about hiding their
marijuana from thieves than from the government. A rural
underworld has emerged around marijuana, secretive and unknown to
outsiders; booby traps are laid in cornfields. There is now a
group of people in the Marijuana Belt, known as &quot;patch
pirates,&quot; who earn a living solely by stealing marijuana
from growers, whom they follow. White acknowledges that the booby
traps are usually aimed at patch pirates, not his own men;
nevertheless, fishhooks strung at eye level on fishing line are
nondiscriminatory. Outdoor marijuana farms have become smaller in
the past few years, though last summer White's agents found
&quot;60,000 beautiful plants&quot; on a farm in Tippecanoe
County. The case proved a disappointment: the DEA never found the
grower. &quot;What I want is bodies,&quot; White explains.
&quot;I don't give a damn about the dope--that's just something
we're going to burn up.&quot; His job involves a daily
cat-and-mouse pursuit of marijuana growers, with both sides
changing tactics, adopting new technologies, and often, after an
arrest, amicably discussing tricks of the trade. White harbors no
animosity toward his prey. &quot;These are not heroin or cocaine
dealers,&quot; he says. &quot;They're not violent. I find a lot
of them personally engaging.&quot; What they are doing is against
the law, however, and White loves tracking them down. He has had
a good deal of success lately. In 1992 Indiana led the nation in
federal arrests for marijuana. Last year it ranked third. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>