
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B015-158</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/psyamj.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051335 text/html 15898
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:43 GMT
Content-length: 15680
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Psychiatric Aspects of Marihuana Intoxication</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<h1>PSYCHIATRIC ASPECTS OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION </h1>

<p><b>Samuel Allentuck, MD, and Karl Bowman, MD<br>
</b></p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"><br>
</p>

<p>Introduction by David Solomon: (The Marihuana Papers) </p>

<p><i>Because it flatly contradicted many of the marihuana myths,
the following paper caused something of a stir both in the press
and in medical circles when it was read at the ninety-eighth
annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, held in
Boston in May 1942. The findings of Dr. Allentuck and Dr. Bowman
- both practicing psychiatrists - were based upon exacting
studies which they conducted for the Mayor's Committee on
Marihuana. Dr. Allentuck, whose medical degree is reinforced by a
doctorate in biochemistry, was the clinical director of the
Committee.</i> </p>

<p><i>&quot;The Psychiatric Aspects of Marihuana
Intoxication&quot; was originally published by the American
Journal of Psychiatry in September 1942. It has since taken its
place as one of the key reference works in the medical literature
on marihuana.<br>
</i></p>

<p>Marihuana has been known as a passport to euphoria since
ancient times. It has fascinated men of imagination, and
descriptions of its effects upon the mind and body have been
given in popular and scientific literature countless times. The
literature has been adequately considered by Walton (1) and by
Bromberg (2), and will therefore not be reviewed at the present
time. </p>

<p>The observations to be presented here are based on research
conducted in New York City under the auspices of the Mayor's
Committee on Marihuana. Studies were made of the effect of
marihuana on a series of 77 subjects, including some who had
previously used marihuana for varying periods- of time. The work
was done at Welfare Hospital with the assistance of Drs. Frank
Anker and Louis Gitzelter. A monograph based on this and
collaborative work is now in the course of preparation, and deals
with the pharmacological, clinical, therapeutic, social,
psychological, and psychiatric aspects of marihuana. This paper
consists mainly of a description of the psychiatric
manifestations caused by the drug. </p>

<p>The active principle in the plant is an oil, occurring in
maximum concentration in the flowering tops. The drug is ingested
or inhaled after being prepared for use in various ways in
different parts of the world. In this hemisphere it is usually
smoked, but may be eaten in the form of candy, or drunk in
various liquid preparations. The strength and quality of the
effect of marihuana vary with the geographical source of the
plant. It is strongest in the African derivative, less strong in
its Central American form, and weakest as found in the temperate
zones of this country. </p>

<p>Marihuana is unique in the reactions it produces in the users,
although its physiological effects have been likened to those of
the atropine group of drugs, and its psychic effects to those of
alcohol. The following is a clinical picture of the sequence of
events resulting from the ingestion of marihuana. The sequence of
events is the same whether the drug is ingested or inhaled, but
the latter produces its effects more rapidly. </p>

<p>Within one-half to one hour after the ingestion of marihuana
the conjunctiva reddens, the pupils dilate and react sluggishly
to light; photophobia, lacrimation, tremulousness of the eyelids,
and nystagmus upon lateral gaze become evident. Ophthalmoscopic
examination reveals nothing unusual in the nerve head, vessels or
retinal background. The vision for distance, proximity, and color
changes but slightly. The tongue becomes tremulous and dry, and
the mouth and throat patched, suggesting a diminution in salivary
secretion. Cardiovascular changes consist of an increase in the
radial pulse rate and a rise in the blood pressure which closely
follows the pulse increase. The extremities become tremulous, and
there are involuntary twitching, hyperreflexia, increased
sensitivity to touch, pressure, and pain stimuli. Pyramidal tract
signs are not elicited. There is equilibratory and
nonequilibratory ataxia, as revealed by marked swaying and
abnormal finger-to-finger test performance. Not all of these
phenomena occur in every sub ject, but when any of them does, it
lasts for about twelve hours. Elaborate laboratory studies of the
effects of marihuana intoxication for shorter and longer periods,
on users and non-users, reveal no significant systematic
alterations. </p>

<p>Mental phenomena arise two to three hours after ingestion, or
almost immediately after inhalation of the drug. The subject
admits being &quot;high.&quot; This state is characterized by a
sensation of &quot;floating in air,&quot; &quot;falling on
waves,&quot; lightness or dizziness in the head, ringing in the
ears, and heaviness in the limbs. Euphoria is first manifested
objectively in volubility and increased psychomotor activity, and
later subjectively in a delicious and confused lassitude.
Distance and time intervals subpectively appear elastic. In three
to six hours after ingestion of marihuana, hunger, manifested
mainly in a craving for sweets, and a feeling of fatigue and
sleepiness become prominent. The individual may sleep from one to
six hours and on awakening is &quot;down&quot;, that is, he no
longer feels &quot;high.&quot; The clinical phenomena may linger
for another few hours. </p>

<p>The mental status usually reveals a hyperactive, apprehensive,
loquacious, somewhat suspicious individual. His stream of talk
may be circumstantial; his mood may be elevated, but he does not
harbor frank abnormal, mental content such as delusions,
hallucinations, phobias, or autistic thinking. Attention,
concentration and comprehension are only slightly disturbed, as
is evidenced by the fact that the results in his educational
achievement tests are only slightly lowered. </p>

<p>Marihuana may precipitate a psychosis in an unstable,
disorganized personality, when it is taken in amounts greater
than he can tolerate. Under such circumstances, the previously
mentioned physical and psychic manifestations become
quantitatively greater and new events arise. The respiration
becomes labored; pallor and perspiration become evident;
tachycardia and irregularity of pulse occur. The subject
complains of urinary urgency, diarrhea and nausea; and may retch
or actually vomit. His apprehension may be interrupted by
laughing and weeping, by volubility or mutism. Marked
irritability, negativism, and cerea flexibilitas-like phenomena
may be elicited. The subject may assume grotesque, statuesque
positions. He may experience visual pseudohallucinations in the
form of flashes of light and apparitions. Micropsia and macropsia
may occur. More intense intoxication may elicit auditory
hallucinations similar to those met with in the alcoholic
psychoses, such as alcoholic hallucinosis or delirium tremens. </p>

<p>Limitations of time will not permit detailed description of
the nine psychoses precipitated in our series of 77 subjects.
However, it should be noted that a characteristic marihuana psy
chosis does not exist. Marihuana will not produce a psychosis de
novo in a well-integrated, stable person. In unstable users the
personality factor and the mood preceding the ingestion of
marihuana will color any psychosis that may result. In no two of
the cases developing psychoses in our series were the patterns
similar. Marihuana psychosis is protean in its manifestations and
may be mistaken for schizophrenic, affective, paranoid organic,
psychoneurotic or psychopathic reaction types. Should a psychosis
be precipitated in an unstable personality it may last only a few
hours or it may continue for a few weeks. It may be controlled by
withdrawal of the drug and the administration of barbiturates
After a few hours of sleep following the psychotic episode
treated with barbiturates, the patient may awaken with complete
memory for his experience and with his insight unimpaired. </p>

<p>The prolonged effects of the drug are strongly subjective, and
consist of an increase in fatigability and vague generalized
aches and pains. The aftermath of marihuana intoxication
resembles an alcoholic &quot;hangover.&quot; However, in contrast
to alcoholics, marihuana users do not continue their indulgence
beyond the point of euphoria, and soon learn to avoid becoming
ill by remaining at a pleasurable distance from their maximum
capacity for the drug. It may be mentioned that marihuana is no
more aphrodisiac than is alcohol. Unlike damiana, yohimbin,
testosterone propionate, etc. which produce genital engorgement
directly, marihuana, like alcohol, acts only indirectly through
the cerebral cortex in this respect. </p>

<p>Marihuana differs from the opium derivatives in that it does
not give rise to a biological or physiological dependence.
Discontinuance of the drug after its prolonged use does not
result in withdrawal symptoms. The psychic habituation to
marihuana is not as strong as to tobacco or alcohol. Use of
marihuana over a long period of time may conduce to ingestion of
progressively larger amounts merely through accessibility and
familiarity. This increment however does not give rise to a more
intense pleasurable experience. Thus a person experiencing
pleasure with two marihuana cigarettes does not achieve any
greater pleasure with six cigarettes, though he may indulge in
them. </p>

<p>A physiologically active constituent has been isolated from
the crude marihuana by Dr. Roger Adams and his associates,
working in the Noyes Chemical Laboratory of the University of
Illinois, in Urbana, as was reported by Dr. Adams in his Harvey
Lecture in February 1942. This substance or its synthetic
equivalent elicits somatic and psychic phenomena identical to
those obtained with the crude drug. Only brief mention need be
made of these substances since they are ex plained in detail in
Dr. Adams' report. Thus, natural tetrahydrocannabinol is obtained
by the isomerization of cannabidiol, through the action of
p-toluene sulphonic acid. Synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol is
l-hydroxy-3-n-amyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-7,8,9, 1 0-tetrahydro-6-
dibenzopyran. Another synthetic equivalent called synhexyl is I
-hydroxy-3-n-hexyl-6,6,9- trimethyl-7,8,9,
10tetrahydra-6-dibenzopyran. The natural product is most potent,
the synthetic equivalent least potent, and the synhexyl ranks
between them. </p>

<p>In the course of our investigation we studied the therapeutic
application of marihuana derivatives and allied synthetics to
opiate drug addiction, functional and organic depressions, and
psychoneurotic disorders in which dysphoria and anorexia existed.
The rationale for such therapeutic use was that, while exerting
no permanent deleterious effects, marihuana or its derivatives or
synthetics give rise to pleasurable sensations, calmness and
relaxation, and increase the appetite. </p>

<p>A series of cases were selected from among drug addicts
undergoing treatment. Subjective and objective criteria were
employed. Comparative results were charted for the gradual
withdrawal, total withdrawal, and marihuana derivative
substitution, as methods of treatment. A modification of the
technic of Kolb and Himmelsbach was employed in studying the
abstinence syndrome. Forty-nine subjects were studied. The
results in general, although still inconclusive, suggest that the
marihuana substitution method of treatment is superior. Thus, the
withdrawal symptoms were ameliorated or eliminated sooner, the
patient was in a better frame of mind, his spirits were elevated,
his physical condition was more rapidly rehabilitated, and he
expressed a wish to resume his occupation sooner. </p>

<p>In conclusion it is worthy of note that marihuana is probably
taken by its users for the purpose of producing sensations
comparable to those produced by alcohol. It causes a lowering of
inhibitions comparable to that elicited by alcohol in a blood
concentration of 2-3 mg. per cent. The user may speak and act
more freely, is inclined to daydreaming, and experiences a
feeling of calm and pleasurable relaxation. </p>

<p>Marihuana, by virtue of its property of lowering inhibitions,
accentuates all traits of personality, both those harmful and
those beneficial. It does not impel its user to take spontaneous
action, but may make his response to stimuli more emphatic than
it normally would be. Increasingly larger doses of marihuana are
not necessary in order that the long-term user may capture the
original degree of pleasure. </p>

<p>Marihuana, like alcohol, does not alter the basic personality,
but by relaxing inhibitions may permit antisocial tendencies
formerly suppressed to come to the fore. Marihuana does not of
itself give rise to antisocial behavior. </p>

<p>There is no evidence to suggest that the continued use of
marihuana is a stepping-stone to the use of opiates. Prolonged
use of the drug does not lead to physical, mental, or moral
degeneration, nor have we observed any permanent deleterious
effects from its continued use. Quite the contrary, marihuana and
its derivatives and allied synthetics have potentially valuable
therapeutic applications which merit future investigation. <br>
</p>

<p><b>BIBLIOGRAPHY </b></p>

<p>1. Walton, R. P. Marihuana. J. B. Lippincott Company </p>

<p>2. Bromberg, Walter. &quot;Marihuana: A psychiatric study
&quot; J.A.M.A., 113:4, July 1, 1939. </p>

<p>3. Kolb, Lawrence and Himmelsbach, C. K. &quot;Clinical
studies of drug addiction, III.&quot; Am. J. Psychiat., 94:759,
Jan. 1938. <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>