
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B033-4</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065806 text/html 116641
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:57:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:28:11 GMT
Content-length: 116421
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 5</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Michael Hollingshead">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr width="50%">
<center>

<h4>CHAPTER FIVE</h4>

<h3>THE MILLBROOK HAPPENINGS</h3>
</center>

<hr width="50%">

<h4>1964</h4>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Although the world of Millbrook may seem
nonsensical by rational standards to the outside world it was
merely another way of saying reason is not enough. We lived out a
myth which had not yet been integrated into our personalities.
Millbrook was itself the work of art, or a mirror, or simply
something going fast like a watch, some time. Like Kafka's
castle, it gave out messages into the ether in the form of one
high resonant sound which vibrated on the ears of the world as if
it were trying to penetrate beyond the barrier separating 'us'
from 'them'. We felt satisfied that our goals were every man's, a
projection of every man's private ambition. We sought for that
unitary state of divine harmony, an existence in which only the
sense of wonder remains and all fear gone. Here was a philosophy
of TO BECOME in which appear bits of Vedanta and bits of popular
pantheism, bits of the Tao and bits of the Ching. </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; In the Fall of 1964 I arrived at Millbrook.
Leary and Alpert, who had proclaimed themselves the International
Foundation for Internal Freedom (IFIF), had had to leave
Zihuatanejo, Mexico, where they had set up a training centre for
people using LSD. They got back to New York and started looking
for an alternative base somewhere in the States. The solution to
their problem came in the form of a sixty-four-room mansion on a
2000-acre walled estate within two hours motoring distance of the
city. They had rented the estate from the young millionaire Billy
Hitchcock, at a nominal rent more or less&#151;$500 a month. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The mansion was empty when they and their tiny
followship arrived, but it was the ideal place for them to be; it
was secluded and spacious and not entirely lacking in antiquated
charm. It had been built in the 1890s to the rather bizarre
architectural specifications of the German-born gas-lamp magnate,
Charles F. Dieterich, who christened his country seat 'Daheim'. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The spires and turrets pointing above the trees
into a clear open sky, 'Daheim' looked, at first glance, like the
creation of some neo-baroque American King Ludwig. In addition to
the main building, there was an out-building that consisted of a
downstairs bowling alley and a large fireplace room upstairs. It
was built in the style of a Bavarian chalet and had a little
verandah from which access to the roof was easy. There was also a
lodge house at the entrance to the estate, in which Maynard
Fergusson and his beautiful wife Flo lived with their children. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Millbrook was the headquarters of the Castalia
Foundation, so named after the intellectuals' colony in Hermann
Hesse's book <i>Das Glasperlenspiel</i> (The Glass Bead Game),
the last and finest novel by Hermann Hesse, the story of which is
set in the Alpine province of Kastalien around the year 2400. In
this emotionally chill utopian future, isolated from the mass of
population, the elite monastic Castalian Order displays its
intellectual mastery through the ritualised game of glass beads,
a game encompassing all human knowledge. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The pattern sings like crystal constellations, <br>
    And when we tell our beads, we serve the whole, <br>
    And cannot be dislodged or misdirected, <br>
    Held in the orbit of the Cosmic Soul.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Tim was greatly interested in the writings of
Hesse, but at this time, it was the glass bead game that held him
under its hermetic spell&#133; Joseph Knecht ('servant'), hero of
the novel, rises to be a Magister Ludi, the High Priest of the
Castalian Order. Gradually he becomes dissatisfied with the
exclusive and esoteric nature of those who play the game, for the
rules of the game had evolved into an astonishing complexity: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'These rules, the sign language and grammar of the Game,
    constitute a kind of highly developed secret language drawing
    upon several sciences and arts, but especially mathematics
    and music.... The Glass Bead Game is thus a mode of playing
    with the total contents and values of our culture.... All the
    insights, noble thoughts, and works of art that the human
    race has produced in its creative eras, all that subsequent
    periods of scholarly study have reduced to concepts and
    converted into intellectual property&#151;on all this immense
    body of intellectual values the Glass Bead Game player plays
    like the organist on an organ&#133; (the Game represents) an
    elite, symbolic form of seeking for perfection, a sublime
    alchemy, an approach to that Mind which beyond all images and
    multiplicities is one within itself in other words, to God.'
    [Hermann Hesse, <i>The Glass Bead Game,</i> tr. by Richard
    and Clara Winston, Jonathan Cape, 1970, p. 14ff.] </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Knecht left the rarefied world in which he
performed with such eminence and resolved to fashion a link
between Castalia and the outside world. After making this
decision, Knecht fortuitously drowns in an Alpine lake with his
protégé, a misfortune that yet points a precedent for action,
as the protégé feels henceforth, life will 'demand much greater
things of him than he had ever before demanded of himself'. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Tim thought most people missed the real message of
Hesse, himself the member of the Hermetic Circle; entranced by
the pretty dance of words and theme, they overlook the seed
message, for Hesse, in the spirit of Mercurious, is a trickster.
Like nature in April, he dresses up his code in fancy plumage.
The literary reader picks the fruit, eats quickly, and tosses the
core to the ground. But the seed, the electrical message, the
code, is in the core. The seed meaning is within, concealed
behind the net of symbols. Millbrook's Castalia Foundation was
its own 'sublime alchemy', and its own High Priest in Timothy
Leary, who saw in Hesse's story of the Castalian Order, both an
inspiration and a warning against constricting rigidity. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Groups which attempt to apply psychedelic experiences to
    social living will find in the story of Castalia all the
    features and problems which such attempts inevitably
    encounter: the need for a new language or set of symbols to
    do justice to the incredible complexity and power of the
    human cerebral machinery; the central importance of
    maintaining direct contact with the regenerative forces of
    the life-process through meditation or other methods of
    altering consciousness; the crucial and essentially insoluble
    problem of the relation of the mystic community to the world
    at large. Can the order remain an educative, spiritual force
    in the society, or must it degenerate through isolation and
    inattention to a detached, alienated group of idealists ?'
    [Timothy Leary and Ralph Metzner, <i>The Psychedelic Renew,</i>
    Cambridge, Mass., Vol. 1, No. 2, Fall 1963, p. 179.] </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; For those of us who comprised the household,
Millbrook was simply 'a house', in the sense that a house is also
a home. We lived as a community of people who had accepted a
certain way of living, which had rules and goals, shared by all.
We felt that our life-style was a creative solution to the
problems of living in the cinematic, labour-saving world. We
wanted to explore our spiritual individuality, discover our
secret life within, but also to test the validity of our search
by means of living and loving and sharing with other people in
close community. It was some kind of heightened feeling of self,
combined with movement, a natural and instinctive reaction in
such a setting, the light, the landscape, an all-pervading
tactile quality about the place, the texture and the music of
natural surroundings, created a corresponding ambiance of colour,
affective tonality, and seriousness in our minds. Here we could
travel into our own minds, to remote and hitherto inaccessible
realms within. We sought the god who inhabits each and every man.
We took this lofty house and turned it into a small stepping
stone. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Elevated or metaphoric levels of consciousness have
been sought by a few men in each generation. The possibility of
transcendence has attracted the thoughts of men throughout the
ages. The visionary experience has coloured the visions of a few
Western thinkers, and has been recorded by many Eastern mystics.
It is described in the seventh book of Plato's <i>Republic</i>
and mapped in the <i>Bhagavad Gita</i> and <i>The Tibetan Book of
the Dead.</i> For the most part, Western psychology has ignored
the possibilities of mind-expansion and has become almost
entirely externally oriented. During the last hundred years
particularly we have gained an incredible expertise in
manipulating the objective environment while simultaneously
setting up barriers against the exploration of the internal. This
imbalance between the outer and inner creates an over-emphasis on
action and aggressive behaviour, and a neglect of the fundamental
question of what consciousness is. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Everything is internal. Everything happens in the
mind. At Millbrook we wanted to develop a methodology to guide us
in our journey within. In the West our most ready metaphors are
neurological. At Millbrook we wanted to substitute a more
apposite imagery. We wished to confront the realities of our
nervous system, not in a clinical but in a creative setting. To
overcome the superstitious dread of 'tampering with the mind' we
set out to learn the language of inner space. Can this internal
language be understood? The problem is phenomenological. To go
into external space we have to overcome gravitational inertia. By
analogy, our ego spins around inside the mind compelling us to be
tied to its field of gravity. Transcendental experience is the
only escape from the prison imposed by the ego. It is the Saturn
rocket that boosts us into a more differentiated and freer space.
Yet so far from LSD being the withdrawal of the mind from
reality, it has enabled people to appreciate the authentic beauty
of what we understand by objective reality. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the early days at Harvard we didn't know much
about this. We knew enough not to impose rules, roles, rituals on
the brain of another; enough to plan sessions beforehand in an
open way, to remove any fears a person might have that he was
going to have an experience put over him. And while we knew not
to get people out of their minds, we had to find a way to bring
them back. It was like having no equipment to plot re-entry.
Millbrook was an attempt to bring people back in a position to
sustain their spiritual transformation. And while we drew on the
collective wisdom of the great mystical texts we were not
attempting a crude transplant. We desired a coalescence of
Eastern insights and Western intelligence. A combination, for
example, of the Tantra and Western psychology. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Regularly the permanent members of the household
would participate in group sessions, using LSD, and we would take
it in turns to plan these. Fourteen people would turn on
together. The appointed guide would be responsible for the music,
the tapes, the readings, the lights. In one of these run by Dick
Alpert, we agreed not to speak for three hours, but to wholly
give ourselves in responding to the input. Dick read from Meher
Baba, the celebrated Indian mystic who ceased to speak on July
10, 1925 and communicated, through disciples, by means of an
alphabet board: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The sole purpose of creation is that the soul should be
    able to enjoy the Infinite state of the Over-soul <i>(Paramatman)</i>
    consciously. Although the soul eternally exists in and with
    the Oversoul in an inviolable unity, <i>it cannot be
    conscious of this unity</i> independently of the creation
    which is within the limitations of time. It must, therefore,
    evolve consciousness before it can realise its true status
    and nature as being identical with the Infinite Over-soul,
    which is One without a second.' [Meher Baba, 'The Divine
    Theme for Meditation', cited in C. B. Purdom, <i>The Perfect
    Master,</i> Williams and Norgate, London, 1937, p. 309.] </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After three hours we looked in the little hand
mirrors we had all been supplied with before the session and
watched the various physiognomic metamorphoses. For some people
it was like entering the world of Wilde's <i>The Picture of
Dorian Gray</i> watching 'in the dim light the hideous face on
the canvas' and realising, like Dorian, that 'each of us has
Heaven and Hell in him'. Some had a horrific experience of seeing
their faces melting or turning bright orange or red or green. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In fact these paranoid symptoms are described in
the Tibetan mystical writings where they are hallucinations of
devils. In Tibetan <i>tanka</i> paintings fearful dragons with
huge red eyes belch flame and smoke from their nostrils. These
are images of energy that exist in the mind. Under the session
conducted by Dick we also saw the snake, which is the coiled DNA,
the <i>Kundalini</i> serpent which lies at the base of the spine.
Once released it fills the mind and heart with light. Unprepared
for such images they create fear and terror. As we became more
sophisticated with the use of drugs and studied the mystics we
could deal with the images. We saw them as <i>mandalas,</i> as
screens of energy. By suspending analysis we were able to pass
through the screens. We noticed that in the centre of all these
images is a black hole, the vortex of mystical works. By focusing
on this swirling, sucking void we moved through its entrance to
the other kingdom. The blind spot in the centre of each <i>mandala</i>
is recognised by Tibetan monks as a device to reach
transcendence. It comes to life and triggers off archetypal
images. We learned to move through the <i>mandala</i> to Nirvana,
the state of absolute bliss. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In our hand mirrors we saw former selves, lives
past, and lives we might yet live in the present. And in this
session with a dosage of 800 gamma LSD (justified because of the
secure supportive system) we saw the multiple facets of our
potential. Indeed, 'it might be proposed that what we encounter
here is an activation of the phylogenetic inheritance.' [R. E. L.
Masters and Jean Houston, The Varieties of Psychedelic
Experience, Anthony Blond, London, 1967, p. 217] I had
experiences of living in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
and of living in India 2000 years ago. I also dissolved into a
very old man, receded into a young man, spun and shrunk into a
baby being born. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After five hours we still had not started to
verbalism We silently prepared for the period of re-entry. Here
daily consciousness is slowly intruding and our conceptual mind
perceives it with all its inhibitions, its whole pathology of
content. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'So far you have been searching for your past personality.<br>
    Unable to find it, you may begin to feel that you will never
    be the same again,<br>
    That you will come back a changed person. <br>
    Saddened by this you will feel self-pity, <br>
    You will attempt to find your ego, to regain control. <br>
    So thinking you will wander here and there, <br>
    Ceaselessly and distractedly.'<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(The Tibetan
    Book of the Dead)</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At peak experience the being is filled with love,
joy and ecstasy; under LSD it is impossible to think of killing
anything. On reentry we would try to choose who we wanted to be.
If we were to return from spiritual heights we wanted to do so
changed, still possessed of love and radiance. This was the point
of the session, but none of us really managed it. The re-entry
periods we wanted to freeze were elusive. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dick's session was followed by a walk in the woods,
a silent exercise in looking. And after experiencing the sensuous
impact of the grass, and the trees, and the animals we went back
to the house and prepared a meal of rice and <i>tamara,</i> wine
and cheese, and we began to speak to each other. </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; We also played behavioural games with each
other, accumulating evidence to test various hypotheses. As an
example, in June 1965 we had all been studying Gurdjieff's <i>Meetings
With Remarkable Men,</i> Ouspensky's <i>The Fourth Way,</i> and
Orage's <i>Psychological Exercises.</i> Gurdjieff maintained that
most people sleepwalk their waking hours away, and saw his own
role as that of an alarm clock to wake people from this diurnal
somnambulism. To test this we planned a Self-Remembering game. It
started at 9.00 a.m. and, in an arbitrary sequence, a bell would
ring four times an hour throughout the day. The bell was the
signal for us to stop and record what we were doing at the time.
Under the heading EXTERNAL we answered the questions <i>Where are
you?</i> and <i>What game are you playing?</i> Under the heading
CONSCIOUSNESS we answered the questions <i>When?</i> (i.e. Past,
Present, Future), <i>Where?</i> and <i>What game?</i> As the
house was full of behaviourists this seemed a normal thing to do.
</p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Tim's wedding to 'the beautiful blonde Swedish
model' Nena Von Schlebrugge took place six weeks after I had
moved into my upstairs room at Millbrook. It was a radiant
morning and we were up early to welcome the guests, most of whom
drove up from New York. The marriage service was held in the
Episcopal church in the village of Millbrook in the early
afternoon and afterwards we returned to the estate where we had
arranged a Swedish-style buffet in all the downstairs rooms of
Castalia, so guests could wander around the house eating
delicacies. I had met most of the guests individually, or in
small groups, but this was the first really big gathering of
assorted heads. There were some 150 of us, all high on LSD, or
pot, or both. It was a brilliant festive occasion with everyone
dressed up so brightly that it was like watching an idyllic
pageant from Elizabethan England. Most of the girls had dazzling
ornaments over Indian saris. They held flowers and seemed to
glitter in an extraordinary delicacy. The men wore robes and
brightly coloured costumes&#151;harlequin pants, richly textured
jackets, sumptuous shirts. To view them on the lawn from the roof
of the bowling alley was to peep into a kaleidoscopic garden
party of glorious humanity. Castalia had been transformed into a
palace and it embraced this ceremony. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was one of those days when everyone was happy
and joyous and loving. Felicities filled the air. Charlie Mingus
played his bass, Maynard Fergusson cogitated on his trumpet, and
other musicians joined in to produce an elegant weaving series of
improvisations. Don Snyder took a wonderfully sympathetic series
of photographs. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Before Tim and Nena left for New York to catch the
plane to New Delhi for their first visit to India there was a
receiving line and we all filed past with our presents.
Psychedelic presents of course. Some gave hashish, some gave bags
of excellent grass. Some gave mushrooms. A snuff box of cocaine.
A quantity of LSD. The entire range of mind-expanding substances
were proffered to the newly-weds, and all the while people were
turning on. When Tim and Nena left we carried on with the
celebrations into the dawn, and watched the sun edging over the
horizon as the earth heaved over and took us into another day. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Tim was away for more than a month, during which
time we sent him messages about what we were doing. Tapes would
arrive at New Delhi via American Express and would be taken up to
Tim and Nena, about a mile away in Almora. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Dear Tim and Nina. We're missing you very much. We've
    been studying the works of Meher Baba, particularly his book <i>God
    Speaks</i> and we find this fundamental to our journey. We've
    also been reading Rene Daumal's <i>Mount Analogue</i> and our
    souls are climbing the mountain. Our bodies too: we've built
    our own mountain from chicken wire and plaster of paris, and
    we've painted routes and markings on this mountain, a
    metaphoric statement of where we're at, all climbing the
    mountain together. We ran seven sessions last week. Some
    wonderful. Jacky and Susan are very well. Jack is doing well
    at school, making new friends who he brings round to watch
    the deer in the park. Susan has been learning to bake. On
    Tuesday some of us went to Salvador Dali's birthday party at
    the St. Regis hotel. We were all dressed up, wearing ski
    masks, each with a different musical instrument. They were
    about to throw us out when they discovered we were Dali's
    guests. Gabi gave Dali his pet iguana for a present. Later,
    when Dali took us to the Stork Club for a meal, he paid and
    left the iguana on the table as a tip. We are sending you
    some LSD by next mail, to c/o American Express, New Delhi.
    Enough for forty trips. Love from Millbrook.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Gabi, the photographer, had entered Millbrook
during the time Tim and Nena were away, a period when we spent a
lot of time working on multi-media techniques. The genesis of the
multimedia show 'Psychedelic Theatre' came about when, late one
evening, Arnie Hendin arrived at Millbrook with his girl, Lois.
He was a very active person, tall with a little beard and long
hair. He told me he was a photographer. None of us had thought
much about using photography in sessions, but Arnie mentioned it
as a possibility and asked if he could show me some of his
slides. He set up two projectors in the session room, selected
some music, and we took some LSD. Then he began to manipulate the
projector to inform his photographs with a dynamic quality.
Inexorably I was caught up in this dance of the fixed image. It
was a weird mosaic of visual rhythm, pulsating vibrating colour.
Arnie used our huge mirrors to reflect his slides and bounced
them round the room. He took them in and out of focus, blended
photographs together, and used this controlled agitation in
uncanny counterpoint with the music. These pictures were <i>real!</i>
I lived in them. A shot of the East Village, New York, would come
so alive that I could see the sounds, sense the smells, watch the
people move. At times I had to avoid the traffic. Suddenly Arnie
switched to a pastoral scene of an old New England barn, and the
mood changed abruptly. He had a triangular arrangement of three
mirrors which he put in front of the lens to break the image up
into multiple facets. Taking the slides out of focus he elevated
shapes to forms, and then reduced these to primal blobs of
chaotic colour. It anticipated Stanley Kubrik's psychedelic
continuum in <i>2001</i> when the space pod enters the visionary
atmosphere of Jupiter. I felt Arnie had visually duplicated the
early stages of the LSD experience. Words had never been equal to
the ineffable. These graceful gymnastics of colour which Arnie
had produced, by sheer artistry, were the apotheosis of
distraction. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; He was a magician&#151;not only a technically
brilliant photographer, but a being possessed of mysterious
creative powers, able to utilise new forms of energy. He had
understood that LSD is a non-verbal, visionary experience. An
intensity of seeing whether the eyes are opened or closed. Arnie
had changed our session room from the inside of a cigar box to
the inside of a diamond. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I asked him if there were any other photographers
who were his peers in these realms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'Yes,' Arnie said. 'There is Gabi. He comes from
Detroit like me and came to New York to take up a scholarship at
the Cooper Union. Gabi spent one day looking round the place and
decided it was not for him. He lives in a small basement in the
lower East Village.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had to go into New York the following day to pick
up a Tibetan monkey which had been gifted to us. Why not see Gabi
then ? Arnie told me the address, but asked about the monkey. I
explained that the Tibetan monkey had been destined for the
Baltimore zoo, but had been rejected by the zoo. The donors were
friends of the Fergussons and suggested to them that the Castalia
Foundation could have it if we wanted. Of course, we did. So I
was to drive in and pick it up from an animal emporium just off
Broadway, near Wall Street. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I drove into New York next morning in the Ford
station wagon we had, and went first to see Gabi. He was seated
at a table in his basement sticking coloured polo mints on to a
discarded car axle. Quite naturally he showed me a champagne
glass with broken polo mints stuck around the base. Then a silver
spoon hanging from a string in a box with the coloured sweets
stuck on to it. After a period spent looking at these and similar
creations Gabi introduced me to his animals. He had a pet iguana,
a pet crow, a pet mouse. Later on the crow ate the mouse, and the
iguana freaked the crow by doing something the crow could not
do&#151;blink! It was this same iguana that ended up on a table
in the Stork Club as the Salvador Dali tip. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Gabi was a six footer, with long blond hair, and
the largest blandest eyes I had ever seen. He looked a bit like
Lewis Carroll. I suggested he come out to Millbrook, but told him
that first I had to pick up the Tibetan monkey. Would he help me
as obviously he had a way with animals ? Certainly he would, but
if we were going on to Millbrook he wanted to take his animals.
Gabi put on his head the northern hemisphere from a metal atlas,
and we boxed the mouse, and put the iguana in a cage. Gabi felt
that a trip to the financial district might so upset the iguana
that it might bite, and we didn't want that. The crow, however,
was not nearly so sensitive so we let if fly above the station
wagon and follow us to the Wall Street district. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We got into the emporium without incident, and the
crow still hung about the station wagon. The monkey, about
two-and-a-half feet high with snowy white eyebrows and beard, was
put into a huge cage. Gabi said he could speak to animals, so I
carried the cage and he carried the monkey. So we walked back to
the station wagon, an extraordinary trinity&#151;me in my raccoon
coat and tam o'shanter, Gabi with half of the world on his head,
and the Tibetan monkey completely at home in Gabi's arms. From
the looks on the faces of passers-by it seemed as if a whole
section of New York had freaked out! Rush hour took on a new
meaning. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As soon as we got back to Millbrook everyone wanted
to see some of Gabi's psychedelic magic. He installed the animals
and then set up projectors, as Arnie had done. We were soon
transfixed by the beauty, dazzling colour, and unique insights
performed by Gabi with light and colour. The magicians were
taking over. And we liked it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This development led to other groups coming.
Probably the most important was USCO&#151;'US company'&#151;three
performers from the artists' colony at Woodstock, N.Y. The group
comprised Gerd Stein, poet and former <i>Playboy</i>
correspondent; Steve Durkee, previously a pop artist; and Michael
Callahan, an electronics technician. USCO communicated through a
multichannel media mix, a psychedelic orchestra of film, colour
slides, kinetic sculpture, strobe lights, and live actors. They
had developed a system of linking all projectors to one control
manual. With this ability to control all visual effects from one
source they used techniques of spinning sound from one speaker to
another. This, in conjunction with the images, seemed to us to
offer an exciting dramatic possibility, a unique form of theatre.
A performance where the audience would be involved intimately in
the field of action, participating. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At Millbrook we did not isolate ourselves
hermetically from the world outside, but wished to contribute to
and reflect something of the spirit of our time. Our Psychedelic
Theatre or 'Tranart' (transcendental art) did not arise like a
diversion or arrive like a gilded Pavlova. It grew out of alembic
of creative minds, from aspects of personal experiences of
living. We continually exposed ourselves to novel departures in
our conceptual, label-making process and tried to get rid of
ideas of what art must necessarily be. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the case of the Psychedelic Theatre we suspended
the general assumption that Theatre is concerned solely with
formal, fixed construction like the plays of Ibsen. We wanted to
avoid the mistake tacitly committed by both spectator and artist
of submitting to a mental trap of knowing what is expected of
them. The Psychedelic Theatre arose out of something like the
cave-paintings of primitive man interested in constructing a
piece of reality from the flux. It was a theatre of controlled
spontaneity, offered not as a virtuoso performance by a
signature-artist, but as a sensory embrace. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The first public psychedelic event ever performed
was at the Village Vanguard jazz club in Greenwich Village on
Monday, April 5, 1965. Those taking part were myself, Dick
Alpert, Alan Watts, Charlie Mingus, Pete La Roca, Steve Swallow,
Charlie Lloyd, Ralph Metzner, Susan Leary, Mario (a dancer), and
Bjoern Von Schlegrugge as stage manager in charge of the
electronic equipment. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I introduced the event thus: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Our purpose in being here is to expand our awareness. To
    assimilate and to see aspects of the psychedelic
    consciousness. To observe the phenomena of inner space. This
    is the Magic Theatre. By magic we mean the phenomena of
    everyday life through which we pass most of our time asleep.
    Tonight we shall be mixing auditory and visual phenomena. The
    brain is capable of processing all this data. It will see
    different images moving in a random/planned fashion. Sound
    tracks, some of which have been cut up, will be heard. Films
    and light will perform. All you have to do is focus on one
    point. And then you will see the rest. Diversity will be
    unity. But do not try to understand. The brain will do all
    that later. Here you will have 10,000 visions. So sit back
    and relax. Extend yourself to an aesthetic distance. You may
    have the opportunity of leaving your body. Leaving your mind.
    You are going on a voyage. The price of admission is your
    mind. For if you attempt to analyse and conceptualise you
    will cheat yourself of the opportunity to see things in a
    fresh manner.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then I read: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Is it a dream ? <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Shadowy<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Elusive<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Invisible <br>
    All things <br>
    All images<br>
    Move slowly <br>
    Within<br>
    Shimmering nets </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Here<br>
    Essence endures<br>
    From here<br>
    All forms emerge<br>
    All forms<br>
    Emerge<br>
    From this second<br>
    Back to the ancient beginning<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(Tao Sutra 21)</i>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And we began. The impact of this event is perhaps
best appreciated from the review in the <i>New York Times</i> of
Sunday, April 11, 1965: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Tamara, her blonde hair falling to her baggy white
    pyjamas, was passing out Tibetan incense. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; ' &quot;That's because it's delightful,&quot;
    she explained. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The patrons who jammed the 123-seat basement
    jazz club accepted the offerings with an equally earnest
    mysticism, for they had come to experience the debut of the
    Psychedelic Theatre&#151;a simulated &quot;session&quot; with
    the consciousness expanding drug Lysergic Acid Diethylamide,
    or LSD. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'It was &quot;speakout&quot; night at the
    Village Vanguard&#133; last week an LSD symposium transcended
    the merely verbal because, as a grave young man backed by a
    throbbing bass declaimed, &quot;Our limited lexicography,
    with its procrustean subject-object limitations cannot
    communicate this experience.&quot; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'Darkness. Up tempo bass. Lights flash through
    the audience; slides flash on a sheet: Mount Rushmore,
    biological specimen, Buddha sliding in and out of focus.
    Drums and a clarinet pick up the rhythm. Tamara, accompanied
    by Tasha, a thin, haunted-looking young man also in baggy
    whites; they dance, not quite to a twist, with Siamese arm
    motions. Later, more dancing, to the Beatles, while a
    flickering blue light seems to stop the motion into jerks....
    A noise like three monotone bears trapped in a sewer,
    transforming itself into an oriental fluting, bonging and
    chanting. A movie of a frog embryo in a glass bowl, evolving
    rotating and flipping to a cool jazz score, while a voice
    quietly intones universal truths and insights: &quot;&#133;
    muddy water cannot be fathomed.&quot; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'A hundred would-be experiencers were turned
    away, business at the bar was slow, and the audience was rapt
    and curiously split. &quot;There's an awful lot of uptowners
    here,&quot; muttered a hostile hipster, glowering at a
    section of Wednesday matinee women. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'There was a scattering of ageing beards, but
    the other face was that of youth, sure of its
    terminology&#151;&quot;Cosmic consciousness&quot;,
    &quot;re-entry&quot;, and &quot;set&quot;. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'Some matched the religious fervour of the
    performers, residents of a Millbrook, N.Y. &quot;utopian
    colony&quot; who soberly passed out jelly beans and balloons
    during intermission.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As well as passing out jelly beans (which some of
the audience imagined, with delight or apprehension, depending on
their attitude, to be treated with LSD) we gave Dick Alpert a
spot. He sat on a stool and began telling funny stories about his
experiences at Harvard, about his early experiences with his
millionaire father, and how this world now seemed several light
years away. The audience laughed uproariously at Dick's stories
and, after the show, the owner of the Vanguard, Max, came up to
Dick. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'You are a natural-born comedian. Would you like to
try a week here as a comedian, doing what you did tonight?' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dick said he would try it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A couple of weeks later Dick took up the offer.
Unfortunately only half a dozen people were watching him and they
were boozy and incapable of understanding Dick. Apart from
myself, who accompanied Dick to New York for his 'gig', and some
friends, no one got the point of his humour. It simply seemed
crazy to them that a man could jeopardise an enviable family
security and a top academic job to live as Dick was doing then.
It was clear to us that for Dick's jokes to be understood
everyone had to be high. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Subsequent to the Village Vanguard evening we set
up a regular Monday night series of 'Psychedelic Explorations' at
the New Theatre, East Fifty-Fourth Street, in collaboration with
USCO. There would be lectures, psychedelic improvisations,
discussions, performances by the Castalia Foundation and USCO,
and finally an informal question-and-answer period. The idea was
that the Psychedelic Theatre would illustrate and amplify the
themes discussed in the lectures which in turn supplied the
theoretical background necessary for an understanding of the new
techniques of audio-olfactory-visual alteration of consciousness.
Our other main forum was the Coda Galleries in the East Village.
This opened in April 1965 and acted as a salon for exhibitions,
discussions and demonstrations. It proved immensely successful
and on one occasion some 6000 Villagers tried to cram into the
sixty-five-person capacity gallery to hear a panel of
psychologists and artists discuss the value of chemically-induced
transcendence for artists. The Coda's director, Ray Crossen, also
sponsored the 'Theatre of the Ridiculous' and many
poetry-readings in which I took part. There is no question but
that the work we did at that time in New York has been seminal in
the development of kinetic and optical art, the new cinema, and
freer forms of theatre. It opened up a whole vista of new
entertainment possibilities. Arnie Hendin, who had suggested so
much of this potential growth on his first evening at Millbrook,
was by now developing into a one-man theatrical event; as three
Yale psychologists were shortly to find out. </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; So involved had we been in the Psychedelic
Theatre and so closely had we communicated with Tim in India that
it seemed like days not months had passed when he eventually
returned with Nena. After the preliminary salutations of welcome,
Tim made it very clear that he had mainly learned from India that
all fire and metals should be kept underground. 'The great work
of the future,' he said, 'will be to return fire and metal back
to earth. This will be a work of joy. All works of destruction
involve fire and metal. We must overcome them. In future we will
separate our garbage into metallic and non-metallic substances.
All the metal must be buried.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I took it upon myself to bury all the empty tin
cans by sticking them upside-down into the footpath through the
garden. So we would walk on the metal and it would eventually
subside into the earth. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Tim began to take up his psychological work with
some intensity and announced one morning that three senior Yale
psychologists were coming to see around Millbrook that afternoon.
Tim wanted this to be a serious exchange of ideas so he asked
Arnie Hendin&#151;who wore funny hats, trousers made out of
multicoloured curtain-material, and bells&#151;if he would mind
discarding his technicolour clothes for the duration of the
psychologists' visit. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'Uhuh,' nodded Arnie. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And, true to his word, he went to borrow a lounge
suit and a tie and a white shirt and shoes. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The psychologists arrived for lunch and sat, rather
stuffily, listening to an affable Tim making jokes and
lighthearted conversation. Most of the members of the household
present for lunch were stoned, but, in deference to Tim's wishes,
we maintained an external propriety. In the middle of lunch Arnie
walked in sporting his splendidly conventional outfit and
carrying a copy of the <i>New York Times</i> under one arm. He
nodded and sat down opposite the three psychologists who seemed
suitably impressed by his impeccable attire. Arnie opened the <i>Times</i>
and began to read it. Then he smiled and, as he did so, a trickle
of green liquid started spilling from the corners of his mouth,
and slowly ran down to his little beard. Next Arnie opened his
mouth a little and the green liquid spurted over his chin and on
to his white shirt. By now everyone was staring at Arnie, so he
opened his mouth in a yawn and the green gushed from his mouth
over his newspaper and his shirt, all the while reading the news
as if nothing was happening. Arnie had filled his mouth with
green vegetable dye and it produced the first one-man happening I
had ever seen. The psychologists observed this event fastidiously
and seemed, from frowns and raised eyebrows and movements of the
mouth, to have agreed that this irreproachably dressed young man
was inoffensive&#151;merely afflicted by a slight idiosyncrasy.
Tim said nothing at all about it. Neither did we. It seemed the
wisest course to smother the scene in silence. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After lunch, Arnie having excused himself with a
nod, we suggested to the psychologists that we show them around
the house. Indulging the frivolity of a moment, one of the
psychologists asked if we had any animals in addition to the four
dogs that wandered about the front porch. Tim pointed to the line
of Tibetan monastery flags strung along the turrets on the roof
of the house and jocularly linked that with the presence of our
Tibetan monkey upstairs. Often the monkey roamed about the house,
but at meal times it had to be kept in its huge cage because it
would perch high up on shelves and throw eggs at people.
Obviously that couldn't happen to a distinguished group of Yale
psychologists. Tim said he would remember to show them the
monkey. We got to the room, entered, and there, sitting in the
cage with a banana in one hand and engrossed in the <i>New York
Times,</i> was Arnie. Tim let the psychologists draw their own
conclusions. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Arnie was not only magical and mischievous, though;
he could be practical. Once Dick Alpert got a severe cold, dosed
himself with aspirins and sleeping pills and retired to the
bowling alley where he curled up in a sleeping bag before the big
log fire. Arnie asked me about Dick and I confirmed that Dick was
miserable and had just gone off to try to sweat out the cold in
front of the fire in the bowling alley. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'He doesn't need to do that,' said Arnie. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'Oh ? Why not ?' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'I know of a way to cure colds.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had considerable faith in Arnie's powers and
agreed to accompany him at midnight to see Dick. When we got into
the bowling alley Dick was sleeping like a twisted log in front
of the burning fire. Arnie started to prepare the room. He
arranged coloured pieces of glass on the floor and built a shrine
with a statue of the Buddha quite near to Dick and his sleeping
bag. Then Arnie lit about twenty candles. I was watching him, at
a loss to see what he was doing other than to create a setting
that would normally appeal to Dick. Arnie rushed out again and
came back with a primus stove and a huge metal crucible in which
he melted lead. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'This,' smiled Arnie, 'is an old recipe for curing
colds.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I nodded. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Every now and then Arnie would throw an apple or a
banana into the molten lead and they rapidly disintegrated into
sparks which filled the room with a pungent smell. Arnie felt he
should now wake Dick but it proved impossible. So Arnie filled a
hypodermic with DMT (N,N-dimethyltryptamine&#151;a very
fast-acting but temporary psychedelic drug which throws the
subject into fantastic realms and renders him incapable of
physical action) and injected Dick in the buttocks. Just as he
was pulling the needle out, Dick sat bolt upright and we watched
him maintain this position rigidly for half an hour while he
swirled through neurological space. When he came round, Arnie fed
him 800 gamma of LSD from a spoon. After about fifteen minutes
Dick turned round and saw the flowing colours of the glass, the
Buddha, and the crucible. He looked at Arnie, who was wearing a
hat with a tassel of bells, like a troll from Ibsen's <i>Peer
Gynt,</i> and who still periodically threw fruit into the molten
lead. As a final measure Arnie put on three separate
record-players simultaneously&#151;a Beethoven symphony, a
Coltrane record, and a Stockhausen record, all at full volume.
Dick seemed to swim in this incredible sonic tidal wave for an
hour. Arnie asked Dick if his cold was any better. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dick smiled: 'It's gone completely.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The wonder was that he was still there after such
drastic treatment, but in fact the cold never returned. We might,
therefore, claim that Arnie had found a cure for the common cold,
but somehow I cannot see his methods being universally adopted by
the medical profession. </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Millbrook was not confined to the activities of
the permanent household. As its name spread we received many
people we admired. As I had been the first person to turn Tim on
to LSD, with what he felt were satisfactory results, I was
usually called upon to act as guide for the special guests.
Several of these had memorable trips. Feliks Topolski got in
touch with me, saying he had heard about me from Alex Trocchi in
London. Feliks had come to New York to do murals in the St. Regis
Hotel and when he arrived at Millbrook we agreed to do a Cook's
Tour of the mind. We went to the upstairs room of the bowling
alley and I decided to concentrate the visual input on colour,
using the projectors to suggest amorphous masses of
undifferentiated tonality. I blended images and sounds and let
Feliks think on them. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Remember: <br>
    The hallucinations which you may now experience, <br>
    The visions and insights, <br>
    Will teach you much about yourself and the world. <br>
    The veil of routine perception will be torn from your eyes. <br>
    Remember the unity of all living things. <br>
    Remember the bliss of the Clear Light.'<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(The
    Tibetan Book of the Dead)</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The session commenced in the late afternoon, and at
one point Tim came into the room with Billy Hitchcock. Not
wishing to disturb Feliks they sat in a corner, talked briefly,
and then left without interfering with Feliks. To Feliks,
however, this seemed like a conspiratorial tête-à-tête, and he
said to me when they'd gone: 'Wow, they're just like gangsters.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our session continued into the early hours of the
next morning and as the first light was being refracted from the
clouds I took Feliks out on to the balcony of the bowling alley.
Just as we stepped outside there was a flash of lightning. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The world is charged with the grandeur of God. <br>
    It will flame out, like shining from shook foil&#133; '<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; (Gerard Manley
    Hopkins, 'God's Grandeur') </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Feliks was stunned. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'My goodness,' he mumbled in his gentle way, 'look
at that.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'Yes,' I smiled, 'we try to do our best for someone
on his first session.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dawn came, and later sunlight filled the entire
room. Another day, another world, had come. We went back on the
balcony, smelling the air, listening to the sounds of the birds,
feeling as if we were being reborn with the day. And as our eyes
were scanning the horizon we saw a car being driven very fast up
the road followed by clouds of dust. The car halted at the
bowling alley and out stepped Arnie, a male friend, and a
girlfriend. They were naked, <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; and painted all over with colourful symbols. One of
Arnie's legs was blue, another green, and looking down I could
make out a painting of a torso on his forehead. All he had on was
a feather in his hair. He brought a flute out of the car and his
friend got a saxophone. Then they started to play and dance at
the same time. It lasted a few minutes and then they got back
into the car and drove off. They came from nowhere, hadn't been
expected, and went away again. Disappeared. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'This was a very vivid hallucination,' Feliks said
to me. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I knew it had not been an hallucination, but had to
question the whole concept of what was real and what unreal at
Millbrook. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Saul Steinberg the cartoonist, who lived in New
York, came up for an LSD session. He was very fond of romantic
composers and I played records of Ravel, Debussy and Chopin. I
laid on some large drawing cards and pencils in case he wanted to
draw, but he didn't. Nor did he want any slides. We used a
downstairs room in the house, and respecting his wishes for as
much solitude as possible, asked the others not to disturb him.
After turning him on I left and looked in every hour or so to see
how he was doing. He was quiet, smiling at the fire, but asked me
to stop the music. He was finding it abrasive and brittle though
this was his normal preference for music. Hours later he came out
on his own and spent some time with our coatimundi, a South
American animal resembling a raccoon. It was a friendly beautiful
animal and it curled up in Saul's lap. He put his finger to its
mouth and it gently rested its teeth on his finger. I sat beside
Saul on the porch for a while, then he went off on his own for a
walk through the woods. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Driving him back to Poughkeepsie for the train to
New York next day, l asked Saul if he had gained anything
permanent from his LSD experience. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'I discovered trees,' he said. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Saul's life was usually spent either in his New
York home or in his little summer house in East Hampton, a select
Long Island bathing resort for the very wealthy. The trees he saw
there seemed desiccated. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'At Millbrook I discovered real trees. I have never
thought about trees before. That was the principal thing I got
from the session.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And sure enough about two months later, on the <i>New
Yorker</i> cover, there was a Steinberg drawing which
featured&#151;a huge tree. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On Monday, April 19, 1965 Paul Krassner came for a
session. Krassner, editor of <i>The Realist</i> and later, with
Abbie Hoffman, founder of the Yippie party, took LSD with me
upstairs in the bowling alley. Krassner later recorded his
experience in <i>The Realist</i> No. 60, June 1965: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'My LSD experience began with a solid hour of what my
    &quot;guide&quot; described as cosmic laughter. The more I
    laughed, the more I tried to think of depressing
    things&#151;specifically, the atrocities being committed in
    Vietnam&#151;and the more wild my laughter became . . . I
    laughed so much I threw up. &nbsp; &nbsp; <br>
    The nearest &quot;outlet&quot; ws a windoe. My hands seemed
    absolutely unable to open it. My guide opened the window with
    ease, and I stuck my head out. Was this a guillotine ? Was he
    to be my executioner ? Such fantasy occurred to me, but I
    trusted him and concentrated instead on the beautiful colours
    of my vomit. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'On the phonograph, the Beatles were singing
    stuff from <i>A Hard Day's Night</i>&#133; I started
    crying&#133; for false joy, it turned out. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'I had seen the film with my wife&#151;we are
    separated&#151;and there was, under LSD, an internal
    hallucination that she had not only helped plan for this
    record to be placed, but, moreover, in doing so, she had
    collaborated with someone she considered a schmuck in order
    to please me.... Filled with gratitude, I decided to call her
    up (the power of positive paranoia), but I <i>also</i>
    decided that she had planned for me to call her up against my
    will.... Then I called&#151;collect, since I was in another
    city. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The operator asked my name. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'I suddenly answered: &quot;Ringo Starr !&quot;
    <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; ' &quot;Do you really want me to say that
    ?&quot; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'I was amazed at my calm, logical response:
    &quot;Of course, operator. It's a private joke between us,
    and it's the only way she'll accept a collect call.&quot; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The operator told my wife Ringo Starr was
    calling collect, and naturally she accepted the call. When I
    explained why I was calling, she told me I was thanking her
    for something she didn't even <i>do.</i> I had been so sure
    I'd <i>communed</i> with her.... ' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Millbrook was music and musicians, too. Charlie
Mingus and I were in the kitchen one evening, high on LSD, and
unaccountably the tap started making yowling sounds followed by
bangs. Charlie got out his bass and played <i>arco</i> in
counter-point to the sound coming from the watertap. He seemed to
know exactly the pattern of the sound. 'I am conducting the
sound,' Charlie told me. 'I've taken it over. I've tuned into the
vibrations and resonate to them.' Millbrook was Charlie Lloyd
playing his flute in the woods. I walked in the woods during the
afternoon following the agitated sound of flute music. And there
was a very high Charles Lloyd playing to a squirrel who jumped
from branch to branch. Charlie performed a flute <i>obligato</i>
which matched and predicted the movements of the animal. It was
as if it was bewitched by the music as it slowed down and
relaxed. It was like watching a Disney film. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Millbrook was Pete La Roca, the drummer, taking LSD
and wanting to play. We hung a sheet from the ceiling and
projected on to it a nine-minute time-lapsed colour film sequence
of a frog embryo. From a black dot in the middle of the screen it
grew into a tadpole and the eyes and head appeared. Pete drummed
in the dark, behind the sheet, providing a rapid pulse that
speeded up at the climax of the film. His wife said she had never
heard him play so fast. He seemed hypnotised by the record of
creation before him. And Steve Swallow, the bass player
associated with Mingus, took LSD and watched one of Arnie
Hendin's photographs of a flower being taken in and out of focus
and mixed with colour filters. I was operating the projector,
when I heard Steve stop playing his bass and groaning 'It's so
beautiful, it's all so beautiful'. Then there was a double crash
as Steve and the bass fell to the floor. He had fainted. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Jazz musicians, psychiatrists, social scientists,
people who were crazy enough to think us crazy. Mediums,
spiritualists, people who had had spontaneous visions, church
ministers. They all came to Millbrook by special appointment. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From my point of view one of the most interesting,
fluent and beautiful visitors was Joan Wainscott, an American
girl in her mid-twenties who had been studying anthropology at
London University. She had acquired a convincing English accent,
very sharp and unbreakable. She told me she was a second-degree
witch in the British Coven of Witches, and that she had spent a
year in Africa living with primitive tribes. Before our LSD
session she told me about witches. She reckoned they were
priestesses of religion who had simply had a bad press down the
centuries. They followed a divine calling. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We chatted one another up and then had our session.
During this I read her 'Gate of the Soft Mystery', the Sex Cakra:
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Valley of life<br>
    Gate of the Soft Mystery<br>
    Beginnings in the lowest place<br>
    Gate of the Soft Mystery <br>
    Gate of the Dark Woman <br>
    Gate of the Soft Mystery <br>
    Seed of all living <br>
    Gate of the Soft Mystery <br>
    Constantly enduring <br>
    Gate of the Soft Mystery <br>
    Use her gently and <br>
    Without the touch of pain.'<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(Tao Sutra 6)</i>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It became obvious that we were going to make love.
We fed each other grapes, and touched each other on the hands and
face. Slowly we merged together in an ecstatic union. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What disasters we did have usually had a comical
aspect. As most of the household had taken LSD anything up to 200
times we did not see fit to store it surreptitiously. For
example, some liquid LSD was poured into a half-empty port bottle
and left on the top floor, usually out-of-bounds to visitors. A
Canadian TV crew came to record a Weekend Experimental Workshop
for a programme called <i>Seven Days on Sunday.</i> The head of
the CBC crew, a large man of about six feet, eight inches, began
to wander about the house on his own. When he saw the bottle of
port, to him a measure of normality in an inscrutable world, he
guzzled down a few slugs. Within twenty-five minutes he was on a
very high LSD trip, something he was not prepared for. We were
sitting in the dining-room when this huge man lumbered in with
one shoe off, his tie half undone, his jacket buttons ripped off,
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; 'his doublet all unbrac'd; <br>
    No hat upon his head; his stockings foul'd <br>
    Ungarter'd and down-gyved to his ankles; <br>
    Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; <br>
    And with a look so piteous in purport <br>
    As if he had been loosed out of hell <br>
    To speak of horrors.'<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    (Shakespeare, <i>Hamlet</i>) </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The weekend visitors found it somewhat
extraordinary that this huge TV producer, ostensibly present to
record the activities with a detached professional eye, should be
stumbling around under the influence of LSD quite incapable of
doing anything. We sat with him through the night, comforting him
and playing music, until he was afraid no longer. In the morning
he was fine. I hope the programme was too. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It is the sudden impact of the unexpected that
causes so many bad trips on LSD. Or any other drugs for that
matter, as I was to discover when I tried JB118 (the space drug)
in an attempt to go as far as possible in mapping the inner
Hebrides. The connection with NASA, who were developing JB118
came quite by chance. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; One morning the telephone rang. It was a Dr. Steve
Groff calling from Miami. As staff hypnotist with NASA he was
interested in the use of psychedelic substances in connection
with astronaut training. He had just come from the space centre
and told me that all the astronauts had taken LSD to prepare
themselves for weightlessness and disorientation due to the lack
of external coordinates from which to take their bearing. Could
he come to Millbrook for a session to see how we were
administering LSD? Could he examine for himself our claim to have
joyful experiences with LSD, a claim in direct contradiction to
the results of sessions taken in clinical psychiatric
surroundings ? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'Of course,' I said. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Groff arrived and I ran the session for him. During
the session he played the Beatles' <i>A Hard Day's Night</i> so
many times that I, as guide, felt it truly <i>was</i> a hard
day's night. Then after he was saturated with the music we took a
walk on the lawn. He told me how he had been in the Olympic
sky-diving team and that the LSD experience had certain
similarities with a free-fall from an airplane. After describing
his sky-diving exploits in some detail he suggested we go to
Poughkeepsie airport to rent a plane. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was easier than I expected. At the airport he
presented his Hertz rentaplane card and his flight licence and
within minutes a small Cessna had been put at his disposal and we
were airborne. As we had no maps we followed the winding road to
Millbrook and flew towards the turreted house where apparently
miniscule Tibetan flags fluttered. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; By this time there were people up on the roof, and
some on the verandah and we were 4000 feet high physically, and
higher still metaphysically, when Groff began to zoom to within
twenty feet of the roof before shooting back into the sky. We did
this about a dozen times and enjoyed seeing friends waving up at
us. It was a strange visceral experience, like going on a huge
roller-coaster on Coney Island. I felt no fear, but enormous
elation and was disappointed when after half an hour Groff
returned the plane to the airport. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Over lunch Dr. Groff told me of his friend Jim
Arender, the former world champion sky-diver. If anyone would
appreciate a session it was Jim. And three days later Jim
arrived, twenty-six, handsome, dynamic. All-American in
appearance but with an un-American interest in astrology. Jim
brought along a movie of himself sky-diving and we showed this to
him backwards during his session by bouncing the images off a
mirror. He was stunned at the correlation between memories of
actual flights and the heights reached during his session. And he
stayed on at Millbrook to repeat the experience many times. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The links made through Dr. Groff with NASA resulted
in us obtaining some JB118, the space drug officially on the
secrets list. Dick and I volunteered to try it and remarked that
it looked as if we were becoming the guinea pigs for NASA and the
CIA. We went to the recording room and when Dick sat down on the
couch I took up the lotus position on the floor. We ingested the
drug and waited for the slight change in body metabolism one
associates with LSD. But wham ! ! ! ! This took effect instantly
in the somatic sensory areas. I felt myself moving round the room
in leaping acrobatic backward somersaults. I could not prevent
this, yet I was not hitting any of the electronic equipment in
the room. I was spinning round and round the centre of the room
gliding past everything. I had the absolute conviction that I was
in a small space capsule about the size of a tennis ball and that
I had broken loose from the safety-belts. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I felt alarmed and sensed a paranoic antipathy to
whoever had been careless enough to put me in the capsule in such
a dangerous way. Suddenly a door in the capsule opened and Whoosh
! ! ! ! I was sucked out and down towards the atmosphere,
hurtling down an air corridor, free-falling, able to move any way
but upwards. Observers said that all the time I was spreadeagled
on the floor, lying on my stomach. But I remember a horrific
sensation and suddenly there was a lurch and I stood up. It
seemed a parachute had opened just a foot before I hit the
earth's surface. Yet it had broken my fall. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I wanted to fly again and I was a crow. I started
to caw and flap my arms. <i>Caw! Caw-caw!</i> My eyes were
tightly closed and I knew what it was to be a bird. I started to
hop around the house, pegged my way downstairs and into the
dining-room. With my eyes still tightly shut I touched people to
see who they were, let my blackfeathered wings brush over human
faces. And still I didn't bump into anything. With my eyes closed
I steered my way through the house several times. Through doors.
Through corridors. Through passages. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Eventually I was coaxed back upstairs with a piece
of bread as bait and I nested militantly until I finally evolved
back into a man and came round. The whole trip had lasted three
hours. Dick had sat on the couch for the duration of the trip. He
told me his experience was fantastic. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The first thing I saw was this young chick coming in. She
    was beautiful with long dark hair. She had a glass in her
    hand and asked me if I would like some grapejuice. I said
    yes. She put a glass on the floor and proceeded to fill it
    with grapejuice until it overflowed and then a red trickle of
    grapejuice moved across the floor, up the side of the
    opposite wall, along the ceiling, down the wall near me, on
    to the floor again, and towards the couch. I had to get up as
    it threatened to pass over me. I managed to avoid it and it
    got back into the glass. It was utterly real.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I agreed. This JB118 drug made hallucinations
palpably real. LSD gave a sense of bliss and oneness with life.
JB118 was a solid slab of hallucinatory experience that offered
nothing for the traveller to bring back to the real world. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Even more extraordinary, if we indulge our
empirical prejudices for a moment, was the experience of Alan
Eager and Arnie Hendin on the space drug. They went on an
identical trip and were aware of doing so all the time. Like me
they were pulled into the vacuum of space and moved freely above
the blue curvature of the earth. They saw a little dot
approaching them and noticed, when it came closer, that it was a
space-craft, with the hammer-and-sickle on the side. As it
floated towards them they clung to the side and saw two Russian
cosmonauts inside the craft. The men saw Arnie and Alan and
seemed frightened. So agitated did they become that Arnie and
Alan decided to float away on their own and eventually they
returned to earth in Millbrook. Next day, March 19, 1965, it was
reported that the Soviet Voskhod 2, containing cosmonauts Pavel
Belyayev and Alexei Leonov, had encountered difficulties in
reentry. On their first attempt to do so their automatic re-entry
system failed and the Voskhod 2 pilots had to make an extra orbit
and then bring the spacecraft back to earth themselves. This
change in landing site meant a long wait in the winter cold
before rescue helicopters located them.... As few of us at
Millbrook took much interest in current news it is doubtful if
either Arnie or Alan had heard of this flight. They were sure
they had not read about it prior to taking the space drug and
firmly maintained that the delay in re-entry had been caused by
the panic of the cosmonauts in seeing them. We await confirmation
from the Soviet Union. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Alan and Arnie were to take another sort of trip,
this time through the heartlands of America. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'In New York we set up a centre in a large townhouse with
    a full working theatre in the basement, bought a roomful of
    divers musical instruments and opened another chapter in the
    history of psychedelia. In reaction to the programmed
    existence at Millbrook, a constant party developed which
    continued nonstop for months. Many of the Millbrook tribe
    would visit with us on their days off to play and learn.
    After a while we got restless. There were too many people
    around and it got repetitious and dull. We decided to take a
    trip. It was very cold in New York. I was shooting a lot of
    DMT&#133; at that time a smoking form had not been
    discovered. Arnie, Cathy, Simba the Siamese cat and me, plus
    guitar, soprano sax, pocket coronet, phono, records,
    psychedelic magic kit and a suitcase of drugs piled in the
    white Alfa and headed for warmer territory. The <i>I Ching</i>
    might have suggested it, I think. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The total picture we gave freaked out every
    cop south of the Mason-Dixon line and we were busted every
    time Arnie drove. (From the driving seat that is&#133; we all
    drove at once which can be very tricky sometimes but taking a
    trip while tripping is another trip&#151;if you know what I
    mean.) Arnie and I were in costume, he looking like Jesus,
    but in baseball pants, high sneakers, beads, etc., which is
    quite the mode now&#133; in '64 it was extraordinary and
    worth a hundred gamma just to look at it. When he would add
    extra touches to his gear like those kid space-helmets we
    wouldn't get half a mile before a cop would see us go by and
    flip. No harm . . . we were always released very quickly.
    Arnie, in his best prophet manner, would promise
    interrogating police chiefs fire and flood unless we were
    released at once. It always worked.... He's a fine magician.
    Our clothing was a time trip and it caused short circuits in
    robot people. Although we ate in all types of restaurants we
    were never asked to wear ties or jackets. Mainly, I think,
    because it never occurred to them. It would have been like
    asking an Eskimo to wear a tie. After a few days' travelling
    we had it worked out pretty well. Anything we needed from the
    establishment would be gotten by Cathy as she had a fairly
    straight appearance. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'We had gotten into warm weather and we
    travelled and explored all over the countryside on and off
    the roads&#133; cutting across fields and meadows and
    treating the Alfa as if it were a Land Rover; stopping at our
    slightest whim. Antique stores, underground caverns&#133;
    far-out little towns with one gas pump the man cranked,
    little stores that sold penny candy in glass jars and had
    spittoons that were used. Rural America almost unchanged in
    fifty years. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'In Charleston we checked into the bridal suite
    of the Holiday Inn, had supper in our room (preferable to
    going out) and after bathing proceeded to set up shop. Out
    came the incense, candles, bottles, India prints, mirrors,
    toys, comics, phonograph, musical instruments, movie camera,
    fireworks (we had bought $100 worth a few hours before),
    magic kit and the drugs. We had everything but grass&#133;
    the brown rice of drugs. Arnie tried to score some from our
    coloured bellhop but his mind had been whitewashed. He
    brought us a bottle of vodka which we duly set in place
    unopened. We had about thirty-five caps of beige acid which
    we hadn't tried yet. We each took a cap. As it came on we saw
    it was good and took a few more. We were feeling great and
    proceeded to get married. We had bought funny fake marriage
    licences which we signed with our other names; Vazy McKoops,
    Ring, Hank and the Cat Paw Print. We kissed, danced, lit
    roman candles off the balcony and sparklers inside, which
    Arnie photographed in the candlelight. We danced and drew
    arabesques with them, and I drew a showering sparkler out of
    the bell of the golden soprano. We were flying ! <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'I took some more caps. Arnie followed. We were
    travelling very fast now. The speed of sound (all motion is
    relative) at least. Again we took some more caps and now
    really started to move. We were at a rate that was so
    glorious that we decided to add a little JB840 to it. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'I went out into the hall and got some Coke.
    Then instead of putting a normal dose in a glass, overcome,
    we poured three-quarters of a bottle of JB118 into the glass
    and drank. Suddenly, violently, and with a sickening lurch we
    were moving faster than light. I fell back on the bed and had
    a vision of a Roman or Etruscan warrior holding a sword to my
    stomach. It was no vision. I knew it was real. We had
    poisoned ourselves. Death was here. Real Death. I remembered
    and gave in surrendering to it. A pain lanced through my
    right side and my convulsive gasps stopped. BLACKNESS. And
    then pinpoints of light in the stygian dark. I realised the
    lights were stars and we were moving through the very edge of
    our solar system at some unknown speed, but without the
    feeling of movement. Then to the front of my mind, I sensed
    an alien intelligence. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'Curious, I probed further, trying to contact
    it, when it started a mind-probe in an area it thought empty
    of life it tripped every alarm in my nervous system and body.
    I could feel my body on earth panicking, ready to explode
    with terror. I had to withdraw the mind-probe and take care
    of my terror-struck earth body. My mind came and, carefully,
    slowly, I began to turn off the alarms and unlock the
    muscles, sinews and nerves, calm and soothe the glands and
    get my body back to normal. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'As I was working I realised through visions in
    another part of my mind, that all of us on earth are remnants
    of other races and civilisations from various solar systems
    seeded into earth bodies for a reason not yet revealed. I had
    been from this solar system originally and had been a
    galactic ambassador, quite used to dealing with other
    cultures. Arnie was not of this universe originally, and I
    vaguely saw his shape as it had been; huge, swift and
    somehow, feline&#133; fifteen feet tall, five tons and
    covered with golden fur. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'I opened my eyes, candlelight flickered, and
    the Holiday Inn took shape. Then a silent screaming came into
    my mind. It was on the edge of sanity driven there by fear.
    It was Arnie, Arnie the Great, The Prophet, Magician, Seer,
    Artist, Arnie was flipping out. I tried to lock my mind on to
    his, but he was so frightened, his mind was like greasy
    Jello. I couldn't hold on, so I followed, and when it would
    stop for an instant, I would hover and try to coax him back.
    It would have been all right, but Cathy didn't understand.
    She was trying to help vocally, and every sonic vibration
    only drove him further out. It was horrible! Arnie was
    moaning and flickering in and out of reality, sanity pain and
    dimension. I finally took Cathy to the next room and made her
    promise to remain silent, but she has a very strong mind and,
    when she began thinking of medical help, I couldn't block her
    thoughts completely. Soon Arnie began to think for help. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'After a time I gave up and called the desk for
    a doctor. Less than three hours had passed when we started
    and we were still very high to say the least&#133; plus
    slightly in shock. The doctor after a game attempt to get
    Arnie hospitalised, reluctantly gave him a mild sedative.
    After several stern reminders from me that he was a doctor,
    not a judge, he finally left, radiating disapproval. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'After a few more eons&#151;earth time, about
    an hour&#151;Arnie fell asleep. By then it was dawn. We were
    asked to leave soon after. When Arnie awoke, we moved to the
    nearest motel (a block away I think) and ate in bed rather
    quietly and slept till the next day. When we awoke we ate
    some more, discussed the dumb doctor, and the strange
    intelligence we had encountered, took stock of our drugs (we
    had thrown out all of the JB), and packed, giving all the
    fireworks to a bellhop as Arnie was afraid he would set them
    off mentally. We were quite down from the experience so we
    each took two capsules (Cathy wasn't having any), and I drove
    us out of Charleston through spiral type buildings, heading
    south, the top down. By the time we were out of the
    DMT-coloured city-limits and on the open road, we were
    feeling normally glorious. The car purred, the cat slept, and
    overhead the most tremendous, white thunderhead in a
    purple-rose sky formed a glorious paean to earth and the
    future and we sped into the technicolour southern dusk.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Probably the most highly-publicised feature of our
work at Millbrook was the Weekend Experiential Workshop. These
were held on alternate weekends when some fifteen guests would
arrive at 7.30 on Friday evening and leave on Sunday afternoon.
The idea was to simulate the LSD experience by means of Hindu and
Buddhist yogic traditions, Gestalt therapy, Gurdjieff's
selfawareness training, and Psychedelic Theatre techniques. We
wanted to use all the means at our disposal to provide a
nonchemical means of transcendence. Our handout advertising the
Experiential Workshops outlined three steps to take to the ideal
of maximum awareness and internal freedom: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The first step is the realisation that there is more:
    that man's brain, his thirteen-billion-celled computer, is
    capable of limitless new dimensions of awareness and
    knowledge. In short that man does not use his head. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The second step is the realisation that you
    have to go out of your mind to use your head; that you have
    to pass beyond everything you have learned in order to become
    acquainted with the new areas of consciousness. Ignorance of
    this fact is the veil which shuts man within the narrow
    confines of his acquired, artifactual concepts of
    &quot;reality&quot;, and prevents him from coming to know his
    own true nature. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The third step (once the first two
    realisations have taken place) is the practical theoretical.
    How can consciousness be expanded? What is the range of
    possibilities outside of our current verbal-cognitive models
    of experience? What light do the new insights perhaps most
    important, how can the new levels of awareness be maintained
    ?' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was to provide the answers implied in the third
step that the weekend workshops in consciousness-expansion were
instituted by the Castalia Foundation. We noted carefully in our
brochure that 'because of the complicated current legal situation
in the United States, psychedelic drugs will not be used in these
workshops'. This did not prevent many visitors from asking us for
drugs but we had to protect ourselves by refusing these paying
guests. Several guests, wise to our methods, took LSD before
arriving but that was not officially our affair. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The vulgarisation of these weekends commenced at an
early stage. In an article in the New York <i>Sunday News</i> of
August 29, 1965, beneath a banner headline asking ARE THEY OUT OF
THEIR MIND ? and suggesting 'You might call these sect members a
bunch of weirdos', the article noted: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'On alternative weekends they are joined by ten to fifteen
    paying guests recruited by direct mail and word of mouth.
    Most are middle-class professionals&#151;teachers, doctors,
    psychologists, students. The fee of $75 a person or $125 a
    couple includes plain home-cooking and a mattress on the
    floor.... There is no happy hour of cocktail chatter.
    Instead, each guest is escorted silently to a box-like room
    in the old servant's wing and left there for an hour to
    meditate. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The rooms are decorated with madras hangings,
    wall-sized paintings of Buddha, a collage of words and images
    collected from a psychedelic fantasy, or religious posters
    from India. The only furniture besides the mattress may be a
    lamp, a bookcase or a writing table.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Such succinct details suggest the guests were
paying for a self-imposed ascetic exercise in hardship, but it
was nothing of the kind. The money from the workshops paid for
oil-heating bills and food, and helped to secure a
self-supporting community for the weekends. The Castalia
Foundation, after all, was a non-profit corporation. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Before the guests arrived on the Friday the guides,
of which I was one, would prepare spiritually by taking LSD or
pot and would reflect on the imaginative possibilities of
Millbrook. The house would be completely silent and the guests
were met by a beautiful girl in a sari holding a flower and
giving out copies of Max Picard's text on silence: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Silence has greatness simply because it is&#133;<br>
    It is and that is its greatness, its pure existence&#133; <br>
    There is no beginning to silence and no end&#133;<br>
    Man does not put silence to the test, silence puts man to the
    test&#133;<br>
    Silence contains everything within itself; it is not waiting
    for<br>
    anything, it is always wholly present in itself and
    completely<br>
    fills out the space in which it appears&#133;<br>
    Silence is original and self-evident, like the other basic
    phenomena, like love and liberty and death and life
    itself&#133;<br>
    And there is more silence than speech in them, more of the
    invisible than the visible&#133;<br>
    There is also more silence in one person than can be used in
    a single human life&#133; ' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This observation of silence had two reasons. First,
as Tim said, 'One of the oldest methods of getting high is
silence.' Secondly, it allowed us to impose an essential mood
that saved the time of the visitors. For the first workshop we
had welcomed the guests with a cocktail party, to break the ice,
and the straights immediately plunged into the cocktail party
game of which they were the experts. 'Hi, I'm Jack Smith from
Denver, who are you?' 'Jack Smith, eh?' And so on. The whole
evening had been wasted, and as we were novices in the cocktail
party game we were completely flattened. The guests were merely
putting an extra spin on their social whirl, while the household
was brought down by the experience. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In instituting the idea of silence we wanted to
impress on the guests that they were entering a new kingdom. That
they were tuning out of their everyday 'normal' world and turning
on to ours. Passing through the gates of Millbrook had to be like
stepping on to a spacecraft&#151;they had to leave behind them
all their usual judgements and normative expectations. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Having welcomed them with silence we gave each
guest MESSAGE ONE which requested absolute silence and asked them
to look, listen, to non-verbal energy and <i>experience directly.</i>
With the initial ambiance established we took each guest to a
separate small room on the ground floor and gave them three more
messages to read in solitude: </p>

<p> <center>MESSAGE TWO</center> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This period of silence is designed to help you
clear your mind from routine thoughts and to encourage an opening
of your awareness in several ways. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Please follow this programme: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 1. Fill out the question sheet. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 2. Then spend the next ten to twenty minutes trying
to meditate. Focus on the candle and see if you can turn off
planning and thinking. Concentrate on the moment-to-moment flow
of time. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 3. After ten to twenty minutes turn on the light
and read MESSAGE THREE. This is your game contract for the
weekend. There are many implications and meanings contained in
each paragraph. Read it carefully. Make note of any questions or
comments. These will be taken up later. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After reading MESSAGE THREE, then re-read it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 4. Turn off the light and meditate again for
fifteen minutes. Watch how your mind keeps interrupting. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 5. Next, turn on the light and read MESSAGE FOUR. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 6. Wait serenely until you are contacted by a staff
member. Be aware of your body, your flow of thoughts, your
emotion (you may be bored, or feel rejected, or irritated; you
may be excited, hopeful, etc.). </p>

<p> <center>MESSAGE THREE <br>
&quot;HOW TO PLAY THE 'EXPERIENTAL WORKSHOP GAME' &quot;</center>
</p>

<p> <i>What Do We Mean by Game?</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A game is a temporary social arrangement with the
following characteristics: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; goals, roles, rules, strategies, space and time
limits, values, rituals. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All of these characteristics of any game are
subject to revision. Ecstatogenic games are voluntary and the
contract explicit. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; You have been invited to participate in the
&quot;Experiential Workshop Game&quot; during your stay at
Millbrook. This means you are a three-day member of a social
system which in some ways may be novel to you. This contract is
designed to lessen your &quot;culture shock&quot; and aims to set
up a memorable weekend. </p>

<p> <i>Goals</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 1. To communicate and exchange ideas about
consciousness <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; and its expansion and control. Relevant <i>theories</i>
about consciousness-expansion will be
discussed&#151;neurological, philosophic, religious,
psychological, oriental. A wide variety of <i>methods</i> will
also be reviewed. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 2. To employ several of these methods during the
weekend, to expand the consciousness of participants and to
maintain as high a level of ecstasy as possible. </p>

<p> <i>Roles</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; While there are many roles involved in running such
an enterprise, in this contract we are solely concerned with the
roles involved in the visitor game. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The roles which have been most comfortable to you
and of which are of most use to you in your regular life will be
of lessened utility here and, indeed, may handicap you. The aim
of the workshop is to get out beyond your routine robot
consciousness. Thus there is little interest in who you are
(were) and much more concern with where and how far you can go.
What you can obtain during the weekend depends in part on how
much of your routine ego you can leave in your room. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; . . . Why don't you check it in your suitcase ? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <i>Staff roles.</i> Around ten people will be
present during the weekend whose job is to facilitate the goals
of the seminar. Their functions are assigned and scheduled. <i>Visitor
roles.</i> In general, the actions of visitors are addressed
towards the two goals of the seminar: i.e. to learn as much as
possible about the theories and methods of
consciousness-expansion and to put this knowledge into practice.
It is assumed that each visitor is here because of his past
experiences and his current interest in consciousness-expansion.
It is hoped that you can contribute any special knowledge you
have when it seems relevant. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <i>The Seeking Help Role.</i> This is not a
psychotherapeutic situation and the doctor-patient game is not
played. Personal problems cannot, therefore, become the focus of
discussion. </p>

<p> <i>Rules</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 1. Be aware of and try to minimise the attempt of
your robot to capture audiences for its personal dramas. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 2. Please obey the laws of the land. In particular
do not bring marijuana or any other illegal chemical to the
weekend workshop. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 3. Visitors are asked to maintain their own room
during their stay. </p>

<p> <i>Strategies</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The ecstatic-psychedelic experience can be reached
by several means: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; intellectual <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; emotional <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; bodily movement <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; sexual <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; somatic-sensory <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; One of the aims of the workshop is to encourage
expansion of consciousness in all five of these functions in some
sort of balanced harmony. (Consciousness-expansion in the sexual
will be limited to indirect methods.) Since the average person
quickly falls into habitual and stereotyped modes of
awareness&#151;mental, emotional, physical, sexual, and
instinctive&#151;the weekends are designed to produce novel
experiences which deliberately &quot;break through&quot; these
stereotypes. If you feel yourself reacting with shock or outrage
at the challenge to your favourite habits, please remember that
this sort of friction probably points to an under-development of
some function and is a challenge for growth. For the same reason,
do not concentrate only on one of these methods of
consciousness-expansion. Take advantage of this opportunity to
expand consciousness at all levels. </p>

<p> <i>Space Factors</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After a while one of the staff will show you around
the house and grounds. During your leisure time you are free to
use any areas except for the third floor (which is residential)
and the kitchen, except during breakfast period. </p>

<p> <i>Time Factors</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The schedule of programmes will be announced.
Consult a staff member about additions and revisions to the
schedule and about leisure play. </p>

<p> <i>Values</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; According to the &quot;game model&quot;, values are
specific to the particular game and hold only for the defined
spacetime limits of the game. In the ecstatic game, the
&quot;goodness&quot; or greatness of your robot performance is of
lessened importance. Each person starts each second with a fresh
neurological slate. &quot;Good&quot; is what raises the ecstasy
count of all persons present and &quot;bad&quot; is what lowers
the ecstasy count. </p>

<p> <i>Mythic Context</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; While any human behaviour sequence can be seen as
unique and original, another illuminating perspective can be
obtained by recognising that certain classic human games are
continually being re-enacted and that any social situation you
find yourself in is a current version of an ancient drama. The
question is not How does it turn out? (that is probably
pre-ordained by the script and the role) but rather, How well do
you play your part ? and, How conscious are you of your role at
each moment ? and, How can you change your my/this game? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Millbrook Workshops are clearly a re-enactment
of one of the oldest and most ambitious games&#151;the
transcendental game, expansion of consciousness, internal
exploration, ecstatic discovery. Our endeavours here are
descended from and indebted to those groups of explorers in
India, Persia, China, Greece and to their current western
counterparts. </p>

<p> <i>Rituals</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The creation of consciousness-expansion experiences
usually involves rituals&#151;some of which are directly
practical, others of which are designed to evoke mood or
readiness to change. The use of certain rituals (candles,
mandalas, pictures, incense, etc.) is strictly experimental and
does not involve any commitment to sectarian systems on the part
of staff members or visitors.' </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Finally MESSAGE FOUR reiterated the five most
important areas of consciousness accessible to the average
person&#151;intellectual, emotional, body movement,
somatic-sensory, sexual&#151;and requested the visitor to spend
the next ten minutes reviewing his stereotyped methods of
awareness in each of these five areas. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Naturally many of the visitors were overwhelmed by
reading MESSAGE THREE in solitude, and there was always one guest
each weekend who would decide&#151;in silence&#151;that the
experience was going to be too much. 'They think they have fallen
into the hands of a mad scientist,' Tim used to say, 'and that's
when we hear them creeping down the back stairs and screeching
out of the driveway.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Those who stayed on would be divided into groups of
five and taken by their appointed guide for a walk in the woods
by candlelight. We walked silently in Indian file, then returned
to the oak-panelled library for a lecture by Tim or Dick or Ralph
or myself. We outlined and discussed our philosophic and
methodological ideas and hoped that the guests would sleep on
them. For some sleep was rather difficult as they tried to
anticipate what was to come. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Saturday morning breakfast was a food game.
Everyone had to be up at 7:30 for Ralph Metzner's yoga session,
including instructions on sitting in the full lotus and
half-lotus positions, standing on the head, and eliminating the
doubting fly of the mind. After this Ralph took them to the
kitchen for breakfast (where a cupboard door bore the legend
'Take LSD and See') and let them look at it for a while. He had
reversed the visual connotations of all the food. The scrambled
eggs were green, the porridge was purple or bright orange, the
milk was black. As the guests sat down to eat Ralph would say: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Our ideas dictate to us what we imagine reality to be.
    And we are very much affected by the imprints we have,
    particularly those of colour associations. When someone says <i>sky</i>,
    we think of blue, when someone says meadow we think of green,
    when someone says <i>scrambled eggs</i> we think of yellow.
    But this is a mental hangup. It doesn't really make any
    difference whether scrambled eggs are green as they are
    today, or whether they are yellow. Why is this ? All of these
    colour changes were achieved by a non-toxic, odourless,
    tasteless vegetable dye and as you are eating your green
    scrambled eggs and drinking your glass of black milk try to
    reconcile in your mind the different subjective responses
    that you have, and notice how your brain deals with this
    input.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Needless to say Ralph always took the precaution of
eating before the visitors and he would sit and observe their
attempts to appreciate the anti-food. Hardly any visitor got
through this breakfast and, as well as having a mental impact,
this method of serving food cut down our weekend budget as we
only needed to offer very small portions. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The rest of the morning was spent in sweeping up
the parquet floors, and in relaxed preparation for the simulated
session. In the afternoon I would take groups to the waterfall
where, submerged in the gently churning water at the bottom of
the fall, I had a bottle of sherry on a string. As my group stood
looking at the waterfall I would slowly pull this piece of
string, finally revealing the sherry bottle. I also had a box of
glasses hidden in the bushes flanking the waterfall. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After spending some time in the woods we went back
for the evening meal, taken in the huge dining-room where guests
sat crosslegged or knelt on cushions around a circular table
raised six inches above the ground. From this room, dominated by
the massive fireplace, great windows offered a view of the front
lawns. There was an oak-panelled ceiling, a carpetless parquet
floor, and sliding doors which led off into the corridor. The
meal was simple brown rice or wheat and fruit. Hiziki soaked in
water. Baked pumpkin. Aduki beans and onion. And our own bread
baked from roast corn flour, water-salt, and sautéed vegetables.
The meal itself was a yoga. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Once the guests were seated, the mantra OM was
chanted by Tim, followed by a suitable period of silence. Then a
little bell would ring and a disembodied message would be relayed
into the room: 'With the next mouthful of food contemplate on the
wonders of the body: where this food goes, how it is digested,
how it is transformed into energy, into you. Think carefully as
you chew the next mouthful.' </p>

<blockquote>
    <p><br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'Observe your body <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Mandala of the universe <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Observe your body <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Of ancient design <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Holy temple of consciousness <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Central stage of the oldest drama </p>
</blockquote>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Observe its structured wonders <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; skin <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; hair <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; tissues <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; blood <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; bone <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; vein <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; muscle <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; net of nerve </p>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Observe its message.' <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(Tao Sutra 24)</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After the meal we took the guests to a long
darkened room at the back, the session room. It was dominated by
mirrors and a huge mandala painted on the ceiling. I always felt
conscious of the wood panelling and felt that at times it was
like being in a cigar box. All around were mattresses covered
with Indian prints. Slide projectors were humming in the dark.
Six speakers were linked to a tape recorder so that we could get
circular sound. Several pre-programmed movie projectors were
ready. I would then say: 'This is not a show, not something
outside yourself. We, for our part, will experience some of the
same things as you. This is a teaching device. All of us in the
household have been engaged in psychedelic work for a number of
years and we have developed methods of duplicating the world we
see on these trips. We want you to share some of these methods of
seeing inner space. We want you to go out of your minds and into
your heads.' And I would read: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 'Let there be simple, natural things to contact
during the session &#151;</p>

<blockquote>
    <p><br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; hand-woven cloth <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; uncarved wood <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; flowers&#151;growing things <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; ancient music <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; burning fire <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; a touch of earth <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; a splash of water <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; fruit, good bread, cheese <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; fermenting wine <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; candlelight <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; temple incense <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; a warm hand <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; fish swimming <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; anything which is over<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; five hundred years
    old <br>
    Of course it is always best to be secluded with nature.' <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(Tao Sutra 19)</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In an instant, from all sides, came an electric
bombardment of sound and image including many of the images used
in the Psychedelic Theatre: the US flag, Buddha, the frog embryo,
amorphous colours. A voice would spin from speaker to speaker
saying:</p>

<blockquote>
    <p><br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'That which is called ego-death is coming to
    you <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Remember: <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; This is now the hour of death and rebirth; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Take advantage of this temporary death to
    obtain the perfect <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; State&#151; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Enlightenment. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Concentrate on the unity of all living beings. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Hold on to the Clear Light. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Use it to attain understanding and love.' <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(The Tibetan Book of the Dead)</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then there would be silence and darkness relieved
only by candlelight. Watching the perplexity on some faces I
thought how strange it was that modern Americans should find
something strange in a technique that had been used for thousands
of years in one form or other. It was clear that the one who
resisted the experience needed a new morality, a set of natural
harmonious rules to follow as they spun off into neurological
space. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; They sat, some responsive, some astounded by the
assault on their senses. Just as they were becoming accustomed to
the candlelight, the stroboscope would start making multiple
divisions of light, hitting the retina in a staccato burst and
forcing chemical changes. By now the whole concept of
environmental reality had been altered. We encouraged the guests
to walk around in the flickering movement-stopping light. As a
body moved in the stroboscopic light it looked like a series of
still photographs being crudely animated. Guests who tried to
dance in the light were reduced to chaos because they could not
coordinate with their apprehension of their partner's movements.
Abruptly the strobe was stopped and we saw only the candles,
their light weaving in the warm air of human breath. Slowly the
room was bathed in yellow which is the colour of the Root <i>Cakra</i>
which we reinforced with Tibetan chanting music. After twenty
minutes the Water <i>Cakra</i> would be played on the
tape-recorder: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Can you lie quietly <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; engulfed <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; in the fierce slippery union <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; of male and female ? <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Warm wet dance of engeration ? <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Endless ecstasies of couples ?&#133; <br>
    Can you feel the coiled serpent writhing <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; While birds sing ? <br>
    Become two cells merging <br>
    Slide together in molecule embrace <br>
    Can you, murmuring <br>
    Lose <br>
    All fusing.'</p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Twenty minutes after this came the Sex <i>Cakra</i>
when the room would be suffused in a pale silvery light and we
thought of the energies surrounding our sexual feelings. Ravi
Shankar music would dissolve into a Caribbean bossanova and we
watched slides of men and women in the act of love. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; So on to the Heart <i>Cakra.</i> Colour of red
fire. The room bathed in crimson light. Music by Scriabin and
Miles Davis and Bach. And the sound of a child's heartbeat. Then
the Throat <i>Cakra:</i> blue bubbles of air. Debussy, Indian
music, Japanese flute music. Finally the Head <i>Cakra</i> with
Stockhausen and the sounds of outer space. Slides of the stars
and galaxies would edge around the room. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At the end of this timeless session we would bring
the visitors back, carefully prepare them for re-entry: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; 'As you return <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Remember to choose consciously <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Power is the heavy stone wrenched <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; from your garden of tenderness <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Virtue is the heavy stone crushing your
    innocence </p>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; What can be learned <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; From nature is <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Harmony <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Therefore&#151; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Shun the social <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Cuddle the elemental <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Avoid angles, lie with the round <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Shun plastic, conspire with seed <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Do no good <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; But <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; For God's sake <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Feel good <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; And <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Nature's order will prevail' <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; <i>(Tao Sutra 3)</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Undoubtedly many of our visitors obtained genuine
spiritual edification from these simulated sessions, though it is
my experience that they can never be a substitute for the
sacrament of LSD. For their money they had been changed in some
ways. Even those who did not seek change had access to the
Millbrook facilities of seminar rooms, meditation house, forest
paths, the lake for swimming, vegetable gardens, art and
photographic libraries, music and book libraries with an
extensive section on Eastern Philosophy, and our library of tape
lectures and experiential films. Some were astounded at what they
found. Those willing to drop the sensation-seeking game had an
insight into the religious aims of Millbrook. Though many members
of the public who might have been otherwise willing to open
themselves to the experience were alienated by lurid press
reports of which the following, from <i>The Charlotte Observer,</i>
is typical: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'A quick belt of whisky from the suitcase improves things
    considerably. OM. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; ' &quot;I am Michael Hollingshead,&quot; says
    the man in the doorway, half an hour later. He is tall,
    thirty-ish, baldish, with cold, cruel grey eyes. &quot;I am
    your guide for the weekend. Will you follow me?&quot; He has
    an English accent and a soft voice of sinister authority. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'Down the hall (OM OM OM) down the stairs.
    Outside four people gather silently in the back of a battered
    Land Rover: two women and two men, one of them an egg-bald
    bespectacled young man from Ottawa. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;'Right now we're in the period of
    silence,&quot; says Hollingshead. &quot;First we'll go for a
    little drive, then a little walk, then dinner.&quot; He
    drives along a track through dusk-hushed woods, then out into
    a field and stops at a pond&#133; Hollingshead produces a
    bottle of cocktail sherry and paper cups. Dusk deepens. The
    pond is covered with a film of green growth, which creeps. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; ' &quot;Is the period of silence over ?&quot;
    asks the poison ivy woman, emboldened by sherry. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; ' &quot;Not for you,&quot; says Hollingshead
    with a little smile. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The drive continues through the woods and
    fields, then back to the house&#133; Timothy Leary enters and
    sits. He is tall, forty-five, handsome, barefoot, a dentist's
    son, the father of three: a boy, a girl, and the psychedelic
    movement&#133; Leary talks&#133; The reason psychedelic
    experiences are important and valuable is that people live
    their lives by their own &quot;chess-boards&quot;, playing
    the lawyer-game, the merchant-game, or some rule-ridden
    ego-game, rarely if ever expanding their consciousness to the
    point of true awareness and understanding of man and nature,
    including themselves. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'He demonstrates: Susan Leary and Hollingshead
    enact a short skit, she as a wife asking her overworked
    husband to take a holiday, he as a school principal firing a
    teacher. Their chessboards do not match; they do not
    understand each other&#133; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The appearance of things around Castalia's
    baroque bastion indicates a certain abandonment of modern
    survival values&#133; No particular concern is shown for the
    house&#133; Castalians are above the landed-gentry game.
    Furniture is not important to them&#133; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'The woodwork and windows need washing, the old
    parquet floors need polish&#133; the dogs&#133; anoint the
    porch at will&#133; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 'An air of sad decline pervades the house, like
    a Rolls-Royce being used as a dump truck.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The fact that the local press had praised our work
in maintaining the house and improving the lawns and planting
three acres of corn and vegetables is beside the point. Like so
many people, that reporter looked without seeing, listened
without hearing, calculated without thinking. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had been a guide for invited guests, a guide for
paying visitors, and after taking so many people on an internal
journey I felt it might be time to do the same in other
countries. Mark Twain said that 'Guides cannot master the
subtleties of the American joke', and though he was not thinking
of a psychedelic guide, he had a point. There were too many
American jokers doing injustices to Millbrook. One of the
greatest guides, Virgil, says to a Dante tormented by frightening
phenomena </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; 'But, as for thee, I think and deem it well <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Thou take me for thy guide, and pass with me <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Through an eternal place&#133; ' <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; (<i>Inferno,</i> Canto 1, tr. Dorothy Sayers)</p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And Dante passes through a hell which in its
realistic aspects corresponds closely to the unenlightened daily
life. It is the desire of the guide to take his voyager to
paradise. As guide to many travellers I have taken them out of
their hell and offered them at least a temporary glimpse of
paradise. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The role of the psychedelic guide is new in our society,
    but the newness of the role should not blind us to the
    antiquity of its precedents. Priest and shaman, after all,
    were the first purveyors of its technique. Seer and sibyl
    mapped the cosmography of its domain. Perhaps the finest of
    its precedents is to be found in the figure of Virgil in
    Dante's <i>Divine Comedy</i>.... It should be one of the
    chief tasks of the guide to assume the role of Virgil in this
    chemically-induced Divine Comedy and to help the subject
    select out of the wealth of phenomena among which he finds
    himself some of the more promising opportunities for
    heightened insight, awareness and integral understanding that
    the guide knows to be available in the psychedelic
    experience. [R. E L. Masters and Jean Houston, <i>op. cit.,</i>
    p. 130f.] </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I guided Leary and Alpert through their first
trips. I guided the authors of the above passage through theirs.
I acted as guide to Krassner, Topolski, Steinberg, Mingus, Steve
Groff and dozens more. None had bad experiences. None returned
with distaste for the spiritual or natural worlds. I endorse the
ideal of the guide as Virgil, though could not claim to be an
ideal guide. At the most I could claim to be conscious of my
subject's creativity and that, in itself, is a step on the road
to paradise. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And so I felt it to be time to take to the road
again myself. By September 1965 I felt that the Experiential
Workshops had been stimulating and often extremely successful. I
felt satisfied with our work in New York developing the
Psychedelic Theatre. Americans, the sensitive ones, were
responding to the wonderful implications of LSD. Artists and
scientists were admitting they could learn from mind expansion.
LSD was becoming quite popular with a growing number of people
and, in addition to the black market supply emanating from the
West Coast, two very devoted student alchemists were synthesising
it at Yale. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As a European I felt the time had come for us to
share with Europe some of the things we had discovered about the
methodology of taking LSD in positive settings. I wanted to rid
people of their inhibitions about mystical writings and
demonstrate to them that <i>The Tibetan Book of the Dead,</i> the
<i>Tao Te Ching,</i> and the <i>I Ching</i> were really basic
manuals with fundamental instructions about taking LSD sessions.
We felt we had supplemented this ancient knowledge by the
exploitation of modern technological means of transmitting
aesthetic phenomena. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From what I had heard in letters and conversations,
the psychedelic movement in England was small and badly informed.
It appeared that those who took LSD did so as a consciously
defiant anti-authoritarian gesture. The spiritual content of the
psychedelic experience was being overlooked. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We had a meeting at Millbrook to discuss this
question of disseminating the results of our experimental
research. It was agreed that I should return to London with the
idea of introducing <i>The Tibetan Book of the Dead</i> in the
translation by Tim, Dick and Ralph; the cyclostyled typescript of
the <i>Tao Be Ching</i> by Tim and Ralph; and the <i>Psychedelic
Review,</i> a magazine devoted to the theoretical discussion of
psychedelic experience. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Tim came to see me on the day of my departure. He
was going to join me in London in January 1966, which gave me
three months to set the scene for his arrival. The idea was to
rent the Albert Hall, or 'Alpert Hall' as Tim called it, for a
psychedelic jamboree. We would get the Beatles or the Stones to
perform, invite other artists, and, as the climax of the evening,
introduce Tim as the High Priest. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Taking a piece of paper from his pocket Tim said,
'These are your marching orders, your instructions.' What they
were I don't know because he decided to scrap them and took a
clean sheet of paper and wrote the following on it: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'HOLLINGSHEAD EXPEDITION TO LONDON 1965-66 </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Purpose: SPIRITUAL AND EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>To introduce to London the interpretation and applications
    and methods developed by and learned by Michael Hollingshead.
    </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>A YOGA-OF-EXPRESSION BY MH. <br>
    <i>Plan</i> <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; No specific programme of expression can be
    specified in advance. The Yoga may include <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 1. Tranart* gallery-bookstore. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 2. Weekly psychedelic
    reviews&#151;lectures&#151;questions and answers&#151;Tranart
    demonstrations. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 3. Radio&#151;TV&#151;newspaper&#151;magazine
    educational programme. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 4. Centre for running LSD session.' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus it was I arrived London in the fall of 1965,
with several hundred copies of <i>The Tibetan Book of the Dead</i>
and thirteen cartons of the <i>Psychedelic Review</i> on their
way. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; * Tranart was the term we used to describe the art
of psychedelic simulation. The name never became widely accepted
and to this day there is no adequate label for psychedelic art . </p>

<hr>
<a href="holl6.htm">

<p>Chapter 6</a></p>

<p> <!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" --> </p>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>