
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-65</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B006-249</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/jackb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134818 text/html 14017
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:10 GMT
Content-length: 13799
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>La Guardia Committee Report - The Marijuana Cigarette</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>The Marihuana Cigarette </h1>

<p><b>(Look for the Jack Benny Jello Hour)</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><b><u>The Cigarette</u></b> </p>

<p>Smoking. When marihuana is smoked, there is, as has been
stated, no such accuracy in dosage as is the case when it is
ingested. The marihuana user acquires a technique or art in
smoking &quot;reefers.&quot; This involves special preparation of
the cigarette and regulation of the frequency and depth of
inhalations. In a group of smokers, a cigarette circulates from
one to another, each in turn taking one or more puffs. The
performance is a slow and deliberate one and the cigarette, held
in a forked match stick, is smoked to its end. </p>

<p>When the smoke comes in contact with the respiratory mucous
membrane, the absorption of the active principle is rapid and the
effects are recognized promptly by the subject. He soon learns to
distinguish the amount of smoking which will give pleasant
effects from the amount which will give unpleasant ones and so
regulates his dosages. Providing there are no disturbing factors,
as is the case in gatherings of small friendly groups or parties
in &quot;tea-pads,&quot; the regulated smoking produces a
euphoric state, which accounts for continued indulgence.<br>
</p>

<p>(TABLE 4)<br>
</p>

<p>The effect from smoking marihuana cigarettes was studied in 32
subjects. Of these, 20 were classed as users, that is, prior to
their arrest they had had more or less extensive experience in
smoking. In the study the smoking was repeated by each subject
several times, the number of cigarettes smoked within an hour
ranging from one to eight. </p>

<p>In all of the user group the smoking produced a euphoric state
with its feeling of well- being, contentment, sociability, mental
and physical relaxation, which usually ended in a feeling of
drowsiness. Talkativeness and laughing and the sensation of
floating in the air were common occurrences. These effects were
of short duration, from one to three or four hours after the
smoking was concluded. In none of these subjects was there an
expression of antagonism or antisocial behavior. </p>

<p>In the non-user group the effects were similar except that in
one subject a state of mental confusion occurred and in another
the main effect was a feeling of dizziness, unsteadiness, and
muscular weakness. Finally one subject showed effects entirely
different from the others. He smoked one cigarette and became
restless, agitated, dizzy, fearful of his surroundings, afraid of
death. He had three short attacks of unconsciousness. At one
period he had visions of angels, and for a few minutes a euphoric
state. The entire episode lasted a little over an hour, after
which he went to sleep. This subject had a similar psychotic
episode after taking 120 mg. of tetrahydrocannabinol. On seven
other occasions he had been given the marihuana concentrate or
tetrahydrocannabinol with no unusual effects. </p>

<p>Of the physical symptoms occurring with smoking, dryness of
the mouth and throat, dizziness, and a sensation of hunger were
the most common. None of these or other symptoms seemed to lessen
materially the pleasurable effects. </p>

<p>The effect of smoking on the 7 females, 6 of whom were classed
as users, corresponded to that on the male group. All showed
euphoric effects. One of the subjects was nauseated and another
was restless, irritable, and contrary. These effects were
observed in both of the subjects when marihuana was taken by
stomach. One of the users, euphoric after smoking 6 and 10
cigarettes, had a psychotic episode after 8 cc. of marihuana
concentrate. </p>

<p>Tea-Pad Parties. (This section on &quot;Tea-Pad Parties&quot;
was prepared by Mrs. Halpern.) In addition to the quantitative
data regularly obtained from the subject during the course of the
testing program, the examiner had opportunity to make diverse
observations of the subject's global reactions, which threw
interesting light on the general effect of the drug on the
individual personality. </p>

<p>When the subject became &quot;high,&quot; his inclination was
to laugh, talk, sing, listen to music, or sleep, but the
requirement that he solve problems, answer questions, or remember
drawings created an artificial situation, tending to bring him
&quot;down&quot; and spoil his pleasure. In order, therefore,
that the influence of the drug might be observed in less formal
circumstances and in a set-up more nearly like the customary
&quot;tea-pad,&quot; two groups of men were given
&quot;parties&quot; on the last night of their hospital sojourn.
The men were consulted beforehand, and the stage was set
according to their desires. They requested that nothing be done
until it was really dark outside. They brought the radio into the
room where the smoking took place and turned it to soft dance
music. Only one shaded light burned, leaving the greater part of
the room shadowy. The suggestion was made that easy chairs or
floor cushions be procured but the party progressed without
these. </p>

<p>The men were allowed as many cigarettes as they wanted. When
the &quot;reefers&quot; were passed out they crowded around with
their hands outstretched like little children begging for candy.
The number of cigarettes the men smoked varied, the range being
from two to twelve or thirteen. There were both users and
non-users in these two groups. The users of course were highly
elated at the prospect of getting much free &quot;tea,&quot; and
some of the non-users also smoked with genuine enjoyment. </p>

<p>In the beginning the men broke up into little groups of twos
and threes to do their smoking, or in some instances went off by
themselves. Smoke soon filled the atmosphere and added to the
general shadowy effect. After the initial smoking there was some
moving about- some men laughed and joked, some became
argumentative, while some just stared out of the window. The
arguments never seemed to get anywhere, although they often dealt
with important problems, and the illogical reasoning used was
never recognized or refuted by the person to whom it was
addressed. Gradually, as though attracted by some force, all
restlessness and activity ceased, and the men sat in a circle
about the radio. </p>

<p>Occasionally they whispered to one another, laughed a little,
or swayed to the music, but in general they relaxed quietly in
their chairs. A feeling of contentment seemed to pervade, and
when one man suddenly got a &quot;laughing jag&quot; they were
annoyed at the interruption. </p>

<p>In general, they gave the impression of adolescent boys doing
something which was forbidden and thereby adding spice to the
indulgence. Many of the adolescent personality patterns as they
appear in group activities were clearly observable here. There
was the eternal &quot;wisecracker,&quot; the domineering
&quot;important&quot; individual who tried to tell everyone what
to do, the silly, giggling adolescent and the shy, withdrawn
introvert. One forgot that these were actually adults with all
the usual adult responsibilities. One could not help drawing the
conclusion that they too had forgotten this for the time being. </p>

<p>Although urged to smoke more, no subject could be persuaded to
take more than he knew or felt he could handle. After about an
hour and half of smoking, the men were given coffee and bread and
jam and the party broke up. They all went to bed and reported the
next day that they had slept very well. </p>

<p>Another attempt at evaluating the effect of marihuana in less
formal situations was made in the following manner. The examiner,
one of the police officers and the subjects listened to Jack
Benny on the Jello Program at 7 o'clock Sunday evening. The
police officer noted the number of times the audience laughed,
and the length of time the laughter lasted. The examiner checked
these items for the subjects. The first time this was done
without marihuana; the following week the subjects were given
several &quot;reefers&quot; about fifteen minutes before the
radio program started. The results were as follows: </p>

<p>Without drug, the subjects laughed 42 times as against 72
laughs in the radio audience. The total time for all laughs was
63 seconds as compared with 139 seconds for the radio audience.
With cigarettes the subjects laughed 43 times as compared with 47
laughs in the audience, the total laugh time being 129 seconds as
compared with 173 seconds of laughter in the audience. Without
drug, the subjects laughed, roughly speaking, only half as often
and as long as the audience- while under the drug they laughed
almost as often and the laugh time was about 75 per cent that of
the audience. </p>

<p>It is obvious that under marihuana the subject laughs more
readily and for longer time intervals. This is probably due both
to the fact that things seem funnier to him and because when
under the influence of the drug he is less inhibited.<br>
</p>

<p><b><u>Differences Between Concentrate and Cigarette</u></b> </p>

<p>When marihuana was ingested, it was in the form of the
concentrate, containing all the active principles which are
soluble in the medium used. The relative proportions of the
principles present are unknown, and the effects can be assumed to
give a composite picture of different actions, the dominating one
being that of tetrahydrocannabinol. There is no information
available concerning the principles present in marihuana smoke,
and it is possible that some of those found in the concentrate
have been destroyed by the heat of combustion. The effects from
smoking correspond to those induced by tetrahydrocannabinol taken
by stomach, so it may be assumed that this principle is present
in the smoke. The rapidity with which effects occur after smoking
demonstrates the quick absorption of the cannabinol from the
respiratory tract and the short duration of these effects
indicates its prompt excretion or detoxification. When the
concentrate is taken, the absorption from the intestinal tract is
slower and more prolonged. For these reasons it is not possible
to make a precise comparison between the effects of the two forms
of administration. </p>

<p>In general the subject's consciousness of unpleasant symptoms
is more marked when the concentrate is taken and this may
interrupt or obscure the pleasant effects. The long duration of
action and the inability of the subject to stop it serve to
accentuate the physical symptoms and to cause apprehension
concerning what may happen. </p>

<p>The result of all this readily accounts for the irritability,
negativism and antagonism occurring. The lessening of inhibitions
is not peculiar to marihuana, for in a few subjects who were
given alcohol in intoxicating doses the behavior corresponded to
that induced by marihuana. </p>

<p>After smoking the main effect was of a euphoric type. Some
dizziness and dryness of the mouth were generally present but
were not pronounced enough to distract from the pleasant
sensations. The condition described as &quot;high&quot; came on
promptly and increased with the number of cigarettes smoked, but
it was not alarming or definitely disagreeable, and did not give
rise to antisocial behavior. </p>

<p>On the contrary it prompted sociability. The marihuana was
under the subject's control, and once the euphoric state was
present, which might come from only one cigarette, he had no
inclination to increase it by more smoking. When a considerable
number of cigarettes were smoked, the effect was usually one of
drowsiness and fatigue. </p>

<p>The description of the &quot;tea-pad parties&quot; brings out
clearly the convivial effect on the groups and the absence of any
rough or antagonistic behavior.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>