
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-87</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B011-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/myths/myths3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100927 text/html 21073
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:09:17 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:22 GMT
Content-length: 20855
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Crime and Drug Legalization </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>Drug Legalization: Myths and Misconceptions</p>

<h2>Chapter Two: Crime and Drug Legalization </h2>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Discussion</b> </p>

<p><b>I. Their Argument</b> </p>

<p>Proponents of legalization advance two theories as to how
legalization will decrease crime in the United States, and both
are dependent on the assumption that legalization will reduce the
cost of drugs to the user. First, because users will not have to
spend as much to support their drug habits, fewer will need to
commit crimes such as robbery and burglary to obtain drug money.
Second, because the cost of drugs will decrease, so will the drug
sellers' profits. Because drugs will no longer be a profitable
business, and because addicts will be able to obtain their drugs
from legal sources, the current black market suppliers of drugs -
gangs, foreign cartels, organized criminals, etc.-will fade away.
</p>

<p><b>II. Our Argument</b> </p>

<p>Before addressing these theories, it is useful to distinguish
between three types of drug-related crime. As Professor James Q.
Wilson notes </p>

<p>[t]he illegality of drugs increases crime, partly because some
users turn to crime to pay for their habits, partly because some
users are stimulated by certain drugs (such as crack or PCP) to
act more violently or ruthlessly than they otherwise would, and
partly because criminal organizations seeking to control drug
supplies use force to manage their markets.25 </p>

<p>For ease of discussion, this author will refer to the crime
caused by people to pay for their habits as
&quot;purchase-related,&quot; the crime caused by people while
under the influence of drugs as &quot;drug-induced,&quot; and the
crime caused by organized criminal suppliers of drugs as
&quot;black market crime.&quot; Let us discuss each in turn. </p>

<p><b>A. Purchase-related crime</b> </p>

<p>As stated above, legalizers assume that as legalized drugs
become less expensive, addicts will no longer have to commit
crimes in order to fund their habits. One immediate difficulty
with this analysis is that drugs already are exceptionally
inexpensive. For example, a hit of crack costs about five dollars
on the streets of Seattle and about three dollars in other major
metropolitan areas.27 Granted, the pharmaceutical cost of cocaine
sufficient to make a hit of crack is roughly twenty-five cents.28
But to the extent that a legal crack supplier likely would have
to meet government regulations or would have to internalize the
costs of taxes placed upon the legalized drug, some analysts
question whether it is possible to reduce the current
street-price of drugs.29 </p>

<p>Nonetheless, let us assume that legal drug suppliers could
undersell the black market by offering cocaine for approximately
fifty cents a dose. What would happen? </p>

<p>As discussed at length in Chapter One, addiction rates would
skyrocket. This fact is almost indisputable, and even the
Libertarian supporters of drug legalization admit that &quot;low
prices would encourage use.&quot;30 History is very clear on this
point as well---once cocaine began being marketed in the high
potency/low cost form of crack, addiction rates did increase.31
And when addiction rates increase, so does purchase-related
crime. As Elliott Currie explains, &quot;[h]igher levels of drug
use <u>do</u> go hand in hand with increased crime, especially
property crime.&quot;32 </p>

<p>So in reality, legalizing drugs would not decrease
purchase-related crime, but would actually <i>increase </i>it.
Three reasons explain why this is so. First, if you decrease the
price of an addictive substance, addicts merely will buy more of
the<b> </b>less expensive product.33 Second, it is not as if
addicts steal money only to pay for drugs; likely, they steal
money to meet living expenses such as food, rent, etc. William
Bennett notes that &quot;[m]aking drugs legal would just be a way
of subsidizing [addicts] habit. They would continue to rob and
steal to pay for food, for clothes, for entertainment.&quot;34 Of
course, since there are more addicts, there would be more people
committing purchase-related crimes. Third, one must recall that
purchase-related crime is not directly related to the cost of the
drug, but instead is indirectly related: the prices of drugs
affect the addiction rate, which in turn affects the
purchase-related crime rate. This point perhaps is subtle, but
also is important. Addicts will pay almost any price for drugs.
Thus the question becomes not &quot;What is the price of
drugs,&quot; but instead &quot;How many addicts are there?&quot;
Because legalized drugs increase addiction rates,
purchase-related crime necessarily increases. </p>

<p><b>B. Drug-induced crime</b> </p>

<p>As with purchase-related crime, the price of drugs is not
directly relevant in determining the amount of drug-induced
crime, except to the extent that the price affects the number of
addicts. Undoubtedly, drug-induced crime is a significant
problem, One conservative estimate based upon the Bureau of
Justice Statistics study suggests that with regard to local jail
inmates, 15.4% of such inmates tested positive for illegal drugs
and an additional 12.1 % tested positive for a combination of
illegal drugs and alcohol.35 Another study conducted by the
National Institute of Justice in 1986 found that for twelve major
metropolitan areas, 70% of inmates tested positive for illegal
drugs.36 The N.I.J. study concluded that &quot;[these offenders
did not commit crimes simply to feed their habits. Drugs changed
their behavior, enabled and encouraged them to act violently and
irrationally.&quot;37 </p>

<p>Again, these results are unsurprising. Drugs such as crack
encourage hyperactive violence.38 If you legalize such drugs and
the addiction rate increases, you will have more people walking
around more often under its influence. It simply is untenable to
suggest that policies such as legalization that increase
addiction rates could do anything but increase the frequency of
drug-induced crime. </p>

<p><b>C. Black market crime</b> </p>

<p>As mentioned above, legalizers suggest that if you allow drugs
to be sold legally, it would drive out the black market, for the
latter only thrives when people cannot obtain goods through
normal, legal channels. Such analysis seems attractive at first,
but a closer look at the facts will prove that it is both
simplistic and incorrect. </p>

<p>So long as there are any restrictions as to what drugs were to
be legalized, who would be able to buy them, what quantities and
potencies were available, etc., a black market would fill the
need. For example, if the legalizers would limit the sale of
drugs to those people over twenty-one, then the black market
would target children. This argument is made by David T.
Courtwright, who finds potential black markets for &quot;those
under twenty-one, or for public-safety officers, or transport
workers, or military personnel, or pregnant women, or prisoners,
or probationers, or parolees, or psychotics. . . . &quot;39 In
order truly to defeat the black market, one not only would have
to allow anyone to buy drugs, but also would have to make all
forms of drugs available. William Rasberry explains that
&quot;[i]f marijuana and perhaps heroin are legalized, but not
crack cocaine and violence-inducing PCP, the effect on the crime
associated with drug trafficking would be minimal.&quot; Few, if
any, legalizers would be willing completely to legalize all drugs
for all people - but if they refuse to do so, they cannot
justifiably claim to have made a significant impact on black
market crime. </p>

<p>Another problem with the legalizers' argument is that many of
them advocate a policy whereby legalized drugs are taxed in order
to raise revenue for other social programs. But again, if you
legalize drugs and tax them, you will have a black market that
can sell the same drugs less expensively. The same is true if you
stamp a tariff on imported drugs, and history shows this to be
correct. Recall that until the early twentieth century, opiates
and other drugs were legal in the United States. Much of the
opium consumed by U.S. citizens was imported from China, and
&quot; enlightened lawmakers decided to place a tariff on the
drug as a means of raising revenue. For example, between 1866 and
1914, the duty on crude opium was 33%; on ready-to-smoke opium it
was 97%.41 Although these tariffs did produce income, they also
created a smuggler's paradise that organized crime syndicates
such as the Chinese tongs quickly filled. Criminals would smuggle
opium into the country, not pay the tariff, and make a higher
profit margin on their goods. Interestingly enough, at the peak
of the opium tariffs twice as much opium was smuggled into the
U.S. as went through legal channels.42 Thus, history proves that
if you place a tariff on imported drugs - be they legal or
illegal - black markets will continue to flourish unabated. </p>

<p>Let's return to the simple taxation of drugs produced within
the United States. Again, the equation is simple - tax equals
black market - and again, history proves it to be true. Take
tobacco for instance. Here is a legal commodity that potentially
can be taxed by both the federal government and any of the state
governments.43 Unsurprisingly, some states historically have had
higher cigarette taxes than others. In 1975, smokers in North
Carolina would pay thirty-six cents a pack whereas New Yorkers
had to pay fifty-four cents.44 Organized syndicates took
advantage of the situation, buying cigarettes in North Carolina
and selling them in New York for a profit-indeed at one point 50%
of all the cigarettes sold in New York City were bootlegged
products controlled by criminal organizations.45 Thus, proponents
of legalized drugs will never be able to stop the black market,
because the federal government, even if it wanted to, could not
stop state governments from taxing the drugs at different levels.
</p>

<p>Finally, with regard to the entire black market theories of
the legalizers, we have to remember the simple fact that
organized crime is composed of criminals. Query what the Cali or
the Medellin Cartel would do if they discovered that their
cocaine was being under priced by a legal manufacturer (let's say
a pharmaceutical company like Upjohn). What is the chance that
the Colombians would say &quot;Oh well, we just cannot compete in
the market. Let's close up shop and take real jobs.&quot;
Unlikely. Instead, currently entrenched crime syndicates would
use violence to ensure their place in the market.46 In the above
example, the Cali cartel might destroy Upjohn's laboratories. Or
it might murder everyone who sits on their Board of Directors. Or
it might take the less glamorous, but certainly more traditional,
strategy of telling addicts that if they don't buy their cocaine
from the cartel, they will be killed. In short, the belief that
if we legalize drugs then organized crime will run away with its
tail between its legs ignores grim reality. </p>

<p>In conclusion, drugs produce three types of crime:
purchase-related crime, drug-induced crime, and black market
crime. To the extent that legalizing drugs would make them
cheaper - a point on which all sides of the debate agree - it
would create many new addicts and the incidence of
purchase-related crime and drug-induced crime would increase.
Furthermore, if there were any regulations or taxes of <i>any
sort </i>placed upon the legalized drugs, U.S. history proves
that the black market crime would continue. Thus, legalizing
drugs not only does not decrease criminal behavior, it almost
certainly would spur its increase. </p>

<p>25 James Q. Wilson, &quot;Against the Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Commentary, February 1990. </p>

<p>26 Statement of John W. Ladenburg (Pierce County Prosecuting
Attorney), &quot;Should We </p>

<p>Legalize Drugs?&quot; </p>

<p>27<b> </b>Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of
Illegal Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July
1988. </p>

<p>28 Mark A.R. Kleirnan, &quot;Legalization: A Simplistic
Solution to a Complex Problem&quot; Issues in Science and
Technology, Summer 1990. </p>

<p>29 &quot;No Magic Bullet - A Look at Drug Legalization,&quot;
U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration,
Demand Reduction Section. </p>

<p>30 Timothy Radonich, &quot;Controlling drugs through
regulation,&quot; Northwest Libertarian (newsletter), September
1990. </p>

<p>31 William Bennett, &quot;Mopping up after the legalizers:
What the 'intellectual' chorus fails to tell you,&quot; The
Washington Times, December 15, 1989. </p>

<p>32 Elliott Currie, &quot;Towards a Policy on Drugs,&quot;
Dissent, Winter 1993. </p>

<p>33 Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of Illegal
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. </p>

<p>34 William Bennett, &quot;Mopping up after the legalizers-
What the 'intellectual' chorus fails to tell you,&quot; The
Washington Times, December 15, 1989. </p>

<p>35 U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,
Bureau of Justice Statistics, &quot;Fact </p>

<p>Sheet: Drug Data Summary,&quot; Drugs &amp; Crime Data,
November 1992. </p>

<p>36 Peter B. Bensinger, &quot;Arguments Against Legalizing
Drugs,&quot; Drug Abuse Update, </p>

<p>September 1988. </p>

<p>37 Id. </p>

<p>38 James Q. Wilson, &quot;Against the Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Commentary, February 1990. </p>

<p>39 David T. Courtwright, &quot;Should We Legalize Drugs?
History Answers,&quot; American Heritage, February/March 1993. </p>

<p>40 William Rasberry, &quot;Legalizing Drugs: Let's Get
Specific,&quot; The Washington Post, November 1, 1989. </p>

<p>41<b> </b>David T. Courtwright, &quot;Should We Legalize
Drugs? History Answers,&quot; American Heritage, February/March
1993. </p>

<p>42 Id. </p>

<p>43 Also note that the federal government cannot
constitutionally prohibit a state from taxing a given commodity. </p>

<p>44 David T. Courtwright, &quot;Should We Legalize Drugs?
History Answers,&quot; American Heritage, February/March 1993. </p>

<p>45 Id. </p>

<p>46 Christopher Collins and Susan Collins, &quot;What
Savings?&quot; The Sun, March 20, 1990. </p>

<h2><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </h2>

<h2>Chapter Two Summary Sheet: Crime and Drug Legalization </h2>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>If drugs were legalized, addicts would no longer have to
commit crimes to pay for their habit. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>Drugs are already so cheap that legalization might not drive
the price down any further. Thus, addicts would still have to
steal. [&quot;No Magic Bullet: A Look at Drug Legalization,&quot;
U.S. Dept. of Justice, D.E.A. Demand Reduction Section Position
paper]. </p>

<p>But assuming that legalization would cut the price of drugs,
low prices encourage use and addiction. [Timothy Radonich,
&quot;Controlling drugs through regulation,&quot; Northwest
Libertarian, September 1990.] </p>

<p>As addiction rates increased, crime, especially property
Crime, would increase. [Elliott Currie, &quot;Towards a Policy on
Drugs,&quot; Dissent, Winter 1993]. </p>

<p>As the prices of drugs decrease, addicts will buy more; thus,
they will still steal in order to spend the same amount on drugs.
[Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of Illegal
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988]. </p>

<p>Addicts would still steal in order to afford food, clothes,
entertainment, etc. [William Bennett, &quot;Mopping up after the
legalizers: What the<b> </b>'intellectual' chorus fails to tell
you,&quot; The Washington Times, December 15, 1989]. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>If drugs were legalized, drug- induced crime would decrease. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>Drug use encourages irrational and criminal behavior. Studies
indicate that as many as 70% of inmates were on illegal drugs
when arrested. [U.S. Dept. of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 'Tact Sheet: Drug Data
Summary,&quot;<b> </b>Drugs &amp; Crime Data. November 1992;
Peter Bensinger, &quot;Arguments Against Legalizing Drugs,&quot;
Drug Abuse Update, September 1988]. </p>

<p>Recent U.S. experience with crack cocaine clearly proves that
as drugs become cheaper, violent crime increases. [William
Bennett, &quot;Mopping up after the legalizers: What the
'intellectual' chorus fails to tell you,&quot; The Washington
Times, December 15, 1989]. </p>

<p>As legalization of drugs increases the addiction rate [see
Chapter One], then we would have more people under the influence
of drugs more often. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>Legalizing drugs would end the crime caused by black markets
and organized syndicates. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>If there are any restrictions placed upon who may use legal
drugs, such as minors, pregnant women, police, military
personnel, pilots, prisoners, parolees, or psychotics, a black
market would rise up to fill the niche. (David T.
Courtwright,&quot;Should We Legalize Drugs? History
Answers,&quot; American Heritage, February/March 1993]. </p>

<p>In order to begin to stop the black market, you would have to
legalize crack and PCP. [William Rasberry, &quot;Legalizing
Drugs: Let's Get Specific,&quot; The Washington Post, November 1,
1989]. </p>

<p>U.S. history proves that if you attempt to levy tariffs on
imported legal drugs, a black market will result due to
smuggling. Such was the case in the early twentieth century when
Chinese crime syndicates smuggled opium into the U.S. so as to
avoid tariffs. [David T. Courtwright, &quot;Should We Legalize
Drugs? History Answers,&quot; American Heritage, February/March
1993]. </p>

<p>If you tax the legal drugs at all, a black market will result.
This is proven by U.S. history, where organized crime would
smuggle cigarettes from states with low tobacco taxes into those
with high tobacco taxes, thus making a profit [Courtwright,
citation above]. </p>

<p>Organized crime would use violence against legal suppliers in
order to ensure its market share. Criminals would not play by the
rules. [Christopher Collins and Susan Collins, &quot;What
Savings?&quot; The Sun, March 20,1990]. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>