
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-35</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B002-332</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133527 text/html 63451
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:35:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:16 GMT
Content-length: 63233
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter III Part 1: Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime </h2>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>Drug trafficking is the most widespread and lucrative
organized crime operation in the United States, accounting for
nearly 40 percent of this country's organized crime activity and
generating an annual income estimated to be as high as $110
billion. Large trafficking organizations dominate the illicit
drug market. These groups include the &quot;families&quot; of
America's La Cosa Nostra, as well as an array of more recently
identified crime groups such as the Sicilian &quot;Mafia,&quot;
outlaw motorcycle gangs and groups based in the Nigerian and
Colombian communities. While La Cosa Nostra has historically been
involved in narcotics trafficking, newer organizations, in many
ways quite different from La Cosa Nostra, now play a major role
in the drug trade. Generally, these newer groups develop solely
around drug trafficking operations and are activity-specific,
dependent only on drug-related criminal activity for income. They
tend to be more fluidly organized than La Cosa Nostra, and are
not as self-contained but are marked by a degree of violence and
corruption unsurpassed by any other criminal activity. </p>

<p>Organized crime groups involved in drug trafficking, however,
share a central feature with other organized crime groups in that
they consist of a core criminal group and a specialized criminal
support designed to facilitate illicit activity. This
&quot;core/support&quot; configuration is one this Commission has
found to be common to all organized crime groups today. </p>

<p>Cocaine Trafficking </p>

<p>America's cocaine supply at present originates exclusively in
South America. Coca is cultivated principally in Peru, Bolivia,
Colombia and Ecuador, and conversion laboratories have been
located in Colombia, Brazil and Venezuela. Other South American
and Caribbean countries serve as transshipment sites. All phases
of the cocaine trade, including cultivation, processing and
distribution have expanded since 1984, and the industry shows no
signs of diminishing despite the fact that cocaine supply already
exceeds consumer demand. </p>

<p>Control of the cocaine industry has traditionally been
maintained by a cartel of Colombian traffickers. Colombian groups
are the largest, wealthiest, most sophisticated organizations
trafficking in cocaine. A key to their domination of the market
has been their control of the processing laboratories used to
convert coca grown traditionally in Bolivia and Peru. Export of
the drug to the United States has also been handled almost
exclusively by Colombian trafficking organizations. While
Colombians currently control an estimated 75 percent of the
cocaine distributed to the United States, their domination has
been lessened recently both by the Colombian government's
imposition of severe restrictions on the importation of chemicals
essential to cocaine processing and by the destruction of cocaine
processing sites throughout Colombia by government authorities.
In 1984 three major Colombian conversion laboratories were
discovered and destroyed: at Tranquilandia, the largest facility,
ten metric tons of cocaine and 10,000 barrels of processing
chemicals were seized. In total, Colombian authorities
confiscated 16 metric tons of cocaine in 1984, a 600 percent
increase from the 2.5 metric tons seized in the previous year.
The pressures on cocaine traffickers were compounded in that year
by the Colombian government's decision to extradite drug
traffickers to the United States, and by the subsequent issuance
of warrants for the arrest of several major traffickers. </p>

<p>Intensified Colombian law enforcement measures have had
significant impact on trafficking operations. The initiatives
have prompted many traffickers to seek refuge in other South
American countries, and in some cases to relocate their
processing laboratories. These incidents have resulted in a
geographic dispersal of cocaine processing and export activities,
most notably to Bolivia and Peru. While it appeared initially
that activity in these countries was sponsored and overseen by
Colombian traffickers, increasing evidence suggests that groups
in both countries are becoming self-sufficient. Such
developments, however, remain an exception to the prevailing
Colombian dominance. </p>

<p>Despite the spread of cocaine activity through South America,
Colombian groups have left little room in the cocaine trade for
small-scale smugglers. While some independent operators and
smaller smuggling groups occasionally work independently of the
Colombian cartel, most are tied to the larger organization in at
least a contractor relationship. </p>

<p>The Colombian Connection: Origins </p>

<p>The Colombian involvement in U.S. cocaine trafficking can be
traced to the influx of Cuban citizens to South Florida after the
Castro Revolution in the early 1960's. Some of the Cuban-settled
communities became bases for the continuation of established
Cuban organized crime networks known as the &quot;Cuban
Mafia.&quot; The Cuban Mafia had been a major distributor of the
cocaine in Cuba, where the drug has long been accepted as a
social luxury, and thus had existing connections with South
American cocaine trafficking organizations. At first, the Florida
Cuban Mafia factions imported only enough cocaine to satisfy
members of their own community, but by the mid-1960's, they began
to import greater quantities of the drug in an effort to expand
distribution and increase profit. By 1965 Colombians supplied
nearly 100 percent of the cocaine moving through the Cuban
networks. Colombians refined the drug and Cubans trafficked and
distributed it in the United States. The system worked for a
time, but the Colombians increasingly desired control of the
entire operation. Through the late 1960's and early 1970's they
became more involved in cocaine production, and increased their
trafficking role. By 1978 Colombian traffickers had cut all ties
with the Cubans and assumed the dominant role they now play in
supplying cocaine to the American market. </p>

<p>Colombian groups have continued to control the U.S. cocaine
market through the 1980's for a number of reasons.
Geographically, Colombia is well-positioned both to receive coca
from Peru and Bolivia and to export the processed drug to the
United States either by air or by sea. In addition, the country's
vast central forests effectively conceal clandestine processing
laboratories and air strips, which facilitate the traffic.
Perhaps most importantly, the Colombians have a momentum by
benefit of their early involvement in the cocaine trade. They
have evolved from small, disassociated groups into
compartmentalized organizations and are sophisticated and
systematized in their approach to trafficking cocaine in the
United States. Further, groups in the Colombian population in the
U.S. provide traffickers access to this country and often serves
as a distribution network for Colombian cocaine. </p>

<p>The Colombian Organization </p>

<p>The major Colombian trafficking organizations are structured
to control each intermediate step required in processing and
exporting cocaine. Like traditional organized crime groups, they
are built of interdependent and essential component
&quot;divisions,&quot; each with a specialized area of
responsibility. Different members act as laborers, processors,
transporters, financiers and enforcers. In addition,
organizations generally supplement their regular membership with
criminal support of affiliates who perform services on a fee
basis. Few members of any organizational division are aware of
the others involved in the enterprise, and trafficking bosses are
well-insulated and protected by their organizations. </p>

<p>Organization laborers and processors prepare cocaine for U.S.
consumption. Most laborers in the cultivation phase are Peruvian
or Bolivian peasants who cultivate and harvest coca in remote
areas of the Eastern Andes, then process the coca leaves to base
in nearby villages. The growers are allied in small, independent
groups, but are typically financed, overseen, and protected by
members of a larger Colombian organization. </p>

<p>Processed coca base is usually flown on light aircraft from
the mountain villages to Colombian processing facilities by those
members of the Colombian organization responsible for
transportation. The planes land at clandestine airstrips, often
simple mud runways, located near the processing laboratories. The
laboratories vary widely in size, ranging from crude
small-quantity operations to large, sophisticated complexes, and
can be found both in Colombia's jungle and urban areas. </p>

<p>Coca base is typically processed to cocaine hydrochloride in
the laboratories, then bagged and taped into kilogram packages,
which are sometimes coded to indicate a particular United States
destination. The packages are loaded into duffle bags or burlap
sacks, then moved by the transportation group to a &quot;stash
house,&quot; a storage facility usually located near a seaport or
a clandestine airstrip. The cocaine is held at the stash house
until it is exported from Colombia. </p>

<p>Colombian trafficking organizations currently export an
estimated 62 percent of the cocaine they process on private
aircraft. The remaining 38 percent is shipped on ocean vessels or
smuggled on commercial air carriers. Most shipments are smuggled
out of Colombia from the country's northern coastal region, the
Guajira peninsula. Principal smuggling centers include the cities
of Santa Marta, Barranquilla, Cartagena, and Medellin. In
addition, a significant percentage of processed cocaine leaves
Colombia from airstrips located near larger processing facilities
in the jungles. </p>

<p>Typically, Colombian organizations oversee each cocaine
shipment from cultivation through wholesale transactions in the
United States. Retail and street-level sales are handled by a
variety of smaller groups and individuals in this country. </p>

<p>The money generated by the wholesale cocaine transaction is
maintained for the organization by financial experts familiar
with international banking, who are responsible for laundering,
banking and investing drug profits, and for assuring that a
portion of the drug profit is returned to Colombia for
reinvestment in the organization's cocaine enterprise. The
cartel's own financial experts are supported by a complement of
bankers, lawyers and other professionals in the United States,
who play a crucial role in facilitating these transactions. </p>

<p>Colombian trafficking organizations, like other organized
crime groups, rely on &quot;enforcement&quot; through violence
and intimidation to protect their inventory and profits.
&quot;Enforcement&quot; occurs both in Colombia and in the United
States and includes the collection of debts owed to the
organization and the elimination of interference from
competitors, informants and law enforcement officials. </p>

<p>Pilots: The American Affiliates </p>

<p>Cocaine is ordinarily smuggled from South America to the
United States for major trafficking organizations by American
citizens acting as mercenary pilots. Recruits include
ex-military, commercial and private pilots, and in some cases,
unlicensed aviators. The speed, mobility and evasive capabilities
of air transport have made it the preferred node of shipment
among Colombian traffickers, and many have built airstrips either
near their processing centers or along the coastlines to permit
the fast direct export of cocaine. On Colombia's north coast
alone, over 150 clandestine landing strips and three
international airports facilitate smuggling activities. </p>

<p>Individual pilots are generally responsible for purchasing or
leasing transportation vehicles and hiring flight crews.
Obtaining a plane for purchase seldom presents any difficulty,
since many aircraft are regularly advertised for sale in a number
of trade periodicals. One popular journal, Trade-a-Plane, is
published three times each month and advertises thousands of
aircraft available for sale in each issue. Planes are also
available for purchase at numerous government auctions of seized
properties. These events often allow traffickers to repurchase
aircraft, which they were previously forced to forfeit. </p>

<p>Because traffickers attempt to ship the largest possible
quantities of cocaine to the widest range of destinations in the
United States, the aircraft selected for smuggling generally
represent the optimum balance between range and cargo capacity.
The most popular of these are conventional light twin engine
planes, such as the Piper Aztec, Piper Navajo and the Cessna 400
series. Most such planes can transport about a ton of cocaine
over a range of about 1,800 miles and can stay airborne for 11
and one hours with standard fuel systems. Larger airplanes such
as DC-3 aircraft are common on shuttle flights between the United
States and various transshipment points; the fastest aircraft are
always preferred when available. </p>

<p>To maximize range and capability, smuggling planes are often
outfitted with auxiliary fuel systems. These auxiliary systems
may be attached to the outside body of the aircraft or the wing,
but must be inspected and approved by the Federal Aviation
Administration each time the outfitted aircraft prepares for
flight. A favored auxiliary system for cocaine traffickers is the
collapsible rubber fuel &quot;bladder,&quot; which may be placed
in the plane's fuselage, and simply folded up or thrown away
after the fuel contained within is used. The space occupied by
the bladder on the trip to Colombia can be utilized for cocaine
transport on the return journey. Bladders are, under all
circumstances, prohibited by Federal law. </p>

<p>Although the legitimate need for auxiliary fuel systems is
very limited, the systems are well-advertised and readily
available. One trafficker told the Commission he purchased
bladders and other long-range fuel systems regularly, always
paying the seller with &quot;suitcases full of cash.&quot; He
claims his cash was never questioned or refused. </p>

<p>Traffic From Colombia to the United States: The Hydra's Head </p>

<p>Smugglers use a vast number of both air and sea trafficking
routes to transport cocaine from South America to the United
States. The most commonly travelled routes are through the
Windward Passage between Cuba and Haiti, through the Yucatan
Channel between Mexico and Cuba, and through the Mona Passage,
bordered by the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. </p>

<p>Traditionally, 90 percent of the cocaine shipped by these
routes has entered the United States at points along the Florida
coast; traffickers now, however, more frequently deliver
shipments to all the States along the Gulf Coast and elsewhere
throughout this country. Cocaine traffic also now runs directly
from Colombia's west coast to California and other western
states. These shifts are perceived as a response by traffickers
to increased law enforcement pressure in South Florida,
specifically to the intensified efforts of the South
Florida/Caribbean Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force.
The theme is a common one: as law enforcement closes off one
point of entry to drug traffickers, traffickers develop many new
points of entry as replacements. </p>

<p>Air Shipment </p>

<p>Nearly two-thirds of the cocaine exported from South America
to the United State is transported by general aviation aircraft.
Planes of all sizes, ranging from small turbo-prop craft to large
C-123 cargo transport planes, are used for drug shipment. Small
aircraft, which cannot carry adequate fuel to allow direct flight
from Colombia to the United States, must refuel at transshipment
points between the two countries. These contact points are
indispensable, and are located throughout Central America, the
Dominican Republic, Cuba, the Bahamas and Puerto Rico.
Transshipment points may be simply refueling stations, or may be
bases or stations equipped to allow cocaine off-loading and
repackaging. From the transshipment points, cocaine is generally
ferried to the United States by small planes or boats. </p>

<p>Mexico has gained popularity as a transshipment point since
1980. Although coca cultivation has not been observed in Mexico,
an estimated 10 to 20 percent of the cocaine exported to the
United States currently transits that country. Three Mexican
transshipment patterns are typical. First, Mexican traffickers
obtain cocaine in South America, transport it to Mexico, then
traffic the drug overland into the United States. Second,
Colombian or American couriers travel by commercial aircraft from
South America to Mexico, then cross the border into this country.
Finally, Colombian or North American traffickers use Mexico's
numerous clandestine airstrips, especially in Yucatan, for
refueling and for loading purposes; the smuggling plane in use
may continue directly into the United States, or the shipment may
be broken into smaller loads, then trafficked overland by Mexican
organizations. The majority of cocaine shipped through Mexico is
transported to the United States by car, truck or bus, but a
significant amount is smuggled aboard small aircraft. The Mexican
groups, formerly limited primarily to trafficking heroin and
marijuana, have eagerly expanded their role as middlemen between
Colombian traffickers and American consumers. </p>

<p>Maritime Shipment </p>

<p>An estimated 18 percent (15 tons in 1984) of the cocaine
trafficked into the United States is exported from South America
by sea vessel. All types of ships are used for smuggling, from
small high-speed cigarette boats to large commercial cargo
carriers. Colombians dominate maritime cocaine smuggling, and
most shipments depart that country's north coastline, which
features three major seaports and countless debarkation ports for
smaller craft. Approximately one-half of the cocaine exported by
sea is concealed in commercial vessels, and a smaller percentage
is shipped in private boats which are frequently outfitted with
special compartments designed for drug storage. Small amounts of
cocaine are also often shipped on with marijuana on
non-commercial smuggling vessels. </p>

<p>Maritime trafficking routes have shifted significantly in the
past five years, primarily in response to increased law
enforcement surveillance. While a major portion of the maritime
traffic formerly flowed directly into South Florida, traffickers
now increasingly use the longer eastern routes through the
Caribbean to the Mid-Atlantic and New England coasts, as well as
direct routes to the U.S. west coast. These routes make smuggling
more expensive for traffickers, since they require larger
vessels, larger crews and more sophisticated electronic
equipment. </p>

<p>Case Study: Devoe Airlines </p>

<p>Devoe Airlines was a scheduled commuter air service operating
between Miami and smaller Florida cities during the early 1980's.
Owned by Miami pilot Jack Devoe, the business was essentially a
front for a Colombian drug trafficking operation, which included
regular large quantity marijuana and cocaine smuggling. In total,
8 to 10 contract pilots employed by Devoe were involved in over
100 trafficking flights over a five year period and carried
roughly 7,000 pounds of cocaine from South America to the United
States. Jack Devoe estimates that his flying organization grossed
millions of dollars each month during peak smuggling periods. </p>

<p>Devoe's trafficking pilots initially travelled non-stop routes
between the United States and Colombia, but developed a
transshipment point on Little Derby Island in the Bahamas for
purposes of &quot;security . . . [and] police protection&quot; in
the 1980's. Devoe hired six to eight employees to work as needed
at the island base to unload and repackage drug shipments. There
was no interference from Bahamian law enforcement at the Little
Darby base &quot;as long as the payments [to officials] were on
time.&quot; </p>

<p>Typically operating mid-size turbo-prop aircraft, Devoe pilots
departed for Colombia either from the base at Little Derby Island
or from Florida airports. Their route took them through the
Windward Passage generally to Colombian locations about 60 miles
south of the equator. In the early stages of the operation,
landings were made at official Colombian airports including the
airfields at Santa Marta and Riohacha. In at least one instance,
cocaine was openly loaded onto the smuggling aircraft at Riohacha
airport. In the early 1980's Devoe shifted landings to
clandestine jungle airstrips maintained by the organization's
cocaine supplier, Pepe Cabrera. This system streamlined the
trafficking process by eliminating transport of the cocaine to an
airport. The cocaine shipment was loaded directly onto the
aircraft near the strip, where the plane was simultaneously
prepared for the return flight. </p>

<p>Generally, Devoe pilots returned to the United States within
one day. Their preferred return route extended along the
Colombia/Venezuela border, over Haiti, and to the Bahamian base
on Little Derby Island. There, cocaine was sealed into the wing
fuel tanks of a small aircraft and flown directly into South
Florida for delivery to the cartel's representative there. </p>

<p>The Devoe organization's methods for avoiding interdiction
between South America and the United States were relatively
simple and typical of such smuggling operations. A Devoe pilot
learned the frequencies of DEA surveillance aircraft on one
occasion by &quot;acting like a helicopter buff&quot; inspecting
a DEA Cobra pursuit helicopter parked near the Devoe hangar.
Inside the helicopter the pilot copied the frequencies from a
clipboard hanging on the instrument panel. As the pilot explained
to the Commission: </p>

<p>By [subsequently] using our scanner and our knowledge of the
frequencies in use, we could monitor the activities of DEA planes
. . . we could learn not only the activities of the planes, but
also go up and check the plane out. By learning what types of
aircraft DEA was using we could plan our own strategy more
effectively . . . </p>

<p>Devoe also regularly sent &quot;cover-flight&quot; aircraft
ahead of the smuggling planes along the trafficking route to
monitor DEA and Customs Service surveillance patrols by radio.
These planes, which carried no drug cargo, were also used to
decoy pursuit aircraft. Once in the United States, Devoe strategy
for clearing Customs inspection was to: </p>

<p>&quot;. . . act normally and file a flight plan, come in and
land, and let them inspect the airplane . . . Customs inspectors
were far less interested in a lengthy examination of my plane if
I came in on a Sunday afternoon in the middle of the televised
football game. If the Dolphins were playing, that was even
better.&quot; </p>

<p>Using these tactics, Devoe Airlines was able to complete over
100 trafficking flights from Colombia without interference from
law enforcement authorities. </p>

<p>Case Study: Barry Seal </p>

<p>Adler Berriman Seal, a former TWA 747 captain, flew cocaine
from Colombia to the United States for over seven years during
the late 1970's and early 1980's. Seal was recruited as a
trafficking pilot by a personal friend who worked for the
Colombian cocaine trafficking organization headed by Jorge Ochoa,
and eventually worked directly with that organization's
leadership. </p>

<p>Initially, Seal flew direct trafficking flights between
Louisiana, and Colombia. He piloted a number of different
smuggling aircraft, the largest of which was a Vietnam-vintage
C-123 capable of holding tons of packaged cocaine. Seal always
departed and returned to his Louisiana base at night to reduce
chances of interdiction. His typical route took him over the
Yucatan Peninsula (not over the more heavily patrolled Yucatan
channel) and directly over Central America to the eastern tip of
Honduras, then south to any one of a number of airstrips and
airports in north central Colombia. </p>

<p>According to Seal, the Ochoa organization paid Colombian
officials bribes of $10,000 to $25,000, per flight for a
&quot;window,&quot; i.e., a specific time, position and altitude
designated for the smuggling flight's penetration of the
Colombian air space. If this payment was not made, the aircraft
was susceptible to interception by Colombian authorities. Seal
generally arrived in Colombia at dawn. His aircraft was loaded
with cocaine and refueled within an hour, sometimes within
fifteen minutes; and he returned immediately to the United
States. </p>

<p>Seal used two fairly simple techniques to avoid interdiction
on his return trip to the United States: both were effective
because of the heavy helicopter traffic running between the Gulf
Coast States and the hundreds of oil rigs located off shore.
First, when he reached the middle of the Gulf on his return trip,
Seal slowed his aircraft to 110-120 knots and was thus perceived
by monitoring radar as a helicopter, not a plane. Secondly, at a
distance of about 50 miles off the United States coast, he
dropped the aircraft to an altitude of 500-1000 feet in order to
co-mingle with the helicopter traffic, and thereby arouse even
less suspicion. </p>

<p>Once in United States airspace, Seal proceeded to prearranged
points 40 to 50 miles inland. The points were mapped out in
advance with Loran C, a long-range navigational instrument.
Further inland, he was generally joined by a helicopter. The two
aircraft proceeded to a drop zone, where the helicopter hovered
close to the ground. Seal then dropped the load of cocaine from
the airplane on a parachute; the helicopter picked up the load
from the drop zone and delivered it to waiting automobiles, which
eventually moved the cocaine to Miami. Seal proceeded to land his
drug-free aircraft at any nearby airport. </p>

<p>Seal was well paid for his services. He claims his top fee for
smuggling a kilogram of cocaine was $5,000; an average load was
300 kilograms. His most profitable single load netted him $1.5
million. He was never apprehended in connection with this
operation. </p>

<p>Specialized Electronics: The Smuggler's Edge </p>

<p>Like many trafficking pilots today, both Seal and Devoe relied
on sophisticated electronic equipment to maintain and secure
communications within their organization and to monitor law
enforcement surveillance efforts. Most devices used, while
expensive, are readily available in the United States, and
trafficking organizations, of course, fund the purchase of any
equipment that will facilitate their operations. Seal, for
example, once spent over $200,000 cash on communication and
surveillance equipment for the Ochoa cocaine trafficking
organization here in the United States in a two-day period.
Payments for this type of equipment are almost always made in
cash - sometimes suitcases full of cash - and are rarely refused.
</p>

<p>The communication devices most commonly used by traffickers
include state of the art radio equipment, communication
scramblers, pocket pagers and encrypting devices. The equipment
is used to prevent law enforcement interception of communication
between traffickers. A scrambler, for example, attaches to an
ordinary radio, and &quot;scrambles&quot; the normal radio
frequency with a number of different codes. Only someone with a
receiver coded to the particular scrambler frequency can decipher
the transmitted message; the transmission is unintelligible to
all other receivers. Digital encryption devices are used to send
messages in code, and are often secured so that they can be
accessed only after a security number is punched directly into
the device. The security feature allows only members of the
trafficking organization, who know the access code, to send or
decipher coded messages. The speed with which a digital message
is transmitted precludes radio tracking, at least by traditional
triangulation. </p>

<p>Among the other specialized devices used by traffickers to
detect and avoid law enforcement surveillance are radar
altimeters, beacon-interrogating digital radar, position tracking
equipment and long-range navigation instruments. Latest
generation night vision goggles are also frequently used by
traffickers flying at low altitudes in darkness. The strap-on
goggles intensify any available light by a factor of 50,000 and
greatly reduce a smuggler's risk of interdiction by allowing him
to fly his aircraft without lights. </p>

<p>The Combined Effort </p>

<p>A number of independent Colombian trafficking organizations,
among them the largest and most powerful operations, work in
collaboration on individual smuggling ventures. As described by
DEA special agent Michael Fredericks, the resulting organization
is fluid: </p>

<p>There is a level of organization that may involve . . . a
handful of people at the top. . . Below that level . . . there
are many workers who move between one organization and another. .
. It seems that in the Colombian organizations, a laboratory
operator may work for 1 [specific] trafficker . . . and not even
be aware of it simple because of the levels of insulation. </p>

<p>At the time of the preparation of this report, three men,
Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria, Jorge Luis Ochoa Vasques, and
Carlos Enrique Lehder-Rivas, were reported to control the most
significant trafficking organizations in Colombia. Known as
&quot;Los Grandes Mafiosos&quot; in the Colombian press, each
directs a separate organization, but the organizations work in
concert and exchange personnel and equipment in various instances
to maximize efficiency and profit. The resulting cartel system
affords these traffickers numerous advantages, among them control
over the price and the quality of Colombian cocaine, greater
access to smuggling and processing equipment, and a wide variety
of methods by which to avoid law enforcement. </p>

<p>A chart detailing a temporary cooperative venture based in
Medellin, Colombia, between the Pablo Escobar organization and
the Jorge Ochoa organization was confiscated from a mid-level
trafficker involved in the operation, and was provided to the
Commission by the Drug Enforcement Administration (Figure 2). As
diagrammed, the Escobar and Ochoa organizations combined and
divided the trafficking responsibilities typically completed by a
single organization. The same component parts - labor,
processing, transportation, finance and enforcement - were
carried over from the individual organizations, with the Escobar
group taking responsibility for production activities, and the
Ochoa group handling enforcement and finances. </p>

<p>Colombia Cracks Down </p>

<p>Through the 1970's cocaine traffickers operated throughout
Colombia with little interference, and in fact with considerable
support from the Colombian government. The situation changed in
April 1984 when drug traffickers assassinated Colombia's Minister
of Justice, Rodrigo Lara Bonilla. Lara's assassination came two
months after he authorized a raid on a major cocaine processing
plant known as Tranquilandia in Southeastern Colombia's Llanos
region, which resulted in the destruction of over $1 billion
worth of cocaine. Following Lara's assassination, Colombian
President Belisario Betancur Cuartas declared a &quot;war without
quarter&quot; on all drug smugglers and signed extradition orders
for a number of known major traffickers. President Betancur also
shifted trafficking trials to Colombia's military courts,
increased eradication and interdiction efforts within his
country, and increased regulation of those chemicals necessary
for processing coca base into cocaine. </p>

<p>President Betancur's actions have had important ramifications
both for traffickers and for other South and Central American
governments. When the intensified Colombian programs became
effective, a number of major traffickers, among them Escobar,
Lehder and Ochoa, went into hiding and moved their processing
operations to neighboring countries. In 1984 processing
laboratories as well as stockpiles of essential conversion
chemicals were discovered and destroyed in Panama, Venezuela,
Mexico and Canada. Evidence suggests that significant processing
activity is now also taking place in Nicaragua and Brazil. The
Colombian regulation of ether and other essential precursor
chemicals has resulted in an increase in cocaine processing
activity in the United States: 21 processing laboratories were
discovered and destroyed in South Florida in 1984 as opposed to
11 in 1983. </p>

<p>In March 1985 despite his status as a fugitive, Carlos Lehder
appeared on Colombian television, filmed live from a jungle
clearing by a Spanish film crew. Lehder used the television
opportunity, which he had arranged, to appeal to the Colombian
revolutionary organizations to participate in the &quot;cocaine
bonanza . . . the arm of the struggle against America.&quot; He
also characterized cocaine as the &quot;Achilles heel of American
imperialism.&quot; Lehder disappeared into the jungle after the
interview and remains at large, presumably in the remote jungles
of Colombia. </p>

<p>Heroin Trafficking </p>

<p>Traditional Organized Crime: La Cosa Nostra and the French
Connection </p>

<p>Heroin trafficking in this country first became big business
in the 1920's, when organized criminals based in New York City's
Jewish community began to control the importation and
distribution of the drug. By the late 1930's, La Cosa Nostra
joined the Jewish groups in the heroin enterprise, importing the
drug from France, Asia and the Mideast. When these sources became
inaccessible during World War II, Mexico became the major U.S.
heroin supplier. </p>

<p>After the war, La Cosa Nostra took control of America's heroin
market, this time importing most of its drug supply from Italian
refineries. When the Italian government banned the manufacture of
heroin in the early 1950's, La Cosa Nostra traffickers were
forced to look to other sources. A new system was quickly
devised, by which Turkish morphine base was refined to heroin in
Marseilles, then shipped to Montreal or Sicily. Organized crime
groups located in these transshipment points then sent the heroin
directly to the United States. This arrangement, popularly known
as the &quot;French Connection,&quot; allowed La Cosa Nostra to
monopolize the heroin trade from the 1980's through the early
1970's. During the peak French Connection years, the LCN
controlled an estimated 95 percent of all of the heroin entering
New York City, as well as most of the heroin distributed
throughout the United States. </p>

<p>The La Cosa Nostra heroin monopoly lasted until 1972, when
under diplomatic pressure from the United States, Turkey banned
opium production and the French Connection collapsed. Amsterdam
replaced Marseilles as the center of European heroin traffic, and
Chicago, Los Angeles and Miami joined New York City as major U.S.
distribution centers. Other trafficking groups rose to compete
with the LCN for heroin dollars in New York City and throughout
the country. </p>

<p>Source Country Traffickers: Mexico </p>

<p>In the five years after the collapse of the French Connection,
Mexico became the major source of U.S. heroin. Mexico's rise was
logical: the country contains extensive regions suitable for both
opium cultivation and refining and shares a lightly guarded 2,000
mile border with the United States. Mexicans could manufacture
heroin and smuggle it into the United States with little risk of
detection. This simplified trafficking system resulted in
increased Mexican heroin availability in the United States. </p>

<p>For generations, opium has been grown in remote areas of
Mexico's Sierra Madre Mountain states of Durango, Sinaloa and
Chihuahua. Culiacan, on the western side of the Sierra Madre, and
Durango to the east, developed in the 1970's as major production
centers for heroin destined for U.S. distribution. Trafficking
organizations are now entrenched in these areas, and are involved
in all phases of the heroin manufacture and distribution process.
Opium gum is collected by peasants in isolated mountain areas and
is transported by mule or carried by hand to nearby mountain
villages. Typically, village middlemen sell the opium to a drug
trafficking organization boss, who moves drugs to an
organization-held laboratory for processing to heroin. Mexican
couriers then transport the heroin to the members of the
trafficking organization in the United States. The major Mexican
heroin trafficking organizations supplying heroin to America are
generally extended familial organizations, but loyal workers
sometimes are given status as &quot;quasi-family&quot; members of
the groups. The organizations work to eliminate competition and
to control as completely as possible all aspects of the heroin
trade. Members act as opium cultivators, village middlemen, and
heroin brokers and distributors. In the United States, the
organization typically controls distribution from the wholesaler
to the retail distributor, but has little or no involvement in
street distribution. This is seen as an unnecessarily risky and
low-profit aspect of the business, and is left to outsiders. </p>

<p>Violence is an integral part of Mexican trafficking.
Organization members provide cultivators with semi-automatic and
automatic weapons to protect their crops; weapons are used
throughout the trafficking system to eliminate informants, and to
intimidate competitors and law enforcement officials. Corruption
of Mexican police officials is well-documented and is essential
to the smooth operation of the Mexican trafficking organizations.
</p>

<p>In 1984, Mexican traffickers provided 32 percent share of the
heroin consumed in the United States. The figure is expected to
rise over the next several years due to the continued devaluation
of the peso and improved agricultural technology. </p>

<p>Case Study: The Herrera Family </p>

<p>Since the early 1970's the Jamie Herrera-Navarres organization
has been a major heroin smuggling power operative between Mexico
and the United States. The Herrera organization is a
confederation of families related by blood and marriage, although
some non-family members have been accepted into the group over
time. Older family members process opium and morphine base,
younger members handle the drug sales and shipments in Mexico and
in the United States. The Herrera organization is now estimated
to have 3,000 to 5,000 members, a significant portion of whom are
naturalized American citizens and illegal aliens residing in this
country. </p>

<p>Despite the 1978 conviction and incarceration of Jamie
Herrera, and several key family members, the organization remains
active. In July 1985, 135 persons in the United States,
comprising eight separate Herrera-related distribution rings,
were indicted in Chicago on drug trafficking charges. These
Herrera groups allegedly trafficked heroin and marijuana from
Mexico through El Paso to a middleman in Texas. From Texas, the
drugs were shipped to Chicago, then distributed throughout the
country. This Herrera enterprise, only a small fragment of the
total organization, is estimated to have had gross annual profits
of over $200 million. The arrests are expected to have a
significant effect on the Herrera organization, if only on a
temporary basis. </p>

<p>Source Country Traffickers: Southeast Asia </p>

<p>Mexican heroin production decreased in the late 1970's due to
enforcement, eradication and poor weather conditions. By 1980,
Mexico provided only 25 percent of the heroin consumed in the
United Stated, down from a peak level of 80 percent in 1975. At
the same time, heroin production in Southeast Asia accelerated
dramatically. By 1976, the &quot;Golden Triangle&quot; of Burma,
Thailand and Laos supplied more than a third of the heroin
consumed in the United States; Mexico supplied the remainder.
Golden Triangle heroin first gained popularity with American
servicemen stationed in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War
because it was readily available, inexpensive, and considerably
more pure than Mexican heroin. After the war, Golden Triangle
heroin was exported to the United States in increasing amounts. </p>

<p>Nearly 90 percent of the Golden Triangle opium is currently
produced in Burma. Two-thirds of this crop is produced in the
northeast area of the country, where control is shared by the
Burmese Communist Party (BCP) and the Shan United Army (SUA).
Both groups were at one time political insurgent organizations
but are now almost entirely devoted to obtaining profit for the
production, smuggling and sale of heroin base. They derive
considerable income from &quot;taxes&quot; and fees they levy on
opium growers and heroin producers and traffickers. This income
is used to purchase weapons, to be utilized not in furtherance of
political goals, but for protection of each group's narcotics
enterprise. Traditionally, the two groups have coexisted
peacefully: the BCP has acted as the major opium supplier in
Southeast Asia and the SUA has been the area's major refiner and
trafficker. The BCP has recently become involved in refining and
distribution activities, and the organizations are currently in
conflict. </p>

<p>Opium and morphine base produced in northeastern Burma
transported by horse and donkey caravans to refineries along the
Thailand-Burma border for conversion to heroin and heroin base.
Most of the finished products are shipped across the border into
various towns in North Thailand and down to Bangkok for further
distribution to international markets. In the past major ethnic
Chinese traffickers in Bangkok have controlled much of the
foreign sales and movement of Southeast Asian heroin from
Thailand, but a combination of law enforcement pressure,
publicity and a regional drought has significantly reduced their
role. As a consequence, many less-predominant traffickers in
Bangkok and other parts of Thailand now control smaller
quantities of the heroin going to international markets. </p>

<p>Although Thailand is the primary transit center for Southeast
Asian heroin destined for international markets, alternate
trafficking routes are increasingly utilized as a result of
Thailand's sustained enforcement actions. Some opium, morphine
base, and heroin base are moved South through Burma to southern
Thailand and Malaysia for conversion to heroin in laboratories
along the Thailand/Malaysia border. Refined heroin is also
trafficked from Burma to India, then to the West. </p>

<p>Heroin from Southeast Asia is most frequently brought to the
United States by couriers, typically Thai and U.S. nationals and
Hong Kong Chinese, traveling on commercial airlines. California
and Hawaii are the primary U.S. entry points for Golden Triangle
heroin, but small percentages of the drug are trafficked into New
York City and Washington D.C. While Southeast Asian groups have
had success in trafficking heroin to the United States, they
initially had difficulty arranging street level distribution.
However, with the incarceration of Asian traffickers in American
prisons during the 1970's, contacts between Asian and American
prisoners developed. These contacts have allowed Southeast Asian
traffickers access to individuals and organizations distributing
heroin at the retail level. </p>

<p>Chinese organized crime groups, known as Triads, located
primarily in Hong Kong, and their U.S. counterparts, Tongs, are
positioned to participate in Southeast Asian heroin traffic, but
the extent of their activity in these enterprises is not known at
the present time. These organizations provide Asians direct
access to criminal groups in the United States, and could
potentially assume a significant role in U.S. heroin trafficking
activities. Currently, there are major Triad organizations in New
York, Los Angeles, Seattle, San Francisco, and Toronto. </p>

<p>Source Country Traffickers: Southwest Asia </p>

<p>Opium production in Southeast Asia was significantly reduced
in the late 1970's and early 1980's due to a prolonged drought.
This decrease, along with the unstable political climate in the
region caused by the fall of the ruling governments in South
Vietnam and Laos, resulted in a reduction of Southeast Asian
heroin exports to the United States. During this period, opium
production in the Golden Crescent area of Southwest Asia,
comprising the common border regions of Pakistan, Afghanistan and
Iran, markedly increased. In 1979 the Golden Crescent became the
primary U.S. heroin source. Southwest Asia continues to be this
country's major supplier: over one-half of the heroin entering
the United States in 1984 originated as opium in the Golden
Crescent. </p>

<p>The surge in Golden Crescent heroin exports to the United
States can be attributed to a number of factors. Opium has always
been grown in the region, but traditionally, opium grown in
Afghanistan and Pakistan was shipped directly to Iran to supply
that country's one million opium addicts. The situation changed
dramatically after the 1980 fundamentalist revolution in Iran, as
political and social instability allowed greatly increased
domestic opium production and curtailed the demand for opium from
Pakistan and Afghanistan. The Iranian market was further closed
to outsiders by the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which
blocked several of the traditional smuggling routes into Iran. </p>

<p>Concurrent with the reduction in Iranian demand for
non-domestic opium, growers in Afghanistan and Pakistan harvested
record crops. The opium crop in Pakistan alone increased by 400
percent between 1974-1979, from 200 to 800 metric tons.
Consequently Pakistani and Afghan traffickers learned to refine
their opium into heroin, and sought new markets for their
product, mainly in Western Europe and the and the United States. </p>

<p>Southwest Asian opium is grown in remote mountain areas and
generally is transported to crude laboratories in the
Pakistan/Afghanistan border areas. Most of the refineries are
located in Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province or
Afghanistan's Nangarhai Province; many are clustered in the area
of the Khyber Pass. Refined heroin leaves Pakistan via several
routes: through Baluchistan to Iran and beyond; by sea through
Karachi to Bombay and on to the Arabian Gulf States or Europe;
overland through the Lahore area enroute to transit points in
India; or by air through Islamabad or Karachi. </p>

<p>Southwest Asian heroin is typically smuggled into the United
States concealed in legitimate shipments of air and sea cargo,
such as textiles or sports equipment manufactured by Pakistani
companies, or it is carried by air couriers. Couriers generally
travel on commercial carriers, and many have connections with
airline crews and station managers. The international postal
system is also commonly used to ship heroin from Pakistan
directly to the United States in sealed newspapers and
periodicals. </p>

<p>Golden Crescent heroin is trafficked into the United States by
a variety of narcotics organizations. The following is an
overview of some of the more significant groups involved in the
Southwest Asian heroin trade. </p>

<p>Pakistani Traffickers </p>

<p>Pakistani nationals are responsible for trafficking a
significant percentage of Golden Crescent heroin in the United
States, especially in the Northeast. The Pakistanis do not have a
sophisticated retail sales network in the United States and
typically rely on family or Pakistani friends in this country to
distribute drugs. They also have relied on black trafficking
organizations in Los Angeles, Detroit and New York, and with
Italian organized crime in New York City. One Pakistani
distribution system was described in testimony before this
Commission by a Pakistani national who was incarcerated for his
involvement in a distribution network. The Commission witness has
relatives living both in Lahore, Pakistan, and in the United
States; he was a resident of Houston, Texas and was employed as
an engineer while involved in heroin trafficking. In the heroin
operation, a family member in Lahore sent couriers to JFK airport
in New York with heroin concealed in false-bottom luggage. From
JFK, the couriers traveled &quot;in transit&quot; to La Guardia,
then on to Toronto. Because of their &quot;in transit&quot;
status, Customs Service officials did not search the travelers in
the United States, and Canadian Customs inspection was not
difficult to clear. </p>

<p>In Canada, traffickers often held a particular heroin shipment
for three to six months, until appropriate distribution contacts
were established and it was certain that law enforcement
officials were not aware of the shipment. At that time,
distribution contacts traveled by automobile to Toronto, picked
up a portion or all of the heroin shipment, and drove the heroin
into the United States without Customs interdiction. This
particular network supplied heroin to Seattle, Houston, San
Francisco, New York and Las Vegas. The contacts were all related
by blood or marriage. </p>

<p>Pakistanis also rely on the international postal system to
move drugs from Southwest Asia to the United States. In July
1983, for example, U.S. Customs officials at JFK Airport seized
one kilogram of heroin concealed in rolled newspapers destined
for Pakistani nationals residing in New York. The package had
been sent from the United Arab Emirates. Two other packages, each
containing one-half kilogram of heroin, were mailed to Berkeley,
California from the same source. Rolled newspapers and magazines
can conceal up to one kilogram of heroin and are generally sealed
in plastic. Drugs are also sent through the mail concealed in
shipments of textiles, clothing and other durable goods. </p>

<p>Lebanese Traffickers </p>

<p>A portion of Golden Crescent heroin passes through Lebanon en
route to the United States, thus affording Lebanese nationals an
opportunity to become involved in the trafficking activity. A
significant percentage of the heroin exported from Lebanon leaves
via Damascus International Airport. </p>

<p>In the United States, trafficking by Lebanese nationals is
especially prevalent in the Northeast. In one network,
non-Lebanese couriers primarily from Canada traveled to Damascus
and Beirut to pick up heroin which they then transported to
Houston, Detroit and New York via commercial carrier. Heroin was
concealed in false-bottom luggage and inside photo albums. The
heroin was transferred to Lebanese nationals living in Toronto
and Ontario, Canada, and in various cities in the United States.
Some of the money generated from the sale of this heroin was
laundered in banks in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. </p>

<p>India </p>

<p>A proportion of the heroin traditionally distributed abroad
through the Pakistan cities of Karachi, Peshawar and Quetta is
now being shipped through Bombay and New Dehli. Traffickers
smuggle Southwest Asian heroin into India along the Indo-Pakistan
border and transport it overland to the Indian cities; Southeast
Asian heroin is brought into Bombay and Calcutta by sea and
overland routes. Bombay, Calcutta and New Dehli are now major
staging, shipping and trafficking centers for heroin smuggled to
the West. Trafficking activity is frequent at Perlane Airport in
Dehli and at Bombay's Sahar International Airport, and Indian
harbors and airports are used by Pakistani, Afghan and Indian
traffickers as points of embarkation to Western destinations. </p>

<p>West Africa. </p>

<p>In the past three years, West African countries, especially
Nigeria, have been documented as transshipments centers for
Golden Crescent heroin. Nigerian couriers based in Lagos travel
to Pakistan to obtain heroin, then continue on commercial flights
to their final destinations, or return to Nigeria to repackage
the narcotics into smaller amounts for smuggling to the West. </p>

<p>A number of loosely associated Nigerian heroin trafficking
organizations have connections both with suppliers in Pakistan
and with retailers in Western Europe and the United States.
Typically, Nigerian couriers travel directly to Karachi on
commercial aircraft and purchase heroin in that city, but some
couriers continue to Peshawar to make their purchases. Couriers
return to Nigeria transiting other countries in Africa and
Europe. A different group of couriers, usually students or poor
residents of Lagos, traffic the drugs to Europe or the United
States. </p>

<p>Couriers typically enter the United States directly through
JFK airport in New York although in some cases, they come to this
country via cities in Europe and Canada. Drugs are concealed in
body cavities, and in false-bottom suitcases. </p>

<p>After the heroin arrives in the United States, it is sold only
to one or two American distributors in a given area. Distribution
networks are most active in New York City and Washington, D.C.
and are operative in Los Angeles, Houston and Boston. DEA reports
that individuals in nearly every community of Nigerian nationals
in the United States has some link to heroin traffickers and
couriers. Profits from heroin sales are laundered through banks
in the United States in Britain. </p>

<p>The Post-French Connection LCN </p>

<p>Traditional organized crime continues to play a significant
role in this country's heroin trade through the 1980's. The LCN's
long established connections with criminal organizations in
Sicily facilitate the movement of heroin from Europe to the
United States, and while Sicily is no longer a major refinery for
heroin, the country is a major transshipment center for Southwest
and Southeast Asian heroin. Sicilian organizations supply LCN
affiliates with heroin; LCN networks either distribute the drug
themselves or sell it in large quantities to major distributors. </p>

<p>The LCN As A Supplier: The Nicky Barnes Operation </p>

<p>Black criminal groups have controlled some percentage of
heroin traffic in New York City since the 1940's. Their influence
increased significantly in the early 1970's, after the French
Connection. The first major independent black trafficking
organization, a group of over one hundred distributors and
couriers, was headed by Charles Green. The Green organization
imported heroin and cocaine from South America and distributed
the drugs throughout New York City during the late 1960's. Green
was arrested in 1970, control of this heroin network passed to
Frank Matthews. Matthews was brought in to the heroin business by
Louis Cirillo, a major LCN associate, and was continually
supplied with LCN heroin. </p>

<p>Leroy &quot;Nicky&quot; Barnes succeeded Matthews in 1971.
Under his leadership, the organization controlled heroin sales
and manufacture throughout New York State into Canada and
Pennsylvania. The Barnes operation was well-organized and
lucrative. By 1976, Barnes had at least seven major lieutenants
under his direction; each of them controlled a dozen mid-level
distributors, who in turn supplied up to forty street-level
retailers. Barnes at all times remained well insulated from the
daily trafficking activities, and maintained a wealthy lifestyle.
He owned five homes, a Mercedes, a Maserati, several Lincolns,
Cadillacs and Thunderbirds, and hundreds of suits and coats. He
estimates that his total trafficking income was at least several
million dollars. </p>

<p>Barnes joined with six other major New York dealers to form a
heroin cartel called the &quot;Council&quot; in the mid 1970's.
Members of the Council pooled funds to purchase multi-kilo
amounts of heroin, worked to ensure a consistent supply of the
drug in their distribution area, combined their
&quot;cutting&quot; and distribution networks in certain cases,
and often used a common sources for diluents, weapons,
automobiles and other resources. The Council had specific
&quot;departments&quot; which arranged legal services, security
and enforcement, and financial services including money
laundering. </p>

<p>Barnes' most significant source of heroin, to whom he directed
other Council members, was LCN associate &quot;Natty&quot;
Madonna. Despite Barnes' assertion and belief that the Council
worked completely independently of the Mafia, through the Madonna
connection, LCN heroin was prevalent in Harlem traffic from 1972
to 1976. </p>

<p>The Asian-LCN Links </p>

<p>La Cosa Nostra actively seeks out Asian nationals as
connections to heroin sources in Southeast Asia. In testimony
before the President's Commission on organized crime, Franklin
Liu, a veteran Hong Kong clothier, explained how he was recruited
as a courier for a New York La Cosa Nostra family involved in
heroin trafficking. Liu, who held a legitimate four year business
visa which allowed him to travel without restriction, was first
contacted by Antonio Turano, a reputed member of the Sicilian
Mafia, in connection with Turano's money laundering operations.
In one instance, Turano brought Liu a suitcase filled with
$400,000 cash, and requested that Liu wire the money to a bank in
Zurich. Turano met with Liu in Milan in the course of the
operation to make certain that the money had been wired without
incident. </p>

<p>At a later date, after Liu had successfully participated in a
number of money laundering operations, Turano asked Liu if he had
any connections to drug traffickers in the Far East; Liu did not.
Turano arranged a connection, and agreed to pay Liu $5,000 for
every kilo of heroin he trafficked into the United States. Liu
was subsequently contacted by Turano's agent, a Thai woman, and
arranged to meet her at a hotel in New York City. When they met,
each held half of a one dollar bill given to them by Turano as
identification. Liu gave the woman his car keys; the next day she
returned the car with heroin in the trunk and requested a payment
of $40,000 in cash and a $60,000 bank check. When Liu went to
collect the money from Turano, he found that Turano had been
arrested. Liu was subsequently arrested and convicted on charges
of conspiracy to import heroin in connection with this case. </p>

<p>The Pizza Connection </p>

<p>During the late 1970's and early 1980's members of La Cosa
Nostra in the United States allegedly cooperated with the
Sicilian Mafia in a drug trafficking conspiracy which resulted in
the importation of heroin worth over $1.6 billion into the United
States. In April, 1984, 38 individuals were indicted on charges
related to the trafficking operation, popularly known as the
&quot;Pizza Connection.&quot; The network that developed to
facilitate the traffic in this enterprise was reputedly one of
the largest heroin importation operations in history, and used
pizza parlors throughout this country to distribute heroin
smuggled from Southeast and Southwest Asia via Sicily to the
United States. Additional heroin that was trafficked through this
system was produced in laboratories operating in Sicily. </p>

<p>According to the indictment in the case, the &quot;Pizza
Connection&quot; heroin network relied upon a faction of the New
York Bonanno organized crime family headed by Salvatore Catalano
to distribute the heroin in this country. In turn, the heroin
business of this Bonanno crime faction was tied directly to
organized criminal groups in Sicily, the rest of Italy,
Switzerland, Spain, and Brazil. Direct evidence of the existence
of the network was first obtained in 1980 when couriers were
observed transferring enormous amounts of cash through investment
houses and banks in New York city to Italy and Switzerland. Tens
of millions of dollars derived from heroin sales in this country
were transferred overseas in this fashion, apparently in
violation of the Bank Secrecy Act. </p>

<p>Investigations related to the &quot;Pizza Connection&quot;
case have revealed that factions of the Sicilian Mafia operate in
the United States independently of the American La Cosa Nostra.
While the two groups apparently cooperate on certain ventures
such as the &quot;Pizza Connection&quot; heroin importation
operations, they appear to be distinct and separate organizations
under different leadership. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>