
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B031-294</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/args1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110358 text/html 79418
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:03:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:35 GMT
Content-length: 79200
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Arguments and Answers -- the drug policy debate</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Arguments and Answers - Page 1 </h1>

<p> <b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p> This is a collection of actual arguments and answers from a
long chain of debates on drug policy. Somewhere in this archive,
every argument you ever heard in favor of the drug war is
encountered and rebutted. If I missed any, please send them to me
by e-mail: schaffer@smartlink.net </p>

<p> My opponent's comments are in <b>boldface</b>. My comments
are in plain text. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>{{1. &quot;....After adjusting for covariants, the
marijuana group showed small but statistically significant
increased risk for all three catagories of conditions
(Respiratory, accidental injury, and other).&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> Other, longer studies, such as the Jamaican studies have
shown no statistically significant differences between marijuana
smokers and non-smokers, even when the marijuana smokers had an
average daily dose about 28 times that consumed by the average US
user. Therefore, one study is not going to break the back of the
collected research on marijuana. </p>

<p> The collected summation of marijuana research is this:
&quot;Marijuana, in its natural form, is probably the safest
therapeutically active substance known to mankind. It is safer
than many of the foods we commonly eat.&quot; -- Francis Young,
Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, after two years of review of all of the evidence
presented by the DEA and by those asking for reform. That is the
same conclusion supported by every major study of drug policy. </p>

<p> <b>{{2. &quot;Respiratory deposition of tar and adsorption of
carbon monoxide in experimental subjects were four and five times
higher, respectively, after smoking marijuana than after smoking
tobacco.&quot;}} </b> </p>

<p> Assuming this is true, how does this prove that throwing
millions of people in prison is the best approach to the problem?
</p>

<p> <b>{{3. &quot;Marijuana has repeatedly been found to be the
second most common drug, after alcohol, present in the blood of
nonfatally and fatally injured persons.&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> There might be a good, logical reason for this. Marijuana is
detectable in the blood for up to two months after a person
smokes a joint, even though the high is long since gone. It may
simply be an indicator that far more people are smoking marijuana
than you thought. You also have to remember that common over the
counter drugs will make people test positive for marijuana. </p>

<p> You will note that they did not say &quot;drivers.&quot; It
is irrelevant what the passengers were using. </p>

<p> And, by this sort of reasoning, the penalties for alcohol
sale and possession ought to be even higher than the pot
penalties. Why aren't you fighting even harder for alcohol
Prohibition? </p>

<p> <b>{{4. &quot;Laboratory studies have shown decreased
driving-related skills after smoking marijuana.&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> Repeated real world experience has shown that marijuana is
not a major factor in traffic accidents. The reason is fairly
simple -- pot has a very mild effect on people and does not
destroy coordination the way alcohol does. The real problem here
is that the people who want to throw people in prison for drugs
do not actually know anything about the drug and its effects. </p>

<p> <b>{{5. &quot;In a Swedish study following a cohort of 45,540
male military conscripts for 15 years, heavier cannabis users had
a nearly three times greater risk of death than nonusers....and
had an elevated risk of schizophrenia compared with
nonusers.&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> A Johns Hopkins study, just as credible, showed that
marijuana smokers were more ambitious than their peers and
usually succeeded better than the rest. </p>

<p> The question here is &quot;Death from what?&quot; Their
cannabis users could have been concentrated in those areas with a
higher risk of death, in light of the fact that they engage in
somewhat more risk taking than their peers. Like, for instance,
our soldiers who smoked pot in Vietnam. </p>

<p> As for schizophrenia -- Did the pot cause the schizophrenia,
or would it be more likely that a person with severe mental
problems would try all sorts of self-medication to stop the
voices in their head? I have a relative with schizophrenia and I
can tell you what the answer is. </p>

<p> And, if the person is developing schizophrenia -- for any
reason -- how does it help the situation to throw them in jail? </p>

<p> <b>{{&quot; The insoluable particulate (tar) phase of the
smoke from marijuana contains about 50% of some carcinogenic aryl
hydrocarbons, including benz[a]anthracene, and benzo[a]pyrene
then the smoke from a comparable quantity of unfiltered Kentucky
reference tobacco.&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> So? Should the prison sentences for tobacco be 50% of those
for pot? Or should we also account for the fact that pot smokers
typically smoke far fewer cigarettes than a tobacco smoker? Just
how long should we put tobacco smokers in jail, anyway? </p>

<p> <b>{{&quot;The smoking of one marijuana cigarette - 800 to
900 mg, 1% to 3% delta-tetrahydrocannabinol - led to the
deposition in the lower respiratory tract of about a four-fold
greater quantity of insoluable particulates (tar) than smoking a
filtered tobacco cigarette of comparable weight...&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> See above. </p>

<p> <b>{{&quot;...the authors [Polen, et al, of the accompanying
article] are the first to use a systematic review of medical
records to assess the health consequences of marijuana...Their
finding that near-daily marijuana smoking is a significant
independent risk factor for the development of respiratory
illness, injuries, and other medical problems requiring medical
attention CHALLENGES THE VIEW THAT MARIJUANA POSES INSIGNIFICANT
HEALTH RISKS.&quot;</b> }} </p>

<p> It will have to do a lot of challenging, because there is
alot of evidence to challenge. Actually, this is more evidence
for a change in the law because every major study of drug policy
said that prohibition only INCREASED the dangers which were
already present in illegal drugs. The more dangerous you assume
them to be, the more important it becomes to treat them in a
non-criminal manner. </p>

<p> But, of course, that is not really the point, anyway. Let's
suppose that I totally believed everything you just said. Why do
you automatically assume that putting millions of people in
prison is the best approach to the problem? If it wasn't a good
idea for alcohol, and we can see that it would be a dumb idea for
tobacco, why do you suppose it is such a great idea for any other
chemical? </p>

<p> <b>{{So, it would appear the marijuana is more dangerous than
tobacco. Itwould also appear that, given the statistics
concerning fatal accidents, that marijuana use can be deadly.}}</b>
</p>

<p> So how many people are actually killed by all these drugs in
a typical year, anyway? </p>

<p> And, while you're at it, there are perhaps thirty million
people who are regular users of pot. How many millions of people
do you think we ought to throw in prison in order to control this
problem? </p>

<p> And why was the most common agricultural crop in America made
illegal in 1937 in the first place? Was it because of these
&quot;dangers&quot;, or was it for some entirely different
reason? How did the most common crop in America suddenly become a
dreaded menace to society? </p>

<p> <b>{{}}Netherlands has fewer addicts per capita than the US.
So does almost every country in the world. So what?}}</b> </p>

<p> Gee, that would seem to argue that our prohibition isn't so
effective, wouldn't it? And you said it was easy to control!!! </p>

<p> <b>{{ Germany recently decriminalized possession of small
amounts of marijuana, as have several states in the U.S. So
what?}}</b> </p>

<p> Maybe you could tell me why hemp (and the other drugs for
that matter) were made illegal in the first place. </p>

<p> <b>{{&quot;When a heroin addicts can get precise doses at
regular intervals, he can function pretty normally.&quot; They
don't want to get high?}}</b> </p>

<p> Ever heard of Dr. William Halsted? Or Senator Joseph
McCarthy? What do they have in common? </p>

<p> <b>{{ I went and looked it up. You need 100 grams of heroin
to get a 5-year sentence or a whole kilo to get a 10-year
sentence. For cocaine, the figures were 500 grams and 5 kilos.
That's a lot of dope.}}</b> </p>

<p> See the 7-8-93 op-ed piece by Federal Judge Weinstein in the
NY Times. He points out that it varies from one city to another.
In some major metropolitan areas, 100 pounds will not get you any
jail time, while in others, a marijuana seed might mean life in
prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{ If there is no evidence that punishment reduces crime,
we should shut down the prisons entirely.}}</b> </p>

<p> There are thirty million illegal drug users. Just tell me the
most reasonable number to put in prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{ You say that junkies don't do any harm, but would you
want to live next door to one?}}</b> </p>

<p> A better question is if you would want to have a drug addict
(William Bennett) as a drug czar? </p>

<p> <b>{{ I keep hearing this. No one provides any evidence. It
doesn't seem logical that people who have so much trouble
supporting a drug habit *outside* somehow acquire the necessary
income when you lock them up.}}</b> </p>

<p> Talk to someone who has been in prison. </p>

<p> {{ Then why lock up drunk drivers? Or any criminal?
Generally, we lock people up because they are a menace to
society. It is *always* possible to lose a potential
&quot;contributing member&quot; in this way, but generally we are
more interested in the rights of potential victims: Who could be
you, me, or anyone.}} </p>

<p> Anyone who commits an offense against another person should
be tried for the offense. What should be different is that a
person on cocaine who commits a crime should not get life in
prison while a drunk would plead diminished capacity for the same
crime. We should have consistent standards for all drugs and we
should apply our limited resources to the part of the problem
where it will do the most good. For example, we don't lock up
wine drinkers to try to control drunk driving. Generally, we do
lock people up because they are a menace to others. Of course,
that never was the reason for the drug laws. </p>

<p> You are far more likely to be the victim of something related
to alcohol and tobacco than from the effects of the illegal
drugs. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The properties of heroin and alcohol are very
different, and the social context is also different. For example,
most people can use alcohol in moderate amounts without ever
becoming addicted. Also, alcohol can be brewed up in any bathtub,
or derived from common products such as after-shave and
mouthwash, so the potential for controlling abuse is much less.}}</b>
</p>

<p> Yes, the properties are different. Alcohol is just as
addicting and far more damaging to the health. </p>

<p> Yes, the social context is different. The illegal drugs were
outlawed primarily because they were associated (wrongly) with
racial minorities, while alcohol and tobacco were perceived as
&quot;white&quot; drugs. </p>

<p> The evidence shows that most drug users of all types use in
moderation. This can be shown quite quickly by a simple
comparison between the total number of users and the number of
addicts. </p>

<p> The fact that alcohol can be brewed in a bathtub is hardly a
sensible argument for any kind of policy. It is equally
nonsensical for other drugs. Does that mean we should legalize
marijuana because people can grow it in their closet? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Since &quot;every major study&quot; agrees with you, it
follows that youagree with &quot;every major study,&quot; for
example:</b> </p>

<p> <b>* The President's Commission on Organized Crime (1986)</b>
</p>

<p> <b>* The National Report of the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(1992)</b> </p>

<p> <b>* The President's Commission on Model State Drug Laws
(1993)</b> </p>

<p> <b>So, can I quote these studies as authoritative, or have
you suddenly changed your mind?}}</b> </p>

<p> <b>The first study has little to do with drug policy and
cannot be considered any kind of a study of the drug policy
issue.</b> </p>

<p> <b>The second is a statistical report with no consideration
of the historical or medical aspects of the problem (or many
other aspects for that matter.)</b> </p>

<p> The third did not do any real research on drug policy. </p>

<p> But, since I so rarely run into anyone who tries naming
anything, I will give you credit. Let's assume, for the sake of
argument, that all three studies were about drug policy and right
on the money. The score is now 10 to 3 against you. When you get
a little closer I will name some more on my side. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I believe your chronology is wrong. I remember reading
a book on the subject (_Chasing the Dragon_, as I recall), which
was published around 1985. Unfortunately I don't have it to hand
. . . But, as I recall, Britain had legalized prescription
narcotics in the 60s, and they were still legal at the time the
book was published. The result was an explosive increase in drug
use, along with the accompanying things that drug abusers like to
do: abuse their spouses, neglect their children and live off the
public dole. I believe it was the Majors administration, sometime
around 1990, which flirted with stricter drug enforcement (still
not very tough by American standards). Is this that what you're
talking about?}}</b> </p>

<p> The correct chronology is given in the text of the 60 Minutes
show contained in Hoover.zip. In the 80s, under US pressure, the
British adopted a get-tough policy. It was a disaster, causing
both health problems and rising crime. In Liverpool at the
current time, they prescribe heroin and cocaine to addicts. Most
of the addicts are healthy, employed, and living with their
families. One of the conditions of their treatment is that they
must not commit crimes. It works. They originally did it because
of the AIDS infection rates, and the infection rate has dropped
to less than one percent of the addicts -- while in the US the
rate is over fifty percent. They also found that Liverpool, which
had become famous for crime, was suddenly peaceful again. It is
happening now and about a half dozen of my friends (including
doctors) are now in England discussing it with them. </p>

<p> <b>}}The Dutch, may not be alone for long. Many other
European countries are looking to decriminalization; many have
signed the Frankfort Accord agreeing that is the best approach. I
dunno about that,}}</b> </p>

<p> The following countries have already either legalized drugs
or taken steps toward legalization: The Netherlands, Germany,
Switzerland, England, Italy, Spain, and Colombia. </p>

<p> <b>}}But it indicates that Germany is moving in the direction
of common sense, while we are not. Yeah, they are liberalizing
hash and persecuting the hard drug users. That's the direction of
common sense.}}</b> </p>

<p> Why is it common sense to persecute anyone? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Still, when soldiers returned to the States, where
drugs were neither cheap nor easy to find, they gave up the
habit.}}</b> </p>

<p> The studies of the issue said that all of the soldiers
surveyed reported they could get heroin after they got back any
time they wanted it. The reason they quit was because they were
no longer under stress. </p>

<p> <b>{{ And we also lock up left-handed people . . . as I have
already pointed out. However, there are very few people in prison
simply for being junkies; most of them have committed other
offenses.}}</b> </p>

<p> Absolutely not true. There are considerable numbers. See the
testimony of the Corrections Commissioner of New York in
Hoover.zip. See also the op-ed piece by Federal Judge Jack B.
Weinstein in the 7-8- 93 New York Times. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Not at all. It is you have ignored my objection: The
argument that expensive to lock up junkies ignores the experience
with drunk driving. The fact is that severe penalties discourage
crime, and therefore reduce the number of people who need to be
locked up.}}</b> </p>

<p> There are thirty million illegal drug users in the US (give
or take). How many millions do you propose to lock up? </p>

<p> <b>{{ More deceptive figures. According to my 1993 World
Almanac, only 7% of prisoners serving terms of 1 year or more are
in federal prisons.}}</b> </p>

<p> What does that have to do with the price of eggs? </p>

<p> <b>}}How many people must we imprison, and at what cost,
before you think we will have solved the problem? --I dunno. }}</b>
</p>

<p> You hit the nail on the head that time. You obviously never
thought about it. That is the problem in a nutshell. As President
Nixon's commission said, the real drug problem is not marijuana,
heroin, or cocaine. The real drug problem is the ignorance of our
public officials who have never bothered to read the evidence. </p>

<p> <b>{{}}There are way more alcholics than there are heroin
addicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. This
has much to do with the relative cheapness and availability of
alcohol. Do you really want to make narcotics equally cheap and
available?}}</b> </p>

<p> Narcotics are freely available at reasonable prices to anyone
who wants them. </p>

<p> <b>{{There are way more alcoholics than there are heroin
addicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Doesn't
that fact support continuing constraints against heroin, before
it can cause damage on an &quot;alcohol&quot; scale?}}</b> </p>

<p> No, not necessarily, but it does make me wonder why you
aren't campaigning even harder for alcohol prohibition. </p>

<p> <b>{{ }}Prohibition of alcohol did not work...{{{</b> </p>

<p> <b>Depends what you mean by &quot;work&quot;.}}</b> </p>

<p> I will accept the Wickersham Commission's definition. They
said it was a hopeless disaster in all respects. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Alcohol consumption absolutely, positively went down
during</b> </p>

<p> <b>prohibition.}}</b> </p>

<p> Absolutely false. The Wickersham Commission found that
alcohol use went down in the first year of Prohibition, but rose
every year thereafter, and that alcohol-related health problems
were much more severe. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Society, however, preferred its legal drug and repealed
prohibition.}}</b> </p>

<p> No, the Wickersham Commission, which was originally empowered
to find ways to improve Prohibition, concluded that it was
hopeless folly which did more harm than if we did nothing at all.
</p>

<p> <b>{{ It is also societies right to keep the lid on the
Pandora's Box of legalization of cocaine and heroin.}}</b> </p>

<p> So, how many millions of people should we put in prison for
drugs? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Clearly prohibition DID reduce consumption.}}</b> </p>

<p> That wasn't right the first time. It is equally wrong the
second. </p>

<p> <b>{{ In Malaysia, they are executed (at least the dealers
are).}}</b> </p>

<p> In Malaysia, the authorities kill more people for drugs than
the drugs do. And they still have a growing problem. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I wouldn't be so quick to discount the deterrent effect
of draconian measures.}}</b> </p>

<p> Neither would I. How many people do you think we ought to
execute to solve a problem that kills about 5,000 people a year? </p>

<p> <b>{{ I would personally love to see an intoxicant developed
that was safe, not physically addicting and doesnt make you (too)
stupid. (I'm dead serious). Marijuana is almost OK, but I truly
believe it makes one stupid (while under the influence) and a lot
of kids would have their intellectual growth stunted if it were
legalized.}}</b> </p>

<p> The Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, after hearing years of arguments on the subject,
concluded that &quot;marijuana, in its natural form, may be the
safest therapeutically active substance known to man&quot; and
that it is &quot;safer than many of the foods we commonly
eat.&quot; There is no evidence to support what you said about
intellectual growth. In fact, marijuana was a common food in the
19th century. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Alcohol does not directly involve the brain's internal
&quot;reward via euphoria&quot; mechanism, opiates do. They are
much more &quot;fun&quot; and way more addicting.}}</b> </p>

<p> Nope. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit
Drugs for a good discussion of the issue. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The Liverpudlian addicts had to first come to the
doctor for help, before being registered. Are you suggesting that
potential heroin users come to the doctor for &quot;controlled
medically supervised doses&quot; before starting the habit - or
do they come after realizing they may have a problem?}}</b> </p>

<p> They come after they realize they have a problem. But the
program has dried up the sellers on the street, and it has
greatly reduced the number one source of new addicts -- old
addicts looking for recruits to support their habit. As a result,
crime rates, health problems, and addiction have dropped
dramatically. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Is it possible that heroin, at cigarette prices, may
lead to a lot of folks to suffer severe vocational and
interpersonal damage, before finally presenting themselves for
&quot;Controlled, medically supervised doses&quot;? The
experience during Prohibition is instructive.}}</b> </p>

<p> Is it possible that tobacco addicts under the same conditions
would behave in the same manner as junkies? The experience in
Europe, after WWII, when tobacco was scarce is instructive. The
experience of Prohibition is instructive. It was a failure in all
respects. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Despite the obvious problems associated with
prohibition, the rates of cirrhosis of the liver and of wife
beating plummetted.}} </b> </p>

<p> Wrong. See the report of the Wickersham Commission. </p>

<p> <b>{{I agree that substance abuse is the trigger for much
crime, violent and non-violent. In those cases, if you can
eliminate the abuse, you probably have a much better chance of
the individual becoming a contributing member. }}</b> </p>

<p> The great majority of such crime is due to the effects of
prohibition, not the effects of the drugs. </p>

<p> <b>{{Instead of spending the money to maintain them in
prison, some sort of supervisd home confinement, coupled with
vocational training, counseling for the abuse, and routine drug
testing. Clean 'em up, train 'em, put 'em to work. That may sound
to simplistic, but what we're doing now isn't working, IMO. }}</b>
</p>

<p> The vast majority of drug users do not need treatment any
more than the vast majority of wine drinkers need treatment. For
the others, treatment is at least seven times as cost effective
as prison, with a far greater rate of success. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Alcohol is addicting to those predisposed.}}</b> </p>

<p> Correct. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Heroin is addicting (if used for non-analgesic
purposes) in everyone. Cocaine is the most addictive of all.}}</b>
</p>

<p> Wrong. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit
Drugs for a good discussion. Heroin addicts commonly report that
it is much harder to kick tobacco than to kick anything else. Or
see the recent <a href="../library/basicfax.htm">NIDA rankings</a>
of addictive qualities. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Increased drinking during prohibition!! No way, no
evidence, makes no sense. The logistics of obtaining, and the
black market price of alcohol during prohibition were HUGE
natural constraints on drinking for the vast majority. (ie. for
all but the speakeasy crowd).}}</b> </p>

<p> See the Wickersham Commission report, or any of the other
studies I have mentioned. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Be careful who you say things like &quot; the deceptive
thing about... liver disease are DEGENERATIVE diseases which take
a little while to develop&quot; to {g}. In 20 yrs as a general
internist, I've treated plenty of alcohol relatedliver disease.}}</b>
</p>

<p> If you are a doctor, let me ask you a question. My mother
suffers from severe chronic pain as the result of a nerve injury
during surgery. It is bad enough that it has driven her to the
point of seriously considering suicide. She has been to the Mayo
Clinic, the National Pain Institute, the USC Pain Clinic and a
long list of others. She has tried a long list of treatments. You
name your best list, she has tried it. The doctors, and her own
experience, tell her that the best treatment for her condition is
either morphine or heroin. The doctors will not prescribe it to
her because they are afraid of the DEA -- they have said so. The
Department of Health and Human Services has issued two reports
which have stated that the undertreatment of pain is a national
tragedy and that is caused by fear. The California Medical
Association recently encouraged doctors to prescribe more
narcotics and said that the reason they did not was because of
fear of the police. </p>

<p> I will not ask you if you would prescribe morphine for my
mother because I have asked every other doctor who has appeared
here and they all copped out. I expect you would too. Just tell
me: Who should determine the medicine my mother gets -- her and
her doctors -- or the police? </p>

<p> <b>{{ It is clear that when prohibition was repealed, liver
disease jumped up within the year, because of resumed drinking.}}</b>
</p>

<p> No, alcohol use continued the rise that it had already
started during Prohibition. And, even if this was true, are you
recommending that we bring back alcohol Prohibition? Why not? </p>

<p> <b>{{ I'm sorry, but the statement that heroin is harmless
flies in the face of long-agreed-on clinical experience.}}</b> </p>

<p> What does your clinical experience tell you about the effects
of prison? Is it beneficial or harmful to someone with a drug
problem? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Show me the references. I will be willing to bet
anything, that they are not the result of well designed trials}}</b>
</p>

<p> Read any of the studies that I posted. I would suggest that
you start with the Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit
Drugs, so you would understand how we got into this situation. </p>

<p> By the way, did you know that the medical community
unanimously opposed these laws when they were proposed and said
they would be a medical, social, and criminal disaster? Did you
know that one of the first actions of the drug police was to jail
more than 3,000 doctors, especially those who advocated drug
treatment? </p>

<p> And, can you tell me why hemp is illegal? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Historically technical question. Shouldnt be too hard
to look up. I doubt very much that it was the OVERT crime issue.
Society was not much affected by bootleggers killing other
bootleggers.}}</b> </p>

<p> One of the major factors was a campaign to &quot;save the
children.&quot; You see, the bootleggers discovered that they
could escape harsh penalties by having kids do the dirty work,
and there was quite a bit of concern about that. Sound familiar? </p>

<p> <b>{{ However one related factor may well have been society
was very concerned about corruption in the police and judiciary.
It would have been scary, back then, to think this corruption was
about to become institutionalised.}}</b> </p>

<p> Prohibition gave us the institution of organized crime, which
is still with us 60 years later. </p>

<p> <b>{{ This doesnt seem to be much of a factor, however, in
our current &quot;prohibition&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> Where have you been? The entire narcotics squad of the LA
County Sheriff was sent to prison for corruption. The situation
is the same in New York and other major cities. I seriously doubt
if there is an honest drug enforcement agent living. I could go
on with stories of their corruption that would curl your hair. </p>

<p> <b>{{I don't like that picture very much at all.}}</b> </p>

<p> You painted a picture of what could happen. How about a
picture of what IS happening? According to the current rates of
incarceration, we will put more people in prison than Adolf
Hitler did, including about one-half of an entire generation of
black men. Do you want to continue with that? </p>

<p> <b>{{ No, only studies which are about legalizing drugs
conclude that it is important to legalize them.}}</b> </p>

<p> You obviously have not read them, have you? </p>

<p> <b>{{ &quot;Decriminalization&quot; is not the same as
&quot;legalization.&quot; The &quot;decriminalization&quot; of
small amounts of marijuana -- reducing possession to the status
of a traffic fine -- has already been tried in several states,
without stirring much controversy. This is a good deal different
from legalizing crack and heroin however. You really won't
impress anyone by trying to equate the two.}}</b> </p>

<p> The issue is not legalization or decriminalization (whatever
they may mean), because we don't know if we will do either, or
anything like them. The issue is prison, because that is what we
are doing now. How many millions of people do you think we ought
to put in prison? </p>

<p> <b>{{ What makes you think they *want* to contribute?}}</b> </p>

<p> What makes you think they don't? Most drug users are employed
individuals, not much different from their neighbors. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Not at all. Heroin is far more addictive than alcohol.
}}</b> </p>

<p> Not true. See the recent NIDA rankings of addictive
qualities. </p>

<p> Isn't it true that an alcohol addict is far more likely to
die during withdrawal than a heroin addict? </p>

<p> <b>{{ This makes it an important substance to control.}}</b> </p>

<p> Let's assume that this statement is true. Where did you get
the idea that jailing massive numbers of people is the best
method of control? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Heroin is also far less widely used than alcohol, and
domestic production is close to zero. This makes it relatively
easy to control.}}</b> </p>

<p> &quot;relatively easy to control&quot;? Someone is out of
touch with reality here. There is no credible evidence anywhere
that any of these drugs are under control. </p>

<p> <b>{{ You left out the key step: motivate 'em. That's the
hard part.}}</b> </p>

<p> Yeah, it is so much easier to throw them in prison at a half
million dollars a pop. </p>

<p> <b>{{ This information is outdated. I have here a psychology
textbook, _The Mind_, by Dr. Richard M. Restak, which says:
&quot;Sigmund Freud was convinced that cocaine could be used to
cure heroin addiction. . . .}}</b> </p>

<p> Now that you brought up Sigmund Freud, you ought to know that
he kicked the cocaine habit but died from the effects of cancer
caused by his cigar smoking. He could not quit, even though most
of the lower part of his face had been removed by surgery. What
did you say about one drug being more addictive? </p>

<p> By the way, if you are a doctor, you should be able to tell
me who Dr. William Halsted was, and what was so remarkable about
him. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I believe then you should urgently warn the people at
the Hoover Institute that this so-called expert, Cliff Schaeffer,
is feeding them bad information. I have a book here about the
British drug experience (_Living With Heroin_), which was
published in 1988, and prescription narcotics were still legal
then. Obviously, the supposed American-style drug crack-down
Schaeffer told you about didn't happen.}}</b> </p>

<p> My associates and I have talked directly with the British
authorities and some of my friends (doctors) are there right now
talking to them. The British did try a crackdown, and it was a
failure. The British Association of Chiefs of Police, as well as
the head of Interpol have now called for decriminalization. </p>

<p> <b>{{ These &quot;sensible&quot; policies led to a major
increase in drug-related crime, according to _Living with
Heroin_.}}</b> </p>

<p> The doctors in Liverpool and the doctors in other European
countries disagree. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Liverpool and the Netherlands are too utterly different
from the United States in too many ways to document here.}}</b> </p>

<p> So what are the specific differences that would make their
plans impossible here? </p>

<p> <b>{{ First offense simple possession usually just gets you
probation. Keep it up, and you'll eventually have to do some jail
time. Hardly anyone goes to prison for simple possession.}}</b> </p>

<p> Absolutely false. That is the reason that 52 Federal judges
(about ten percent of the total Federal judiciary) have refused
to enforce the drug laws. </p>

<p> <b>{{ A lab. rat will starve himself pushing the cocaine
lever (instead of the rat chow lever) when offered the choice.
This tells me that there is a whole lot more biology involved in
drug addiction than simply volition.}}</b> </p>

<p> It seems to indicate that it gets beyond their ability to
consciously control their actions. Which makes it all the more
silly to punish them as a response. </p>

<p> <b>{{ How confident are you that you would remain clean if
offered cheap legal cocaine or heroin?}}</b> </p>

<p> As confident as I am that I can walk past the tobacco and
alcohol displays without the least desire to take either. </p>

<p> <b>{{ And even if you have the knowledge that lets you
resist, what about the millions that dont?}}</b> </p>

<p> For the millions that don't, prison hardly seems the
appropriate response. </p>

<p> <b>{{We may just have a difference in semantics, here. I
believe the majority of drug related crime is caused by
individuals seeking funds to support the habit.}}</b> </p>

<p> That is a direct result of Prohibition. Without prohibition
such criminal activity is not necessary. That is why the police
authorities in the Netherlands, England, and other countries have
called for decriminalization. </p>

<p> <b>{{The vast majority of individuals who drink are not
alcoholics. I'm not familiar with statistics on the
addict/non-addict fractions of the total population of drug
users. The ones who need treatment are the ones whose addiction
is affecting their live and the lives of those around them.}}</b>
</p>

<p> The vast majority of drug users of all t ypes (except
perhapstobacco) are not addicted. I agree that drug use which
gets to the point of affecting their lives or others, it is time
to change their habits. But why should there be a different
standard for how we view that when the problem occurs because of
alcohol as opposed to cocaine or heroin? </p>

<p> <b>{{Thanks for your post. I also hate to think of what life
would be like in this country if drugs were legalized. Especially
since, if we did legalize them, it would be sooo hard to turn
back.}}</b> </p>

<p> Well then, we could look to Europe for guidance. Most major
countries in Europe are going toward decriminalization or
legalization and they report that it is much better than the drug
war. </p>

<p> <b>{{Do I want to continue with that? Of course not! What
sane person would want to throw so many people in prison. }}</b> </p>

<p> Clearly, nobody. But that's what we are doing. If you really
don't like it so much then we ought to honestly investigate our
alternatives. </p>

<p> <b>{{But the scenario I see, if we legalize drugs as you
propose, would be worse.}}</b> </p>

<p> When did I propose legalizing drugs? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Do you want to see this country worse off? So a lot of
people wouldn't go to jail. Instead, they could easily die.
Abusing drugs tends to have that effect. I know - I have known
many who have died from it. It is a terrible waste. }}</b> </p>

<p> So how many people actually die from drugs each year, anyway?
</p>

<p> <b>{{ Your proposal would result in the quality of drugs
going up, the cost of drugs in money going way down, and the risk
(prison) going way down. }}</b> </p>

<p> Yeah, it would probably eliminate most of the bathtub gin and
wood alcohol which is sold to unsuspecting buyers, it would
eliminate the Mafia's prime source of revenue, and it would keep
a lot of little people from having their lives ruined with a
stretch in prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Instead of government programs to fight drug use, there
would be advertising campaigns to encourage drug use.}}</b> </p>

<p> Who said that? You are assuming an awful lot that I did not
say. </p>

<p> <b>{{ As you propose legalizing drug use, you must consider
the fact, that due to all these facts, drugs use would soar.}}</b>
</p>

<p> No, that is simply not true. In areas which have changed
their laws, drug use has stayed the same or gone down. </p>

<p> Every major study of drug policy agreed that there was no
evidence to support your conclusion. Furthermore, they agreed
that EVEN IF drug use did go up, the benefits of
decriminalization would be so great that it would far outweigh
the problems of increased use. </p>

<p> <b>{{I think thowing drug users in prison is a terrible
waste. I think legalizing drugs is much worse.}}</b> </p>

<p> I agree with you on the first point. There never was a good
reason to start this policy in the first place. But those aren't
the only two options. </p>

<p> <b>{{Oh yes, your stat on one-half of a generation of black
men interested me. Are you saying that an absolute minimum of 50%
of black males are drug abusers? I assume many get away with it,
and don't go to prison, so what is the actual figure??? }} </b> </p>

<p> The actual figures appear to be about the same as for the
white population. However, the drug laws were originally intended
to target minorities (look it up) and they target minorities
above all other groups today. For example, about 95 percent of
all the people sentenced under the mandatory minimums are black
men. Over time, because of the police pressure on drugs, and
because of the limited economic opportunities for black men, many
of them will turn to drug dealing as a way to make a living and
then, with the first stint in jail their future is formed. Black
men who have been to prison are virtually permanently
unemployable, so they return to the streets and act as bad role
models for the kids. </p>

<p> <b>{{}}Legalization will flood the market place with cheaper
drugs --thats the box I want to keep the lid on. Interesting
article in the _Journal of Drug Issues_ (Spring 1993) analyzes
the issue on the basis of dynamic simulation modeling and
concludes: &quot;The model suggests that elimination of drug
seizures by itself would pose little risk of increased
prevalence, but neither would it alleviate the load on the
criminal justice system. A policy of reduced arrests at the
retail level probably would reduce the criminal justice load, but
would also lead to a relative increase in cocaine use and
addiction by a factor of two or three or more. A more sweeping
policy that eliminates both seizures and arrests would certainly
reduce the criminal justice load, but would lead to a relative
increase in cocaine use and addiction by a factor of four to
eight or more.&quot;}} </b> </p>

<p> So, under the worst circumstances they cite, there would be
perhaps 10,000 to 20,000 deaths per year from cocaine (4 to 8
times the current 2,500), compared to more than 400,000 for
tobacco, and more than 100,000 for alcohol. For heroin the
numbers would be similar, and for marijuana 4 to 8 times zero is
still zero. On the other hand, we would not have an expensive and
futile policy to put millions of people in prison. In fact, for
the same money that it took to put one person in prison we could
provide treatment for about one hundred. </p>

<p> Relative to your earlier statements on treatment, perhaps you
missed the recent study that said that treatment saves seven
dollars in related social costs for every dollar spent on
treatment. On the other hand, prison costs an additional fifteen
dollars for every dollar spent on prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I've seen you in these discussions before, and people
have gone over the fiscal issues for addicts ad nauseam. Try it
again; maybe you'll make more sense this time.}}</b> </p>

<p> OK, let's start out with the simple aspects. How many people
do you think we ought to throw in prison? </p>

<p> <b>}} And why do they steal money to buy drugs?}}</b> </p>

<p> Because the drugs are illegal and therefore higher priced. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I do have an interesting book here, called _Living With
Heroin_ which studied the drug situation in the English town of
Wirral. On page 99, there is a report which shows that, . . . The
'extra' crime Wirral has experienced in recent years appears to
be closely related to the community's heroin 'epidemic.'&quot;}}</b>
</p>

<p> Liverpool found that their addiction and crime went up as
drug enforcement went up. They found it just about disappeared
when they took their current approach. It may also interest you
to know that the British Association of Chiefs of Police and the
head of Interpol have both come out for decriminalization.
Apparently they know something you don't. </p>

<p> <b>{{ What about the legalized prescription-narcotics?
Doctors are getting burned out .. .}}</b> </p>

<p> Not so in Liverpool. The doctors report a high rate of
success with their patients, perhaps because they base the
prescription on the addicts continued good behavior. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Junkies just are not good patients. Actually, they
aren't really &quot;patients&quot; at all. . . .}}</b> </p>

<p> Yeah? I could have guessed that. I also find most of them
personally distasteful. That still does not mean that the best
approach to the problem is to try to throw them all in prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{According to the 1992 report of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics, the number of individuals surveyed (18-25 age group)
who reported using an illicit drug in the past month has
dramatically decreased:}}</b> </p>

<p> Do you thnk it may have anything to do with the survey
process? For example, with increasing penalties, and increasing
publicity about the penalties, they call people up at random and
ask them if they have used any illegal drugs (committed a felony)
in the last month. I know what I would tell you, regardless of
the truth. From what I have seen of that age group (having four
daughters in that age group) the use habits are not terribly
different than they were in the 60's -- but none of them would
admit it to a telephone interviewer, either. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The United States unfortunately has a far higher crime
rate than other nations; this accounts for the higher
incarceration rate.}}</b> </p>

<p> That was not true until the war on drugs went into high gear
and it is currently true only because of the war on durgs. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Most prisoners are not convicted of drug-related
offenses. }} </b> </p>

<p> Correct, but the largest single portion are and nearly all of
the rise in prison population over the last fifteen years can be
attributed to drug offenses. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The high rate of recidivism is not due to the weakness
of the prison system, but the broader failures of American
society. Poverty, poor education, the lack of family support, the
prevalence of narcotics and a tradition of violence combine to
produce a high crime rate, which is not susceptible to any easy
solution.}}</b> </p>

<p> Perhaps you did not see the 60 Minutes piece on Pelican Bay.
They showed a series of convicts being released from California's
toughest prison. They were put out at the bus stop with $200 (out
of which they had to buy their only civilian clothes) with no
instructions, help, advice, or anything else. They had no job
skills, little education, and no real chance at employment anyway
because of their prison record. What do you expect they would do?
</p>

<p> <b>{{* To begin with, heroin is one of the most powerful
drugs known to man. The effect of a heroin dose is to flood the
body with endorphins. This is incapacitating in the short run and
can lead to long term personality changes.}}</b> </p>

<p> Wrong. I can cite a whole long list of internationally
recognized medical experts in the field who state that, except
for the fact that heroin produces addiction, otherwise it is
&quot;harmless&quot;. Their words, not mine. Can you tell me who
Dr. William Halsted is? </p>

<p> <b>{{* Heroin is also extremely addictive.}}</b> </p>

<p> True, but no more than alcohol or tobacco </p>

<p> <b>{{The overwhelming majority of heroin users become
addicts.}}</b> </p>

<p> Absolutely false. There is no evidence to support this
notion. </p>

<p> <b>{{* Heroin is incredibly dangerous. A dose that is normal
for one addict may kill another. Even a &quot;normal&quot; dose,
to which an addict has long been accustomed, can kill him in
different environmental circumstances.}}</b> </p>

<p> See above about &quot;harmless.&quot; The doctors in
Liverpool state that they have patients on &quot;massive
doses&quot; with no risk of overdose. They say &quot;heroin is
not a dangerous drug&quot; and they prescribe it every day. The
number of people killed by heroin in the US runs about 2,000 a
year or about one half of one percent of the number killed by
tobacco. Aspirin also kills about 2,000 people a year. The
Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs investigated
the issue of heroin &quot;overdoses&quot; and did not find a
single instance which they believed could be attributed to a true
&quot;overdose&quot;. Nearly all of the &quot;overdoses&quot;,
they said, had symptoms which were fundamentally incompatible
with an overdose, such as instant death, or pulmonary edema. They
said their research showed that the most probable cause of these
deaths was the impurities mixed with the heroin, not the her oin
itself. As the doctors in England put it, if an addict is buying
heroin on the black market which is 10 percent heroin and 90
percent cement, it does not take a genius to figure out what is
going to cause the most problems. </p>

<p> The low number of deaths from heroin is all the more
remarkable because it is usually taken in the most dangerous
manner possible. </p>

<p> <b>{{* Tolerance for heroin declines rapidly after
withdrawal. A junkie who abstains for only a short time can kill
himself with a &quot;normal&quot; dose when he resumes.}}</b> </p>

<p> False. See above. </p>

<p> <b>{{* Even if the addict takes a &quot;normal&quot; dose in
a stable environment, the lethal dose is not much greater than
the effective dose, so the chances of a fatal miscalculation
remain high.}}</b> </p>

<p> False again. See above. </p>

<p> <b>{{* Beyond that is the effect of withdrawal, including
chills, runny nose, aching, abdominal cramps, vomiting and
diarrhea. Insomnia and irritability may persist for weeks.}}</b> </p>

<p> My mother-in-law gets that when she gives up her morning
coffee. Should we put her in prison to improve her mood? </p>

<p> <b>{{* Withdrawal symptoms may be reoccur long after the drug
is withdrawn if the addict experiences environmental cues related
to his former drug experience.}}</b> </p>

<p> Same is true with any other addictive drug. Talk to
ex-smokers. </p>

<p> <b>{{* Street heroin is likely to contain impurities,
anything from quinine to rat poison.}}</b> </p>

<p> True, which is why every major study of the issue said that
Prohibition causes more problems than it solves. </p>

<p> <b>{{* Self-administered injections are also dangerous, often
leading to septisemia, endocarditis, damaged veins, hepatitis or
AIDS.}}</b> </p>

<p> More reasons why the doctors in Liverpool decided to take the
approach they did and why the cities of Los Angeles and San
Francisco have decided to openly violate state drug laws (at the
urging of the medical community) to properly address the issue. </p>

<p> <b>{{* The addict lifestyle is unhealthy. Doing heroin is not
conducive to balanced diets, regular exercise, safe sex nor
regular check-ups. Addicts often experience health problems not
directly related to drugs.}}</b> </p>

<p> So let's throw them in prison to improve their health? Does
not make sense. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The drug policy of the United States is to punish
dealers severely. However, *users* face little or no punishment.
}} </b> </p>

<p> There are tens of thousands of people now in prison who know
you are wrong. One woman got a mandatory minimum of ten years,
even though she was not a user or a dealer. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Hence, demand remains high. Economic theory predicts
that where there is a high demand, there *will* be a supply . . .
The principle effect of our enforcement policy is to raise the
price.}}</b> </p>

<p> Now that doesn't sound like a very effective approach, does
it? We might have done just as well by taxing it. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Strict drug laws have practically eliminated narcotics
in Singapore and Turkey, which were once important centers of the
drug trade.}}</b> </p>

<p> Actually, no. And these countries kill more people than the
drugs do. Is that what you want? </p>

<p> <b>{{}}Sixty Minutes corroborated Schaeffer's version.
Wouldn't be the first time they screwed up. Did you see the
episode on Dungeons &amp; Dragons?}}</b> </p>

<p> As I said in another message -- we talked to the docto rs
involved personally. Those doctors confirmed that 60 Minutes was
accurate. </p>

<p> <b>{{ My point was, when Americans moved from a loose-drug
environment (Viet Nam) to a tight-drug environment (the U.S.)
they gave up the habit. }}</b> </p>

<p> As stated before, the studies of this phenomenon found it had
nothing to do with availability because all the returning
soldiers reported that they could get heroin any time they wanted
in the US, they just did not want it anymore. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Holland is a very small country, with a culture
significantly different from the United States. In any case, you
have not provided any figures to support your contention that
drug use didn't increase in Holland after legalization.}}</b> </p>

<p> I offered to put you in touch with the Dutch authorities so
you can ask them yourselves. One of them volunteered to come to
the United States to speak for us because he wanted to stop this
kind of disinformation. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I don't have that study (of over 20 years ago) here,
but I'm old enough to remember that Nixon was greatly embarrassed
when his commission recommended decriminalizing marijuana. It did
nor recommend legalizing narcotics.}}</b> </p>

<p> You may also remember that the commission was composed
entirely of Nixon's handpicked law and order conservatives and
they refused to even hear testimony from anyone who supported
legalization or decriminalization. Still, they concluded there
was no real choice in the matter. As they said, the real drug
problem is not heroin, or cocaine, or marijuana. The real
problem, they said, is the ignorance of our public officials who
have never bothered to read the evidence. Nixon refused to even
read his own report. </p>

<p> <b>{{ But you apparently do not understand the difference
between marijuana and narcotics. Allow me to explain. Marijuana
is a herbaceous plant which grows wild in the United States and
is easily cultivated. It is not highly toxic nor highly
addictive.}}</b> </p>

<p> Then maybe you can explain to me how hemp became illegal. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Narcotics are derived from the opium poppy or from the
coca plant, which are not grown in the United States, and which
much be subjected to an elaborate refining process before
consumption. Narcotics take various forms, all of them far more
toxic and addictive than marijuana.}}</b> </p>

<p> Nothing derived from the coca plant is a
&quot;narcotic&quot;. It is defined that way in law, but always
has been incorrect. </p>

<p> Seeing as how there has never been a recorded human death due
to marijuana, almost anything would be more toxic. </p>

<p> <b>{{ While young and naive people may easily leap to the
conclusion that all drugs are the same, this is simply not the
case.}}</b> </p>

<p> True, alcohol and tobacco are far more dangerous than most of
the illegal drugs. </p>

<p> <b>{{ None of your &quot;credible studies&quot; support the
point you are trying to make. Not one advocates legalizing
narcotics.}}</b> </p>

<p> Which ones have you read, and what did they say? (I will bet
I get a short answer, or none at all, to that question.) </p>

<p> ((Note: When I pressed my opponent on this point, he
ultimately admitted he had never read any of them.)) </p>

<p> <b>{{ This program was only recently adopted, so we don't
know yet how well it works, but it certainly is not simply
&quot;being locked ia a cage.&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> Check that again. Most prisons are so overcrowded that there
are no rehabilitation efforts of any kind. Those words on paper
that you sent are nice, but they don't mean s**t in the reality
of today's prisons. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The experience of a recovering alcoholic may be similar
to that of a heroin addict, but the fact is that most
alcohol-users never become alcoholics. Most heroin-users do
become addicts.}}</b> </p>

<p> False. See the references cited earlier. </p>

<p> <b>{{ The error of our present drug policy is that we punish
the dealers, but fail to effectively punish the users. Dealing
drugs is a high- risk activity; using them is low-risk.
Therefore, there continues to be a demand for drugs. The main
effect of our policy is to raise the price.}}</b> </p>

<p> There are thirty million drug users. How many millions do you
think we ought to throw in prison? </p>

<p> <b>{{I assume you are not just being cute, and therefore you
do not propose legalizing drugs. Excuse me for misreading you. I
am glad you want to keep them illegal. }}</b> </p>

<p> I did not say that either. Please read my other message to
you. </p>

<p> }}So how many people actually die from drugs each year,
anyway? </p>

<p> {{Good question! I haven't a clue. But neither do you. In
your stats on drug caused deaths, what is included? If a heroin
addict gets so run down he dies of pneumonia, is that listed as
heroin caused? }} </p>

<p> The official Federal figures, which have been pretty
consistent for a long time show the following approximate annual
death rate: </p>

<p> Tobacco -- 400,000 </p>

<p> Alcohol - 100,000 </p>

<p> Sidestream tobacco smoke --- 3,000 to 50,000 </p>

<p> Prescription drugs - at least 10,000 </p>

<p> All illegal drugs combined -- 4,500 </p>

<p> Cocaine - 2,500 </p>

<p> Aspirin -- 2,000 </p>

<p> Heroin - 2,000 </p>

<p> Marijuana - No recorded deaths in human history. </p>

<p> The above figures do not include pneumonia type deaths. The
AMA published figures recently which stated that the total of all
such deaths for illegal drugs was about 20,000, still only a
small fraction of the damage caused by alcohol and tobacco. As I
have pointed out in other messages, there is a good deal of
research to suggest that making drugs illegal increases the
hazards of drugs -- such as impure bathtub gin during
prohibition. </p>

<p> <b>{{There were approximately 25,000 deaths on the highway
last year in which at least one driver was drunk. Were those
listed as alcohol caused deaths? }}</b> </p>

<p> No, they were not listed as such in figures I gave above. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I don't know the numbers, but I know that your figures
are low. }}</b> </p>

<p> Then how do you know my figures are low? </p>

<p> <b>{{ I also know that any drug caused death is a waste of a
life. You keep asking, over and over, how many people do we have
to throw in prison. Let me ask you - how many deaths will it take
for you to cry &quot;Enough!&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> Enough what? At the current rate we can't enforce this law no
matter how many people it kills. There just aren't enough jail
cells available to solve the problem this way and there is no way
we can build them. It doesn't matter what you want to do, it is a
matter of what you can do -- and there is no way we can solve the
drug problem with prison. </p>

<p> The reason I keep asking this question is a simple one. You
can figure out yourself what a good policy would be if you will
just seriously address this question. There are thirty million
drug users out there. We are currently working on putting an even
million of them in prison, with no perceivable difference in the
problem on the streets. Should we put five, ten, or twenty
million people in prison? Just tell me what the most reasonable
number is and you will have figured out why this policy cannot
work. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Naturally, the people who were running the program gave
an objective account of the results, and of course a message from
an e-mail friend in Liverpool settles the issue. There is really
no need to read any academic studies from Liverpool University;
you can learn everything you need to know just by watching
television.}}</b> </p>

<p> Well, no, actually you would be better off to go to Liverpool
and talk to both the medical and police authorities there -- as a
few of my close personal friends are doing right now. One, by the
way, is a member of the Board of Directors of the California
Academy of Family Physicians. But, he has already talked with the
doctors and other officials there and confirmed that the 60
Minutes show is an accurate portrayal. </p>

<p> <b>{{ If you want it compared, then it's practically
identical, otherwise it's &quot;utterly different.&quot;}}</b> </p>

<p> Kinda sums up your attitude about comparing us with other
countries, doesn't it? Singapore and Turkey are good comparisons
but the Netherlands is not. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Surprise! The study I have been referring too comes
from Wirral, which happens to be a suburb of Liverpool. You
insist, without having seen it, that this study is mistaken.
However the information from Liverpool, which you know about from
a 15-minute television episode, must be good and also relevant to
the situation in America.}}</b> </p>

<p> Then why did the British Association of Chiefs of Police --
including the Liverpool Chief of Police -- vote for
decriminalization? As I said above, members of our group are over
there right now - - for the second time -- talking with the
officials there. </p>

<p> <b>{{ You don't see any danger, then, from extrapolating from
a small, homogenous country to a large, unhomogenous one?}}</b> </p>

<p> Considering the same thing is happening all over Europe, that
kind of equates to a large, unhomogenous one, doesn't it? And, by
the way, what is the exact difference which would keep their
approaches from producing benefits here? That is, assuming you
know enough about what is happening over there to know the
difference. </p>

<p> <b>{{ They &quot;go to jail&quot; quite frequently; they
don't do much prison time unless they deal or commit some other
crime.}} </b> </p>

<p> There are at least 52 Federal judges who disagree with you. I
will take their word, and the word of the New York State
Corrections Commissioner, over yours. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Prescript ion was a miserable failure in England,
according to _Living With Heroin_.}}</b> </p>

<p> Check again, and this time talk to some of the people
actually involved, as we have done. </p>

<p> <b>{{ By and large, the Legalizers are disturbed, unhappy
people who have friends and loved ones who are in prison or
strung out. The aim of the Legalizers is simply to spread the
misery around as much as possible. The more druggies there are,
the more &quot;normal&quot; it is. The farther the web of
destruction spreads, the better. The more people they can ruin
and destroy, they happier they will be. The driving force behind
legalization is Revenge.}}</b> </p>

<p> Now we come down to the real driving force behind drug
prohibition -- bigotry and ignorance. Do you really think that it
is the desire of such organizations as the British Association of
Chiefs of Police? </p>

<p> <b>{{ To advocate legalizing narcotics isn't political
suicide (the surgeon general did it) . . . but it is incredibly
dumb.}}</b> </p>

<p> No she did not. I suppose then, that the British Association
of Chiefs of Police, the head of Interpol, and the Colombian
Attorney General, as well as the California Medical Association,
the California Society of Addiction Medicine, etc., etc., etc.,
etc., are incredibly dumb? (I could go on with a list of about 40
pages of such people, but why belabor the point?) </p>

<p> <b>{{ If I were strung out, it's entirely possible my own
family would turn me in. Lots of druggies get turned in by their
own families; it's the only way to ensure treatment.}}</b> </p>

<p> Judge Gray was on a radio show one night and one of the
callers was a heroin addict who wanted help to get off drugs. He
said he had called the police to ask for help but they just threw
him in jail when he was desperately ill (with things other than
drugs), he got a criminal conviction and no help at all. </p>

<p> The pity is that people who think they ought to throw people
in jail &quot;for their own good&quot; hardly ever get the same
favor granted to them. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Interesting study. The fact that everyone is doing
drugs has &quot;nothing to do with drug availability.&quot;
Presumably, then, they would do just as much if there were no
drugs to be found . . . clever.}}</b> </p>

<p> That is not going to happen, so why worry about it? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Even the most strung-out junkie still wants to get
high. They keep increasing their dosage, every chance they get.
Higher dosage -}more drug tolerance -} fewer highs -} higher
dosage. It's a vicious circle.}}</b> </p>

<p> So the solution is to throw millions of people in prison? </p>

<p> <b>{{ Heh, half of all drug arrests are for minors. How do
you propose to legalize drugs for adults and keep them away from
the kids?}}</b> </p>

<p> You admit it is not happening under the current system, so
what's the difference? You can't think of anyone who could
control the sales to children better than the current people who
sell drugs, right? </p>

<p> <b>{{ &quot;Worth more&quot; means more expensive. More
expensive means less demand . . . even if one assumes that people
in prison have just as to spend as those outside . . .}}</b> </p>

<p> More expensive means more profits -- enough to corrupt entire
law enforcement agencies, like the LA County Sheriffs who went to
prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{Perhaps you are correct in saying the vast majority
wouldn't become addicted. Perhaps. But then, I didn't like it
either, and I did become an addict. Was one for about 12 years.}}</b>
</p>

<p> It is as illegal as it can be and that didn't stop you, did
it? What makes you think it stops anyone else? Our policy, as it
is, does not seem to have benefited you. </p>

<p> Would your life have been improved if you had spent twenty
years in prison? By what you are recommending, you still probably
would not be out on the streets to engage in this conversation.
And, couldn't you still get your drugs if you decided you wanted
to? </p>

<p> <b>{{ I don't believe a non addict ever truly understands
what it is like.}}</b> </p>

<p> On the other hand, maybe it is the addict who does not
understand. In general, I don't believe that becoming an addict
gives anyone any great insights into national policy. That is
giving more credit to drugs than they deserve. </p>

<p> <b>{{ When you and Mona say that it isn't magical, you don't
know what you are talking about. When the first buzz of the drug
hits me, I become alive, and feel that I have become really
human. When straight, I do not have that feeling. }}</b> </p>

<p> That is not my experience with any of the drugs I have tried
and it is not the experience of the majority of people I know. If
you do not have the feeling of being human when you are straight
then it seems the problem is there whether you have the drug or
not. I (and most people I know) feel alive all the time so there
is not much need for drugs of any sort. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I continued using while convinced that I would die from
it. }}</b> </p>

<p> So prison, by comparison, would not do nearly as much to
dissuade you, would it? </p>

<p> <b>{{ However - I very rarely drove while high, because of
fear of getting caught. Addiction is _not_ logical. }}</b> </p>

<p> Another good reason why stiff penalties are unlikely to
dissuade addicts from using. Their behavior is not logical. </p>

<p> <b>{{ If it is legalized, there will be folks who will just
try it to see what it is like, and will never be straight again.
You do not account for those people. }}</b> </p>

<p> Yes I do. I don't like their behavior but I don't pretend
that putting them in prison is the proper approach to their
problem, either. </p>

<p> <b>{{Drugs _are_ magical to the addict. }}</b> </p>

<p> Lots of things are magical to the addict. The addicts I have
known used drugs of all types without regard for much of
anything. If they could not get heroin they would do other things
such as sniff gasoline, or inject coffee (quite a rush, they tell
me). That still does not mean that it is a good idea to throw
them in prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{}}As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noble
goal. </b> </p>

<p> <b>Sarcasm does not become you. If you never want to inflict
pain, then never raise a child. Never become a supervisor. Never
perform any function where you have the responsibility to modify
someone's behaviour. Pain, whether it be a swat on the butt, a
written reprimand, or a jail term, is an integral part of
behaviour modification.}} </b> </p>

<p> I don't believe in inflicting pain to the point where it
renders someone permanently unemployable and submits them to
things like gang rape, for trivial causes. Punishment, when used,
should be corrective, not destructive. </p>

<p> <b>{{I issue a mild protest over your figures on black male
drug use. You said 50% go to prison for drug abuse. Now you say
50% go to prison period, with drug use the single biggest cause.
But it is not a big point - I was just very shocked at your stat.
}}</b> </p>

<p> No, you misinterpreted. I am very careful about what I say on
this subject, because I have been saying it for a long time to
lots of people. </p>

<p> <b>{{The two most dangerous? Do you think smoking a cigarette
is as dangerous as free basing cocaine? C'mon Cliff! Sure, a lot
more people die from tobacco, but that is because a whole lot
more people use that. Tobacco is legal and marketed. That is
something I want to avoid for cocaine.}}</b> </p>

<p> Compare the death rates. The death rate, per user, for
cocaine is less than that for tobacco. And, just for interest, I
quote from a study done in 1967 - &quot;Cigarette smoking is
unquestionably more damaging to the health than heroin.&quot; --
Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie Nyswander, Rockefeller Univ. </p>

<p> <b>{{What do you think about increasing educational efforts?
Teach school kids more about it. Pound home what it can do, and
what help is available. }}</b> </p>

<p> As all of the major studies have said, most of the
educational efforts have been based around ridiculous scare
tactics which the kids soon discovered were hokey and
disregarded. The main problem is a massive lack of accurate
information by the people teaching the courses. </p>

<p> <b>{{What about more money to help folks get straight? I
think it would be poetic to increase the taxes on tobacco and
alcohol to pay for this. }}</b> </p>

<p> A recent Rand study showed that every dollar spent on
treatment saved seven dollars in related social costs. How about
just increasing the taxes on alcohol and tobacco until they pay
their own costs? </p>

<p> <b>{{Judge Gray's idea is intriguing. If we were to go to
legalization, that would be a much better way to handle it then
just turning it over to the market. Of course, that would make
the government our pushers. Sounds a little scary. }}</b> </p>

<p> His basic thought is that drugs are here anyway, so we should
not kid ourselves that we are stopping them. The truth is that we
currentlyinflict smaller losses (percentage-wise) on the drug
dealers than K-Mart suffers from shoplifters. As you probably
know, shoplifters are not about to put K-Mart out of business.
Given the fact that they will be here forever, let's at least
guarantee that there are pure, reliable sources which will not
make the related problems worse, and which will provide a tax
basis for providing treatment. </p>

<p> Keep in mind that Judge Gray is a former prosecutor with
numerous drug convictions. He has also sentenced more than his
share of people to prison for drug offenses, and is not regarded
as lenient. </p>

<p> When he first came out for a change in policy a little over
two years ago, he was vilified by all kinds of people. He just
got back from the State Bar Convention and reported that the
atmosphere has changed completely. He says he is getting more and
more support from other judges and law enforcement officials.
They don't all agree on what would be a better response, but they
agree that our current policy is a failure and should be
abandoned. </p>

<p> <b>{{As to your repeated mentioning of the Netherlands and
Liverpool, I am reminded of another drug success story. According
to reports, we had found a way to successfully combat heroin
abuse. It was low cost, and supplied free to addicts. Am
referring to the methadone program. It took us a long time to
realize what a horrible waste it was. But all the reports were
glowing..... }}</b> </p>

<p> The medical authorities I have talked to, and the research I
have read (see the list) have indicated that the methadone
programs were a major improvement. Not perfect, but a major
improvement. Of the authorities I have talked to they have all
said that the biggest problems with the methadone program were
created by the government itself. First, they said, was a
consistent pattern of lies about the results. The European
authorities have reported the same thing about what the US
Government says about their programs. Second, there were
restrictions on methadone which, in effect, granted monopolies to
certain people and allowed them to abuse the situation. It would
be much better, they said, if addicts could go to their regular
doctors for prescriptions, like any other medication. </p>

<p> Also, many of them point to the methadone programs as proof
that the narcotics are not especially dangerous, because
methadone is prescribed routinely without any significant
overdose problem. </p>

<p> <b>{{Let us look at some of your stats. You say the death
rate for tobacco is 400,000. For alcohol it is 100,000. For
cocaine it is 2,500. You then answer my question by saying the
2,500 does not include pneumonia type deaths. What does it
include? No doubt (correct me if I am wrong) it is a count of
those who OD, and die. Probably from ER's. How many of the
400,000 tobacco deaths are based on that criteria? }}</b> </p>

<p> As I said, the AMA published figures on this subject, and
said that, using the same standards of classification for the
deaths, the comparable figure for illegal drugs is about 20,000,
to tobacco's 400,000+. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Only way to die of an OD of tobacco is to be in a
tobacco wharehouse as it burns down. So, using that criteria, the
death rate for tobacco is probably close to zero. }}</b> </p>

<p> Absolutely wrong. You must have missed the news shows that
reported on the problem of nicotine poisoning in people who work
in the fields and pick tobacco. There are far more people who
receive permanent nervous system damage (and even die) from that
than from most of the illegal drugs. Nicotine, you may have
forgotten, is an insecticide. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Now if we include lung cancer, etc, with the tobacco
deaths, we must also include pneumonia, suicides, traffic
accidents, dehydration, AIDS, etc, in the cocaine deaths.}}</b> </p>

<p> The AMA's figures included those causes. Tobacco still kills
at least 20 times as many people as the illegal drugs. </p>

<p> <b>{{ Many people become very aggresive on crack, and get in
fights - and get killed. That is a cocaine caused death.}}</b> </p>

<p> Wrong. A study done in NY during the height of the crack
epidemic showed that, of 414 homicides, only three could be
traced to the effects of cocaine in any form, and two of these
were victim- precipitated. For example, in one case the murder
victim tried to rape someone who was high on crack and got killed
in the process. The study showed the only drug with a real
connection to violence was alcohol. This was recently confirmed
by the DOJ report &quot;Psychoactive Substances and
Violence.&quot; </p>

<p> <b>{{ In the same way, how many alcohol deaths are caused by
OD? Maybe a few hundred?}}</b> </p>

<p> Wrong again. Alcohol overdose death is not at all uncommon,
especially on college campuses. Former HEW Secretary Joseph
Califano once estimated that about 40 percent of all hospital
care in the US is due to alcohol related conditions, including
overdoses. </p>

<p> <b>{{ It is not easy to OD on alcohol so badly you die. You
tend to pass out first.}}</b> </p>

<p> False. People are simply lucky if they pass out, but alcohol
overdose deaths are not at all uncommon. The main reason you
don't hear about them so much is because they are not news. </p>

<p> <b>{{ So your stats include liver disease, etc. I have met a
heroin addict, who was unconscious, half in a gutter, on a cold
night. If he had died of exposure, he should have been listed as
a heroin caused death. It, of course, wouldn't have been.}}</b> </p>

<p> So maybe we should adjust the death figures for heroin
downward. As I said, even if you assume that, for whatever
reason, the deaths from illegal drugs are grossly underestimated,
you still don't get anywhere near the deaths caused by alcohol
and tobacco. You should take a big clue from this. The reasons
for the drug laws never did have anything to do with the reasons
you are stating. When the laws were first passed, no medical
evidence was even presented to show that these drugs were harmful
and, in fact, the medical authorities in the US were opposed to
the laws. While we are on the subject of history, maybe you can
tell me why hemp was outlawed? </p>

<p> <b>{{Please see the above. Also, your figures are now
counting deaths only. Not fair for a discussion like this. How
many messed up lives do cocaine and heroin cause? If a man is
sent to prison, it does not kill him, it messes up his life. So -
lets compare like to like. }} </b> </p>

<p> So we take someone who already has a problem and mess up his
life some more? Interesting approach, but I fail to see how it
provides any benefit. </p>

<p> <b>{{You say there are approximately 1,000,000 people in
prison for drug abuse. That is 1,000,000 messed up lives.
According to your stats, that leaves 29,000,000 still abusing
drugs outside. That leaves 29,000,000 messed up lives. Now, to
save the 1,000,000 in prison, youwant to vastly increase the
29,000,000. }}</b> </p>

<p> The first point you should recognize from these stats is that
it is folly to believe that anything is under control right now.
So, basically, you are supporting a campaign that has no way to
achieve your stated goals, even if it was a good idea. The lives
messed up in prison are messed up permanently. Black men (by far
the majority of those prosecuted for drug offenses) are virtually
permanently unemployable once they have a prison record. They can
recover from a drug habit (and many do) but it is much more
difficult to recover from a stretch in prison. </p>

<p> And, as for the other 29,000,000, the vast majority of them
are not any more messed up than the average wine drinker. That
much is self-evident, or the problem would be far worse than it
is. </p>

<p> <b>{{Have you ever had a person you truly cared about who was
an addict? }}</b> </p>

<p> Sure, one of my aunts and a cousin I grew up with, among
others. I deplore their behavior and I wish they would stop but,
at the same time, I recognize that neither they nor society would
be better off if we spent a million dollars to put them in
prison. </p>

<p> <b>{{What do I think is a reasonable number of people to
imprison in order to stop drug abuse? Enough so that the overall
welfare of the country comes out ahead. }}</b> </p>

<p> I agree with that last part. So how many should we put in
prison to come out ahead? Just tell me what the number is so we
can make plans to build that many prison cells. </p>

<p> <b>{{ I think we are a long way from passing the point where
more people are messed up by the prison than by drug abuse. }}</b>
</p>

<p> How would you know if you admit you don't know the stats on
deaths or people in prison? </p>

<p> <b>{{How many additional deaths, resulting from the
legalization of drug use, would it take for you to cry &quot;Too
many!&quot; }}</b> </p>

<p> What evidence do you have to show that there would be
additional deaths? Other than your own opinion, that is. All the
evidence I have seen says that the death rate would probably go
down with a more intelligent policy. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>