
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B017-367</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121940 text/html 8884
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:19:23 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:46 GMT
Content-length: 8667
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Great Britain's Opium Monopoly</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>I - GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY</h2>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"><br>
</p>

<p>In a book shop in Shanghai, we came upon a small book with an
arresting title, &quot;Drugging a Nation,&quot; by Samuel Merwin.
It was published in 1908, eight years before we chanced upon it,
shabby and shop worn, its pages still uncut. The people of
Shanghai, the great International Settlement of this largest city
and most important seaport of China, did not have to read it.
They knew, doubtless, all that its pages could disclose. We,
however, found it most enlightening. In it there is this
description of the British Opium Monopoly: </p>

<p>&quot;In speaking of it as a 'monopoly' I am not employing a
cant word for effect. I am not making a case. That is what it is
officially styled in a certain blue book on my table which bears
the title, 'Statement Exhibiting the Moral and Material Progress
of India during the year 1905-'6,' and which was ordered by the
House of Commons to be printed, May 10, 1907. . . . Now to get
down to cases, just what this Government Opium Monopoly is, and
just how Goes it work? An excerpt from the rather ponderous blue
book will tell us. It may be dry but it is official and
unassailable. It is also short. </p>

<p>&quot;'The opium revenue'-thus the blue book-'is partly raised
by a monopoly of the production of the drug in Bengal and the
United provinces, and partly by the levy of a duty on all opium
imported from native states. . . . In these two provinces, the
crop is grown under the control of a government department, which
arranges the total area which is to be placed under the crop,
with a view to the amount of opium required.' </p>

<p>&quot;So much for the broader outline. Now for a few of the
details: 'The cultivator of opium in these monopoly districts
receives a license, and is granted advances to enable him to
prepare the land for the crop, and he is required to deliver the
whole of the product at a fixed price to opium agents, by whom it
is dispatched to the government factories at Patna and Ghazipur.'
</p>

<p>&quot;The money advanced to the cultivator bears no interest.
The British Indian government lends money without interest in no
other cases. Producers of crops other than opium are obliged to
get along without free money. </p>

<p>&quot;When it has been manufactured, the opium must be
disposed of in one way and another; accordingly: 'The supply of
prepared opium required for consumption in India is made over to
the Excise Department . . . the chests of &quot; provision &quot;
opium, for export, are sold at monthly sales, which take place at
Calcutta.' For the meaning of the curious term, 'provision opium'
we have only to read on a little further. 'The opium is received
and prepared at the government factories, where the out-turn of
the year included 8,774 chests of opium for the Excise
Department, about three hundred pounds of various opium
alkaloids, thirty maunds of medical opium; and 51,770 chests of
provision opium for the Chinese market.' There are about <b>i4o </b>pounds
in a chest. . . . Last year the government had under poppy
cultivation 654,928 acres. And the revenue to the treasury,
including returns from auction sales, duties and license fees,
and deducting all 'opium expenditures' was nearly <font size="1">$22,000,000.
</font></p>

<p>As the blue book states, this opium is auctioned off once a
month. At that point, the British Government, as a government,
washes its hands of the business. Who buys the opium at these
government auctions, and what afterwards becomes of it? &quot;The
men who buy in the opium at these monthly auctions and afterwards
dispose of it are a curious crowd of Parsees, Mohammedans,
Hindoos and Asiatic Jews. Few British names appear in the opium
trade to-day. British dignity prefers not to stoop beneath the
taking in of profits; it leaves the details of a dirty business
to dirty hands. This is as it has been from the first. The
directors of the East India Company, years and years before that
splendid corporation relinquished the actual government of India,
forbade the selling of its specially-prepared opium direct to
China, and advised a trading station on the coast whence the drug
might find its way 'without the company being exposed to the
disgrace of being engaged in illicit commerce.&quot;' </p>

<p>&quot;So clean hands and dirty hands went into partnership.
They are in partnership still, save that the most nearly
Christian of governments has officially succeeded the company as
party of the first part.&quot; </p>

<p>You will say, if the British Government chooses to deal in
opium, that is not our concern. It is most emphatically our
concern. Once a month, at these great auction sales, the British
Government distributes thousands of pounds of opium, which are
thus turned loose upon the world, to bring destruction and ruin
to the human race. The buyers of this opium are not agents of the
British Government. They are merely the distributors, through
whom this drug is directed into the channels of trade.' The
British Government derives a certain portion of its revenue from
the sale of opium, therefore depends upon these dealers to find a
market for it. ' They are therefore, as distributors, the
unofficial agents of the British Government, through whom it is
sold legitimately, or smuggled around the world. In seeking to
eradicate the drug evil, we must face the facts, and recognize
clearly that the source of supply is the British Government,
through whose agents, official and unofficial, it is distributed.
</p>

<p>America, so they tell us, is now menaced by the drug evil. Now
that prohibition is coming into effect, we are told that we are
now confronted by a vice more terrible, far more deteriorating
and dangerous. If that is true, then we must recognize our danger
and guard against it. Some of the opium and morphia which reaches
this country is smuggled in; the rest is imported by the big
wholesale drug houses. There is an unlimited supply of it. As we
have seen, the British Government encourages poppy production,
even to the extent of lending money <i>without interest </i>to
all those who are willing to raise this most profitable crop. The
monopoly opium is sold once a month to the highest bidders, and
some of these highest bidders are unscrupulous men who must find
their markets how and where they can. That fact, of course, is of
no moment to the British Government. It is of deepest concern to
Americans, however. To the north of us we have the Dominion of
Canada. To the south, the No-Man's Land of Mexico. At the present
moment, the whole country is alarmed at the growing menace of the
drug habit, which is assuming threatening proportions.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>