
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-67</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B006-115</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/roe1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035401 text/html 10412
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:53:54 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:08 GMT
Content-length: 10194
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Why we should legalize drugs</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>Why we should legalize drugs </h1>

<p><b>by Benson B. Roe, MD</b> </p>

<p><b>Benson Roe is Professor Emeritus and former Chair of
Cardiothoracic Surgery at the University of California at San
Francisco.</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>And &quot;poison&quot; is also a misleading shibboleth. The
widespread propaganda that illegal drugs are &quot;deadly
poisons&quot; is a hoax. There is little or no medical evidence
of long term ill effects from sustained, moderate consumption of
uncontaminated marijuana, cocaine or heroin. If these substances
- most of them have been consumed in large quantities for
centuries - were responsible for any chronic, progressive or
disabling diseases, they certainly would have shown up in
clinical practice and/or on the autopsy table. But they simply
have not!</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>More than 20 years ago when I was removing destroyed heart
valves from infected intravenous drug abusers I assumed that
these seriously ill patients represented just the tip of the
iceberg of narcotic abuse. In an effort to ascertain what
proportion of serious or fatal drug-related disease this group
represented, I sought information from the San Francisco Coroner.
To my surprise he reported that infections from contaminated
intravenous injections were the only cause of drug-related deaths
he saw except for occasional deaths from overdoses. He confirmed
the inference that clean, reasonable dosages of heroin, cocaine
and marijuana are pathologically harmless. He asserted he had
never seen a heroin user over the age of 50. My obvious
conclusion was that they had died from their. habit but he was
confident that they had simply tired of the drug and just quit.
When asked if the same were basically true of marijuana and
cocaine, he responded affirmatively. That caused me to wonder why
these substances had been made illegal. </p>

<p>It is frequently stated that illicit drugs are &quot;bad,
dangerous, destructive&quot; or &quot;addictive,&quot; and that
society has an obligation to keep them from the public. But
nowhere can be found reliable, objective scientific evidence that
they are any more harmful than other substances and activities
that are legal. In view of the enormous expense, the carnage and
the obvious futility of the &quot;drug war,&quot; resulting in
massive criminalization of society, it is high time to examine
the supposed justification for keeping certain substances
illegal. Those who initiated those prohibitions and those who now
so vigorously seek to enforce them have not made their objectives
clear. Are they to protect us from evil, from addiction, or from
poison? </p>

<p>The concept of evil is derived from subjective values and is
difficult to define. just why certain (illegal) substances are
singularly more evil than legal substances like alcohol has not
been explained. This complex subject of &quot;right&quot; and
&quot;wrong&quot; has never been successfully addressed by
legislation and is best left to the pulpit. </p>

<p>Addiction is also a relative and ubiquitous phenomenon. It
certainly cannot be applied only to a short arbitrary list of
addictive substances while ignoring. a plethora of human cravings
- from chocolate to coffee, from gum to gambling, from tea, to
tobacco, from snuggling to sex. Compulsive urges to fulfill a
perceived need are ubiquitous. Some people are more susceptible
to addiction than others and some &quot;needs&quot; are more
addictive than others. Probably the most addictive substance in
our civilization is tobacco - yet no one has suggested making it
illegal. </p>

<p>As for prohibition, it has been clearly demonstrated that when
an addictive desire becomes inaccessible it provokes
irresponsible behavior to fulfill that desire. Education and
support at least have a chance of controlling addiction.
Deprivation only sharpens the craving and never works. Even in
prison addicts are able to get their `fix.' </p>

<p>And &quot;poison&quot; is also a misleading shibboleth. The
widespread propaganda that illegal drugs are &quot;deadly
poisons&quot; is a hoax. There is little or no medical evidence
of long term ill effects from sustained, moderate consumption of
uncontaminated marijuana, cocaine or heroin. If these substances
- most of them have been consumed in large quantities for
centuries - were responsible for any chronic, progressive or
disabling diseases, they certainly would have shown up in
clinical practice and/or on the autopsy table. But they simply
have not! </p>

<p>Media focus on the &quot;junkie&quot; has generated a mistaken
impression that all uses of illegal drugs are devastated by their
habit. Simple arithmetic demonstrates that the small population
of visible addicts must constitute only a fraction of the $150
billion per year illegal drug market. This industry is so huge
that it necessarily encompasses a very large portion of the
ordinary population who are typically employed, productive,
responsible and not significantly impaired from leading
conventional lives. These drug users are not &quot;addicts&quot;
just as the vast majority of alcohol users are not
&quot;alcoholics.&quot; </p>

<p>Is it not a ridiculous paradox to have laws to protect us from
relatively harmless substances and not from the devastating
effects of other substances that happen to be legal? It is well
known that tobacco causes nearly a million deaths annually (in
the US alone) from cancer, cardiovascular disease and emphysema;
more than 350,000 die from alcohol-related cirrhosis and its
complications and caffeine is the cause of cardiac and nervous
system disturbances. These facts suggest that the rubric is being
fraudulently misled into fearing the wrong substances and into
complacency about hazardous substances by allowing their sale and
even subsidization. </p>

<p>Our environment contains a plethora of hazards, of which
recreational substances are much less important than many others.
Recognizing the reality of consumer demand and the perspective of
relative harm should make a strong case for alternatives to
prohibition. Should we not have teamed from the failure of the
Volstead Act of the 1920s and the current ubiquitous availability
of illegal drugs that prohibition is the height of futility? </p>

<p>Is it not time to recognize that the &quot; problem&quot; is
not the drugs but the enormous amounts of untaxed money diverted
from the economy to criminals? The economic incentive for drug
dealers to merchandise their product aggressively is a
multi-billion dollar return which has a far more powerful effect
to increase substance abuse than any enforcement program can
possibly do to, constrain that usage. The hopeless challenge of
drug crime is compounded by the parallel expansion of theft,
crime, which is the principal economic resource to finance the
drug industry. How can this be anything but a lose-lose situation
for society? </p>

<p>We should look at the fact that a relatively low budget public
education campaign has resulted in a significant decline in US
consumption of both alcohol and tobacco during a period when a
costly and intensive campaign to curtail illegal drugs only
resulted in their increased usage. Is there a lesson to be
heeded? </p>

<p>Of course there is. Scrap the nonsense of trying to obliterate
drugs and acknowledge their presence in our society as we have
with alcohol and tobacco. Legalization would result in: </p>

<ol>
    <li>purity assurance under Food and Drug Administration
        regulation; </li>
    <li>labeled concentration of the product (to avoid overdose);
    </li>
    <li>obliteration of vigorous marketing (&quot;pushers&quot;);
    </li>
    <li>obliteration of drug crime and reduction of theft crime </li>
    <li>savings in expensive enforcement and </li>
    <li>significant tax revenues. </li>
</ol>

<p>Effort and funds can then be directed to educating the public
about the hazards of all drugs. </p>

<p>Can such a change of attitude happen? Probably not, because
the huge illegal drug industry has mountains of money for a media
blitz and for buying politicians to sing the songs of
&quot;evil&quot; and &quot;danger&quot; which is certain to kill
any legislative attempt at legalization. Perhaps it will take
some time before reality can prevail, but meanwhile we should at
least do more to expose deception and to disseminate the truth. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>