
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-50</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B039-63</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/family7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122071440 text/html 21199
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:14:09 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:29:59 GMT
Content-length: 20981
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News December, 1992</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News</h1>

<p>December 1, 1992</p>

<hr>

<p>Merry Christmas! The annual family reunion has come and gone
again. I believe it is caused by a chemical imbalance in the
brain. </p>

<p>Well, for all of you who attended the reunion this year, you
know that Becky and Carl put on one of the better feeds of the
past few years. There was some really good steak, and everybody
brought a lot of other fixings which, luckily, we did not have to
share with any of the lower creatures such as Bill Henry. All in
all, I would say it was successful. Only a couple of people took
shots at me, and both of those were deflected. Becky, being the
gracious hostess that she is, offered to help them reload, but
cooler heads prevailed. </p>

<p>When we got to the reunion, Meta came running out to meet us.
I am a good bit faster than she is, so I kept a good distance
between us until I was sure she was in a good mood. I am sure you
will understand when I tell you that the sight of a smiling
relative fills me with mixed emotions. I never know whether they
are genuinely glad to see me, or just anticipating the pleasure
of killing me. Meta is an especially dangerous relative because
she works at the Internal Revenue Service where she is the
manager of Torture Chamber Number 3. She says that it is against
the rules for her to look up any particular person's taxes, which
helps to establish her alibi when you are suddenly picked for an
audit. Beware of anyone who claims innocence before your bad
luck. </p>

<p>As usual, Bill Henry did not show up for the umpteenth year in
a row. As you all know, I have no interest in trashing his
reputation, even if such a thing was possible. Therefore I shall
try to report only the most favorable things I heard about him. </p>

<p>There were signs that Bill Henry would show up, but it turned
out to be a false alarm -- somebody ran over a skunk. Bud was not
fooled, he knew right away it wasn't Bill Henry. </p>

<p>&quot;Ain't nearly as pungent as Bill Henry,&quot; he said.
&quot;You'd have to have whole carload of skunks before I'd think
Bill Henry was coming.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Now Bud,&quot; Louise said, &quot;I think you're going
to offend some skunks with that kind of talk.&quot; </p>

<p>As it turned out, nobody had anything nice to say about this
low-down individual. Even Louise Leard, who normally comes to his
defense, had to admit that Bill Henry and soapy water had never
been close companions. &quot;You have to remember that it is not
really his fault that he has never attended a single
reunion,&quot; she said. &quot;it is just that he is so obese now
that he takes up two first-class seats on the airplane. He has to
steal an awful lot to get that much money.&quot; </p>

<p>Ruthie tried to apologize for him. &quot;I heard he tried to
come but his kids couldn't make it through the farm animal
quarantine.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Talking about farm animals,&quot; Pete said,
&quot;Living with Bill Henry was kinda like living with a grand
champion Berkshire hog that eats nothing but chili beans.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Now, be careful there,&quot; Louise cautioned him.
&quot;You might offend some Berkshire hogs that way.&quot; </p>

<p>Don said the worst things about Bill Henry. &quot;Me and Bill
Henry are buddies,&quot; he said, &quot;like two peas in a pod.
Bill Henry always looked up to me as a model of refinement and
fine behavior. Of course, he never was quite the gentleman that I
am.&quot; Don was right about that. Bill Henry never was a high
society character like Don, and was not nearly as good-looking,
either. </p>

<p>I called Bill Henry, just to see if he had any kind of
miserable excuse for missing every single reunion that has ever
been held. He was his usual weasel self. He told me that the most
recent lewd conduct charges were all a mistake, because he was
only holding it for a friend. </p>

<p>He told me he was coming to California in December to see some
woman named Nasa. He said Dawn knew nothing about it and tried to
get me to believe that he and all his family are doing well. Mark
is either in college or in jail, and Craig is in his senior year
in high school and will soon be eligible to be tried as an adult.
Dawn, he says, was recently arrested for a long string of
unsolicited good deeds. Bill says he has been doing a fair amount
of running in 5K races lately and soon hopes to run a
sub-15-minute mile. He became concerned about his physical
condition when some old lady ran him down and took her purse
back. </p>

<p>As usual, he gave me the mealy-mouth pretty bad about coming
to the reunion. He said he would try but he could not promise
anything. (His wife hears that a lot.) He said he wanted to make
up for his thoroughly disgusting behavior, so he told me to tell
everyone that he would give one hundred dollars to every person
who calls him <u>collect</u> to remind him to come to the
reunion. He said to be sure to call between the hours of midnight
and 2 AM, California time. If he seems a bit irritable when you
call, just hang up and try again in ten or fifteen minutes. </p>

<p>James and Edna were there in fine form, and James spent a good
deal of time telling me about one occasion when he did not go to
jail even though, by his own admission, he thoroughly deserved
it. </p>

<p>Don Morris was there. More than anything else he reminds me of
a mountain gorilla with a good beer gut, wearing Frisco jeans and
a long-sleeved shirt, desperately trying to pass for human. You
have to give him credit because sometimes he almost makes it.
Elinor came along, too, with no unrealistic expectations about
Don's behavior. Jeff did not come along. Elinor explained that he
slipped his collar and ran off to Sacramento. Elinor does not
attend all that many reunions but it must be stated that her
attendance record is a thousand times better than Bill Henry's. I
heard that Don was sick with a heart problem earlier this year
and, on one occasion, he actually passed on for a short time. The
Lord, however, saw Don knocking on the pearly gates, thought
better of His actions, and immediately sent Don back. Don says I
&quot;appreciate&quot; him. I suppose that is one way of putting
it. I guess the Lord does too. </p>

<p>Joanne was there with her new granddaughter. It looks as if
Christy's attempts to breed Andy have been successful. Their
daughter is an absolutely stunning child, a fact which can be
confirmed by anyone who had the misfortune to wander too close to
Joanne's new cub. I would send you all a picture of her but the
only picture I got shows Joanne proudly displaying her in the
Morris Moon position, and you have all seen that before. Her
Grandpa Don is justifiably proud. </p>

<p>Pete and Sandy were there. Pete says I should go talk to Gary
in Oregon. Ruthie says that she has the highest possible opinion
of Sandy and explained that Sandy is Grade-A Certifiable. I think
we can believe Ruthie on this one. </p>

<p>Ruthie was there but Tom was not. Ruthie explained that, in
less than two years of marriage, Tom had come down with double
pneumonia so she thought it best to leave town while he
recovered. </p>

<p>Louise Leard wrote me a letter in which she told me that she
liked all the parts of these letters that I thought were the
dullest. There is no accounting for taste, particularly in
Louise's case. She says that she enjoys reading them aloud with
the other members of her family. Now that is something I never
even contemplated -- Louise Leard telling fart jokes to her
grandchildren. Maybe she should ask Don to come over and share a
few of his experiences with them. Louise said that she was
pleased to see that I was able to talk about the Leards without
using swear words, because it is so seldom done. </p>

<p>We missed Edith and Louise Taylor at the reunion for the first
time in years. They are usually there every year, except for
those rare occasions when there are rumors that Bill Henry might
show up. The last I heard they were both doing well and making
lots of money. Edith is probably organizing a marathon. </p>

<p>Bud was the clear winner for bringing the most family members
to this reunion. I never thought he was that prolific, but from
the looks of the crowd that he had, he must have been having a
whole lot more fun than I thought. You could tell they were all
related to him, too. They showed up and the food vanished. </p>

<p>Several of you have complained about (among other things) that
I never say anything about myself and my family. Part of this is
due to the fact that I tend to be considerably more refined than
the rest of you (especially the Ohio branch of the family) but,
in deference to the unending stream of complaints about one thing
or another, I shall try. </p>

<p>What can I tell you about my family? You can't really hate
somebody until you marry them. There is no happiness in life that
having children cannot cure. </p>

<p>Serena and Alyssa (the twins) have both graduated from high
school, more or less on time. The Pope has declared it a miracle
and will be erecting a small shrine in front of our house. Alyssa
is now going to the local junior college studying nothing in
particular, and works as a secretary for a real estate appraiser.
Serena has been working full time for the last two years at
Pinkerton Detectives in the Employee Benefits Department, and
will begin college in January. They have matching worthless
boyfriends. </p>

<p>Melissa is in high school, has not been arrested recently
(last thirty days) and had a job over the summer doing telephone
canvassing for a real estate company. Her boss said she was good
at talking on the phone -- a real surprise for all of us. </p>

<p>Courtney is now in junior high school and is wearing the
braces that could have been my new car. Anyone who thinks they
have ever seen stubborn should meet Courtney. For years she has
insisted that one of the Four Tops biggest hits was &quot;I'll Be
Darned&quot;. </p>

<p>Bonnie works at Pinkerton as some kind of manager in the
computer systems department, when she is not home complaining. As
a hobby, they all spend money. </p>

<p>Now, I am sure that all of you with children feel that your
children are a very special brand of idiot. In the majority of
cases, I am sure you are right. That is, you spend a good deal of
time just staring in amazement and shaking your head at the dumb
things they do. Well, so do I, but yours probably don't make it
into the local newspaper. I have enclosed a copy of a news
article which appeared in our local newspaper. </p>

<p>It seems that Courtney (our youngest) was accused of gambling
at school. One of her friends dropped a quarter, so Courtney
picked it up and handed it to her. One of the teachers (a
well-known local nut) saw Courtney do it and assumed that
Courtney and her friend were gambling. Consequently, the teacher
confiscated the money, which was the friend's lunch money, and
said Courtney must come in for Saturday school (their usual
punishment for schoolyard felonies). It was clearly a bum rap
because neither one of them could even accurately describe the
usual technique of gambling, because neither one of them had much
interest in it until they got busted. </p>

<p>We, as parents, took exception to a stupid situation and
protested the matter but, as long as Courtney didn't have to go
to the Saturday school, we were ready to drop it. However, I am
sure the school authorities had no idea they were messing with
Alyssa. </p>

<p>Alyssa is the kind of person who will tell people off just
because they need to be told off. She sort of considers it as a
public service on her part. In fact, she goes out of her way to
find people who need this service. Since we have lived here she
has told off the neighbors, their kids, their pets, the
homeowners association, the gardeners, the security guards, the
mail man, the street sweeper, the sheriff, and the people
building the housing tract next door -- to name a few. Somehow,
an issue always seems to come up which requires her input. She is
often the kind of person who makes you wonder if you can knock
them out with one punch. Alyssa could piss off the Pope. Mother
Theresa would strangle her. I have disclaimed any knowledge of
her on many public occasions. </p>

<p>Alyssa never seems to run short of things that she objects to
and she likes nothing better than a good crusade, so when this
happened to her younger sister she was outraged and vowed to do
something about it. I am not entirely sure why she felt she had
to do something because, on any other occasion, she would
gleefully torment Courtney in any way she could, and I have had
to break up more than a few good fist fights between these two.
If she could have personally arranged for Courtney to attend
extra Saturday schools on any other occasion, I am sure she would
have done it in a heartbeat. I guess the injustice of the
situation was just too much for Alyssa to tolerate. </p>

<p>Alyssa called the local newspaper and reported it to them,
providing them with our correspondence with the school, the name
of the other girl, a few other pertinent facts, and a suitable
amount of righteous indignation. They investigated and published
the enclosed article on page one of the Sunday paper. </p>

<p>As result, the school authorities now eye Courtney with great
suspicion, like Richard Nixon views reporters. No doubt they will
tread lightly when they think of messing with Alyssa, or anyone
who might know her. Their policy of arbitrarily seizing money
from kids has, however, stopped. </p>

<p>As for me, I am doing itinerant computer consulting, some
writing on various subjects, and a good deal of rabble-rousing
for radical organizations such as the American Civil Liberties
Union. I am the only member of the Los Angeles Chapter who is
also a member of the National Rifle Association. Even the ACLU
thinks I am a radical. It makes me feel special to be a misfit
even among the misfits. </p>

<p>My specialty is the legalization of drugs, although I will
willingly engage almost any conservative fool on almost any
subject. As some of you may already know I have spent the last
few years debating everyone from local prosecutors to the Drug
Czars on this issue and, to date, have never lost. The reason I
don't lose is simple enough -- any rational review of the
evidence shows that legalization is a far better approach. Most
of the information I have is really surprising. </p>

<p>Do you know why drugs were originally outlawed? Cocaine was
outlawed because of the fear that superhuman Negro Cocaine Fiends
would drink large amounts of Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola and go on a
violent sexual rampage and rape white women. Caffeine was almost
outlawed at the same time because of the same fear. Police
nationwide switched from .32 caliber to .38 caliber pistols
because, as one police officer put it, &quot;Those cocaine
niggers sure are hard to kill.&quot; Opiates were outlawed
because of racial prejudice against the Chinese, and marijuana
was outlawed as a legal weapon against Mexican laborers during
the Depression. The laws never had anything to do with public
health and safety. </p>

<p>As some of you may know, this year there were three judges
from Orange County who publicly came out and said they supported
legalization of drugs. I have been coaching these judges on how
to debate the subject of drug legalization in media appearances
and there has been more than a little success. In any flat-footed
debate they are just about unbeatable. On one recent radio talk
show one of the judges I am coaching was supposed to debate
Sherman Block, the LA County Sheriff. The morning of the debate,
Sheriff Block announced that he would have to release 20 percent
of all of the prisoners in Los Angeles County because there were
no more jails to hold them. Sheriff Block failed to show up for
the debate and the radio station could not find any official in
LA or Orange County who was willing to defend the criminal laws
against drugs. A recent survey showed that forty percent of all
of the judges in Orange County now support legalization. </p>

<p>(Can you imagine Louise Leard reading this propaganda about
drug legalization to her grandchildren? I'm gonna get scolded for
sure. She already blames me for corrupting her youngest child,
and still watches me warily when I talk to him.) </p>

<p>Attached you will find the latest info on the next reunion.
Pete says there will be more information later, presumably after
he has already collected all the money. </p>

<p>Merry Christmas to all and to all a good night!</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Reunion Details</b></p>

<hr>

<hr>

<pre width="132">
Where:                  <b>Merced River Resort, near Turlock</b>                  
                                                   

When:                   <b>June 26 and 27, 1993</b>                               
                                                   

 
                        In the absence of further information from Pete,   
                        we should assume that the contribution will be     
                        the same, $8.00 per household or loosely           
                        organized mob.                                     

<b>Important:</b>              Pete says he needs to know who is coming by        
<b>January 15, 1993</b> in order to reserve the camp      
                        sites.  Reserved camp sites, tents, and trailers   
                        will need to be paid for by April 15, 1933.        


</pre>

<hr>

<p>The campground has camp sites, tents, trailers which may be
reserved on a first-come, first-served basis. The camp sites and
tents each rent for $15 per night, and you may have more than one
tent per camp site. </p>

<p>The trailers rent for $35 per night. The trailers, I am told,
have three beds and will sleep up to six people, depending upon
their degree of familiarity. One bed is an actual bed, another
bed is really a table, and a third is a sofa -- kinda like we all
used to sleep when we lived on Fedora. The trailers are supposed
to be 24 footers with all of the amenities of home. Those of you
who use linens on your bed will need to bring them with you. </p>

<p>Pete says to get your reservations in early because there are
only six trailers and Pete and Laurence have already taken two of
them. Ruthie will probably take another one, so anyone who
doesn't speak quickly is going to be sleeping in the park again. </p>

<p>There is also a clubhouse which serves breakfast from 9 to 10
AM (too early for me) for about two or three dollars per adult
(too rich for most of us). Alternatively, they have large
dumpsters available to feed the Morrises and the Leards. </p>

<p>Additional accommodations are available in the motels in
Turlock eight miles away, for $36 to $44 per night. Pete says he
will supply more information about these later. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>