
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B036-165</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/baum1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124929 text/html 17310
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:24 GMT
Content-length: 17092
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<h1><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h1>

<h1>Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors</h1>

<p> <b>by Dan Baum, 1996</b> </p>

<p> Dan Baum has written what may be the best modern history of
the political doings behind the War on Drugs over the last 30
years. You can find a copy through your local bookstore, or visit
Dan Baum's Website: <a
href="http://members.aol.com/danbaum/baum.html">http://members.aol.com/danbaum/baum.html</a>.
</p>

<h1><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h1>

<h2>William Bennett</h2>

<p> When William Bennett moved across town from the Department of
Education to be &quot;czar&quot; at the Office of National Drug
Control Policy, he brought his people with him. All white, all
male, none with law enforcement or social-service experience,
some had been with Bennett the entire eight years since his debut
at the National Endowment for the Humanities. </p>

<p> Bennett's men held themselves above the mere budget-cutters,
tax-slashers, regulation-busters, and states-rightsers that
comprised the broader executive branch. John Walters, Bennett's
chief of staff at Education and author of the punitive Schools
Without Drugs, had been to meetings of Ed Meese's Drug Policy
Board and had been appalled at their inanity. Everybody was so
busy jockeying for position that nobody ever ventured an honest
opinion or original idea. Bennett's office, on the other hand,
prided itself on being one continuous philosophy forum, with
great questions of political theory and national purpose the
stuff of daily conversation. Envisioning themselves a kind of
ideological Bennettista cavalry to the Republican infantry,
Bennett's crew saw their mission at the drug office as
fundamentally identical to that at Education or the Endowment: To
reform America's character, by force if necessary. </p>

<p> It would have been okay with them to be assigned teen
pregnancy, abortion, welfare -- any platform from which to
harangue the public about values and exact punishment for
transgression. &quot;Drugs are the hill we're fighting over at
the moment, but the war is much bigger than that,&quot; Bruce
Carnes, Bennett's budget director, would say. &quot;Our fight is
any issue that has a shade on character.&quot; </p>

<p> The &quot;hill&quot; they'd just been given to fight over,
though, wasn't just any piece of political turf, but was the
hottest hot-button issue of the decade. More than half the
country believed drugs to be the America's worst problem.
Majorities favored mandatory drug tests for all citizens,
warrantless police searches of suspected dealers' homes, and
roadblocks to search cars randomly. This wasn't mere naked
paintings or politically correct social studies textbooks. This
was a chance to preach and kick ass on the nation's brightly lit
center stage. </p>

<p> Even before Bennett's Senate confirmation, his men began
plotting their course. The same 1988 law that created the drug
czar's office also required it to produce a drug-control strategy
by September, and there was no time to waste. Bennett himself
wasn't around much. He'd checked himself into a $700-a-week
therapeutic resort to kick his two-pack-a-day cigarette habit. </p>

<p> But in the lofty and freewheeling style to which they'd
become accustomed, Bennett's core group of advisors began laying
out the assumptions on which national drug policy would hereafter
be based. </p>

<p> At this point, the United States had been fighting its War on
Drugs for twenty years. Despite the billions spent, the millions
imprisoned, and the loss of liberties to both drug user and
non-user alike, drugs were cheaper, more potent, and used by
younger children than when Nixon started the War. The drug
cartels were wealthier and more sophisticated than ever. The
number of cocaine dependents had grown. Drug violence, unheard of
at the start of the Drug War, now terrorized poor neighborhoods.
Drug combatants died daily; just the number of slain innocent
bystanders had tripled in the two years prior to Bush's
inauguration. Rather than evaluate the efficacy of the War on
Drugs and the wisdom of pursuing it, Bennett and his men merely
shuffled the deck one more time. </p>

<p> Under Nixon, heroin was the big bad drug. Halfway through
Carter's reign, marijuana nudged it aside. As the public's
passion to fight marijuana waned, cocaine was thrust forward to
draw fire. Then crack. The Drug War front shifted endlessly too,
from the border to the streets to Bolivia to the money-laundering
banks to the suburbs and back to the border again. </p>

<p> Now it was the Bennettistas' turn, and they achieved the most
radical recasting of the country's &quot;drug problem&quot; yet:
Drugs would no longer be discussed as a health problem. </p>

<p> The physical dangers of illegal drugs had always been the
Drug War's causa belli. Even the &quot;zero tolerance&quot;
policy of the late Reagan years was couched in the rhetoric of
&quot;instantaneous addiction&quot; and &quot;the poisoning of
our children&quot;: health terminology. </p>

<p> That had to stop. Because if the drug issue was going to
serve the Bennettistas' decade-long crusade to police the
nation's character, drug abuse needed to be placed in the same
category as offensive art, multicultural teaching, and ethical
relativism: a matter of morality. </p>

<p> &quot;The simple fact is that drug use is wrong,&quot;
Bennett decreed. &quot;And the moral argument, in the end, is the
most compelling argument.&quot; Terence Pell, Bennett's personal
lawyer from Education and now the drug office's chief counsel,
put it this way: &quot;We have to believe. If you think drugs are
bad, that they make people bad neighbors, horrible parents,
dangerous drivers and what have you, then you think drugs are
bad. There's a moral dimension.&quot; </p>

<p> If drugs are a health problem then addicts are
&quot;sick,&quot; and that cast them in a sympathetic light the
Bennettistas felt addicts didn't deserve. The decision to take
drugs that first time, after all, is voluntary. Walters directly
attacked the old approach. &quot;The health people say 'no
stigma,'&quot; he would say, &quot;and I'm for stigma.&quot; </p>

<p> The medical model of drug abuse was to Bennett's men a
philosophic and practical morass. If you base prohibition on
drugs' health effects, what do you say to the millions of
occasional users who convincingly claim to be uninjured by the
drugs they took? If you acknowledge that heavy drug users are
sick, you create an expectation that the government will treat
them. </p>

<p> The biggest problem with basing a prohibitive drug policy on
the health risks, though, was the invitation to comparisons. The
year the chain-smoking Bennett became drug czar, tobacco killed
some 395,000 Americans -- more than died in both world wars.
Alcohol directly killed 23,000 and another 22,400 on the
highways. The Natural Resources Defense Council in March
published a report, widely praised by medical authorities,
estimating that as many as 5,500 Americans would develop cancer
from the pesticides they ate during their preschool years. The
incidence of breast cancer in American women had more than
doubled since World War II, owing largely to dioxin and other
pollutants. Cocaine, on the other hand, killed 3,308 people that
year, slightly less than died from anterior horn cell disease.
Heroin and other opiates killed 2,743. And no death from
marijuana has ever been recorded. </p>

<p> Drugs damage without killing, of course, but even here other
preventable health problems put illegal drugs in deep shade. The
General Accounting Office, Congress's non-partisan investigative
agency, estimated that some 350,000 people were using cocaine
daily in 1989. While that's a big number, 15 times that many
children were going to bed hungry at least once a month that
year, 50 times that many Americans were sleeping on the streets,
and 100 times that many had no health insurance. </p>

<p> Discussing drugs as a moral problem obviated such
comparisons. If the case could be made that drug use is simply
wrong, then it wouldn't matter that some people use drugs safely,
that alcohol and tobacco kill more people than reefer and smack,
that more American than European children know hunger. </p>

<p> The Bennettistas worked hard to address the inconsistencies
of their approach. Their most glaring problem was the new drug
czar himself. By any medical definition, Bennett was a drug
addict, so dependent on nicotine after giving up the drug in its
smokable form that he now carried everywhere a pack of nicotine
chewing gum and was up to 40 milligrams of nicotine a day --
about as much as in two packs of cigarettes. </p>

<p> Alcohol was another problem. Bennett's drug office had no
Congressional mandate to address it, his mainstream constituency
enjoyed it, and the alcohol industry's mulitmillion-dollar lobby
wouldn't stand for further restrictions on booze. So the drug
office needed somehow to place alcohol on the &quot;moral&quot;
side of the line. No small trick. Aside from the cirrhosis and
highway deaths, booze was implicated in violent crime to a much
greater degree than any illegal drug. The Justice Department
found that half of those convicted of homicide in 1989 were using
alcohol at the time of the killing, while fewer than six percent
said they were on drugs alone. </p>

<p> Bennett's men tiptoed through the minefield of alcohol and
tobacco. John Walters took the position that marijuana, cocaine,
and heroin, &quot;enslave people&quot; and &quot;prevent them
from being free citizens&quot; in a way that alcohol and tobacco
do not. Bruce Carnes decided that drug taking was
&quot;life-denying,&quot; and &quot;inward,&quot; but that
alcohol and tobacco were not. Illegal drugs, Bennett said in a
speech that May, &quot;obliterate morals, value, character, our
relations with each other and our relation to God.&quot; None of
these conclusions was based on science, but collectively they had
the effect of royal fiat. </p>

<p> The Bennettistas also relied on a neat bit of tautology:
marijuana, heroin, and cocaine are immoral because they are
illegal. Why are they illegal? Because they are immoral.
Compliance, not health, was the real issue. &quot;Now that the
government has spoken to the subject that drugs are
unlawful,&quot; said Paul McNulty, a Bennettista soul-mate
directing communications at the Justice Department, &quot;a
person who disobeys the law has made a moral choice and should be
dealt with appropriately.&quot; Bennett freely admitted drug
enforcement was but an instrument of a wider agenda, calling for
&quot;the reconstitution of legal and social authority through
the imposition of appropriate consequences for drug dealing and
drug use.&quot; &quot;The drug crisis,&quot; he told the
Washington Hebrew congregation, &quot;is a crisis of authority,
in every sense of the term, 'authority.&quot; </p>

<p> Consequently, &quot;a massive wave of arrests is a top
priority for the War on Drugs,&quot; Bennett announced.
Washington, D.C. had arrested 45,000 of its citizens for drugs in
the two years prior to Bennett's appointment, &quot;without
making an appreciable dent in either the drug trade or the murder
rate,&quot; Newsweek noted. But Bennett wanted more of the same.
On the day he was sworn in, he declared the city a &quot;high
intensity drug trafficking area&quot; and unveiled a massive plan
to fight drugs in the nation's capital. More than eighty federal
agents would bolster the city's drug squad. A curfew would sweep
the streets of minors after 11 p.m. A judge ruled the curfew
unconstitutional, but the mood was infectious. Some members of
Congress suggested declaring de facto martial law -- placing the
D.C. police under federal control and sending in the Army and
National Guard. Of the $100 million Bennett wanted spent in D.C.,
95 percent was for law enforcement. Of that, more than half would
go to a new prison, and until that could be built, Bennett
proposed converting abandoned military buildings into makeshift
drug prisons. As for the purpose of all this new incarceration,
Bennett was characteristically blunt: &quot;I'm not a person who
says that the first purpose of punishment is
rehabilitation,&quot; he told Congress. &quot;The first purpose
is moral, to exact a price for transgressing the rights of
others.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<h2>Elvis Presley</h2>

<p> The year ended on an odd note for the War on Drugs. Four days
before Christmas 1971, Egil Krogh's phone rang. It was Dwight
Chapin, from Bob Haldeman's staff. </p>

<p> &quot;The King is here,&quot; Chapin said. </p>

<p> &quot;King who?&quot; Krogh asked. &quot;No kings on the
president's schedule today.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;Not just any two-bit king,&quot; Chapin answered.
&quot;The King. Elvis. The King of Rock.&quot; </p>

<p> Elvis Presley had appeared that morning at the Northwest Gate
of the White House and handed the guard a nearly illegible
six-page letter on American Airlines stationery. He was an
admirer of the president, Presley wrote, and he wanted to help
spread Nixon's anti-drug message. He was well positioned, too:.
&quot;The drug culture, the hippie elements, the SDS, Black
Panthers, etc. do not consider me as their enemy or as they call
it The Establishment.&quot; To dispel any doubts as to his own
loyalty, Presley added in bold underline, &quot;I call it America
and I love it!&quot; </p>

<p> Then Presley made his pitch. &quot;I can and will do more
good if I were made a Federal Agent at Large. . . . All I need is
the Federal credentials.&quot; </p>

<p> Presley was registered at a nearby hotel under the name Jon
Burrows. &quot;I will be here for as long as it takes to get the
credentials of a Federal Agent,&quot; Presley wrote. &quot;I have
done an in-depth study of drug abuse and Communist brainwashing
techniques and I am right in the middle of the whole thing where
I can and will do the most good.&quot; </p>

<p> Though he didn't mention it in the note to Nixon, Presley was
a collector of police badges. And he was a dopehound of legendary
excess. But in the squareball Nixon White House, Presley found
perhaps the only people in the United States who didn't know
that. Krogh certainly didn't. He took the letter at face value. </p>

<p> At 12:30, the King was relieved of his present for the chief
executive - a nickel-plated .45 automatic, complete with
ammunition -- and ushered into the office of the president. </p>

<p> Nixon was dressed like Nixon: blue suit, white shirt, tie.
Elvis was dressed like Elvis: black velvet jacket, chest hair,
gold medallions, sunglasses and a belt buckle big as a dinner
plate. He pulled up a sleeve to exhibit cufflinks the size of
hamsters. As Nixon bent close to examine them, Elvis launched
into a tirade against the Beatles, who he accused of being
anti-American. </p>

<p> &quot;You know,&quot; Nixon said. &quot;Those who use the
drugs are the protesters. You know, the ones who get caught up in
dissent and violence. They're the same group of young
people.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;Mr. President,&quot; Elvis said, &quot;I'm on your
side. I want to be helpful. And I want to help get people to
respect the flag because that's getting lost.&quot; </p>

<p> Then Elvis got to the point. &quot;Mr. President, can you get
me a badge from the Narcotics Bureau?&quot; </p>

<p> Krogh was afraid of this. He'd already called the number-two
man at BNDD who earlier that day had thrown Elvis out. Elvis had
gone there before stopping at the Northwest gate, and offered a
$5,000 &quot;donation&quot; to BNDD in return for a badge. </p>

<p> Nixon, not knowing any of that, looked uncertainly at Krogh.
&quot;Bud, can we get him a badge?&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;If you want to give him a badge, I think we can get him
one.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;I'd like to do that. See that he gets one.&quot; </p>

<p> Elvis then did something nobody had ever done in the Nixon
Oval Office; he gathered the president up in his arms and gave
him a big bear hug. The staff was stunned; the photographer
didn't even get a picture. Nixon endured it stiffly, handed out
presidential tie clasps, and dismissed the King with a hearty pat
on the shoulder. </p>

<p> And so it came to pass that on the day Elvis Presley died of
a drug overdose in 1977, he was a credentialed Special Assistant
in the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>