
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B03-137</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA097-001038-B032-247</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.fintrend.com:80/Newsletters/Dec_95.htm 206.205.42.66 19970215063347 text/html 30000
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 06:33:51 GMT
Server: Apache/1.0.5
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>FTF December 1995</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<!--webbot bot="Include" u-include="../_private/logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../images/FTFlogo.gif" width="414"
height="100"></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="4054" --><div
align="center"><center>

<table border="5" cellpadding="2" width="60%">
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>December 31, 1995</i></b> </td>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>Timothy</i></b> <b><i>McMahon,</i></b> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>Volume 1</i></b>, <em><strong>Number
        6</strong></em></td>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>Editor</i></b> </td>
    </tr>
</table>
</center></div>

<hr>

<table border="1" width="100%">
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a name="In This Issue . . ."><font
        color="#008000"><em>In This Issue . . .</em></font></a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Dec_95.htm#A Guaranteed Trend">A
        Guaranteed Trend</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Dec_95.htm#Trading Cycles">Trading
        Cycles</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="Dec_95.htm#The Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)">The
        Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Dec_95.htm#Long Term Cycle">Long
        Term Cycle</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Dec_95.htm#Charts">Charts</a></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h1><a href="Dec_95.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="Trading Cycles">Trading Cycles</a></h1>

<p><img src="../images/nov_952.gif" width="574" height="442"> </p>

<p>Everything in life involves cycles&#151;the seasons, the moon,
and the Stock Market. The regularity of it all occasionally
amazes me. Some stocks tend to be more cyclical than others. You
would expect a swimsuit manufacturer's business to be cyclical
but this may or may not translate into a regular cycle for the
stock. Often a stock will demonstrate an annual cycle and within
that cycle there will be a monthly cycle and within that cycle
there will be a daily cycle and possibly even an hourly one. </p>

<p>Before we get too far into this discussion of cycles I would
like to define what I mean by a &#147;cycle.&#148; A cycle is a
discernible regularity to the price of a Stock, Bond, Option or
other monetary instrument which includes equally spaced
alternating highs and lows. A trend on the other hand is
generally longer term and involves prices moving within a channel
in either an upward or downward direction. </p>

<p>The advantages of being able to identify a cycle is obviously
to be able to determine<b> </b>when the next high or low will
occur (not necessarily how high or low it will go).
Unfortunately, identifying the cycle itself is not always so
obvious. However, with a little training and a little time spent
studying the chart, the cycle will often just jump out at you. </p>

<p>I know the title of this newsletter is <i>Financial Trend
Forecaster</i> and somehow trends and cycles don't seem to go
together but being able to spot both makes a much more profitable
investor. Often within a trend there will be a cycle and with-in
a cycle there will be a trend. </p>

<p>Robert Prechter, editor of the <i>Elliott Wave Theorist, </i>P.O.
Box 1618, Gainesville, GA 30503, may be considered one of the
kings of modern day cycle theory. He actually combines cycles,
Elliott waves, numerical relationships, lunar phases and a host
of other indicators to arrive at his predictions, some of which I
agree with and others of which I don't. (Of course, no two market
participants ever agree 100% of the time.) </p>

<p>One of Prechter's primary hypotheses is that cycles sort of
fit together like those little nesting dolls&#151;inside each one
is a smaller one. There is a primary super cycle for the stock
market, which began in 1789 and has mainly trended up. This is
like the big Papa Doll. Within this cycle there is a Mama Doll
super cycle which began in 1932 and is in an uptrend. Nested
within this cycle is an upward trending cycle (from 1974),
Primary Wave (from 1987), Intermediate Wave (from 1994),and Minor
Wave (from Oct. 27, 1995). According to Prechter all of these
cycles are up but topping and his prediction based upon numerical
relationships is that the Dow will peak shortly between 5400 and
5500. </p>

<p>If he is correct, the topping of the smaller cycles is of
little concern but the topping of the three largest cycles would
mean <b>MAJOR Devastation</b>. Remember, the crash of '87 was
only a primary cycle correction according to his reckoning!
Counting Elliott waves, which generally consist of three waves up
broken by two shorter waves down, is an entirely different
process than spotting the types of cycles I am talking about. </p>

<p>Interestingly, the Elliott wave is also predicting a
January-March top in Gold that corresponds fairly well with the
MIP's prediction. </p>

<p>One time I heard of an investor who used the &#147;newsletter
consensus investing&#148; approach. He would subscribe to 10 to
15 newsletters and watch for a consensus among the writers, If,
for instance, two of them advised the same stock it was a buy
signal and if three, then it became a strong buy. </p>

<p>If you follow that reasoning Gold is very likely to be topping
in the January-February range due to the agreement of the MIP and
Elliott wave. By the way, Elliott Wave is predicting a top in the
XAU (Gold Stock Index) at 176 which is well above the peak in
early 1994 or anything we have seen this year. Currently the XAU
is around 120. The only thing that could cause that dramatic a
rise is a panic due to either troops in Bosnia or another
Government shut down. (For more discussion on this see the
article on this month's MIP.) </p>

<p><img src="../images/dec_953.gif" width="455" height="310"> </p>

<p>An interesting stock to learn to spot cycles on is Microsoft
during this past year (see page 1). Prior to this year Microsoft
has not been volatile enough to spot the cycles, although they
probably existed (volatility enhances cycles). Cycles are easiest
to spot in a High Low Close (HLC) Chart. A HLC<i> </i>chart is
created by drawing a vertical line with the top representing the
high for the day the bottom representing the low and a horizontal
dash representing the close. </p>

<p>Our Microsoft chart is set with vertical lines spaced every 10
trading days (2 weeks). Therefore, dotted lines are four weeks
apart (as are solids). After March 29th the solid lines coincide
with the 4 week cyclical highs and the dotted lines are the four
week lows. </p>

<p>The way to isolate a cycle is by simply trying various lengths
until we find one that corresponds with the majority of highs and
has corresponding lows in between. By starting at 3/29/95 we see
that the next three successive cycles hit very close. Then we hit
the blow off peak of July which appears to be a week early,
raising a question that we will answer later. </p>

<p>The cycle continues with two more regular cycles with the
third cycle gapping up and peaks on a dotted line (instead of
solid) at arrow &#147;C&#148;. This raises another question in
our minds and the answer appears to be a longer 16 week cycle
with the peaks at &#147;A, B, and C&#148;. Since both
&#147;B&#148; and &#147;C&#148; were higher than the surrounding
peaks it seems obvious that this is a bigger (longer term) cycle.
Point &#147;A&#148; was not obvious, at the time, but was
determined by counting backward from &#147;B&#148;. </p>

<p>Finally, there is probably an 8 week cycle midway between the
16 week arrows which moves that high closer to the dotted line
than the solid. The one strange point is that the four week cycle
is out of sync. with the 8 and 16 (<i>i.e.</i> it falls on a
solid line rather than a dotted). Prior to point &#147;A&#148;
this was not the case but cycles do change on occasion. We must
be willing to follow the chart not try to fit the chart to our
ideas. </p>

<p>Our December 8th Hotline recommended closing our Microsoft
position at the four week cyclical high due on December 13th
because the technical indicators did not look good. </p>

<p>The high was due Wednesday plus or minus two days. I stated it
should reach $95-100. The true high occurred on the first day of
the window (the 11th) and only reached 94 ¾ giving us a poor
showing by the 13th. With point &#147;C&#148; not exceeding point
&#147;B&#148; all that is necessary for Microsoft to really fall
is a break through the support trendline. If it is contained by
the support line we can expect it to rise to the resistance line.
But as time goes on the two lines get closer until it must break
through one or the other. </p>

<p>An interesting footnote to the price action at point
&#147;C&#148; is that it nicely filled in the gap created in the
drop from the top at point &#147;B&#148;. For some reason markets
don't like gaps and often return to fill them at a later date. </p>

<p>Microsoft Note: From a Fundamental standpoint (Fundamentals
are the study of the earnings, yield, new sales, etc. of a
company), Microsoft still is looking positive. However, from a
Technical standpoint (Technicals are the study of chart patterns,
trendlines, cycles, etc.), Microsoft looks poor. It is possible
that it will undergo a major correction before continuing its
uptrend. </p>

<h2><a href="Dec_95.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="Long Term Cycle">Long Term Cycle</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/dec_954.gif" width="618" height="403"> </p>

<p>Long Term Bonds have demonstrated a longer term cycle first
identified by Russian theorist Kondratieff. In the bond chart
dating from 1820 we can see the peaks (denoted by the
&#147;P&#148;) and the valley's (&#147;V&#148;) follow an
approximate 50-60 year cycle. The &#147;orthodox&#148; peaks are
at 1860, 1920, 1980 with the valleys at 1830, 1890, 1950. The
actual peaks and valleys may be slightly different. If this cycle
holds we should be able to expect a cycle low around 2010.
Unfortunately with a cycle of this magnitude the variation can be
quite great (as demonstrated in 1840). We ought to be able to
expect a few more years of downtrend before we reach the bottom. </p>

<h2><a href="Dec_95.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="A Guaranteed Trend">A Guaranteed Trend</a></h2>

<p>Some Trends are subject to reversal at any moment as part of a
cycle. Some trends like those in currencies are longer term.
There is one trend, however, that is guaranteed to last the rest
of our lives. That trend is the population trend. As Baby Boomers
age they will eventually become Senior Boomers. </p>

<p>One of the underlying causes of the current stock market boom
is the fact that Baby Boomers (BB's) are into their peak earning
years, have two incomes and as such are saving, investing and
spending more. </p>

<p>All of this money flooding into the market drives up share
prices, just as it drove up commodity prices in the 80's when the
&#147;BB's&#148; were in their peak consuming years. If we follow
this trend into the next decade and beyond as BB's enter their
retirement years, we ought to be able to develop some reasonable
hypotheses. </p>

<p>It has been said that as fewer workers are paying into Social
Security (which is not a trust fund but simply a wealth
redistribution scheme). These workers are supporting more retired
people. </p>

<p>In 1950 each retiree was supported by 17 workers, in 1990 it
was down to 3.4 workers and sometime after 2010 it will be less
than 2 workers! At that point each worker will have to give up
half his salary just to pay for the one on retirement. </p>

<p>How many youngsters around today will be willing to do that?
Unless something changes drastically, Social Security is doomed
by demographics. Fortunately, a lot of BB's have sensed this and
although they may be outraged, they are planning for that
eventuality (which may be why they are investing in the stock
market). The major recipient of new capital in the market today
is mutual funds, which filters it into stocks and (lately)
bonds&#151;driving up the prices of the markets. </p>

<p>One logical conclusion of this scenario would be that as these
BB's retire (with or without Social Security) they will begin to
sell off their stocks to meet monthly expenses, thus driving down
the overall stock market. </p>

<p>A brighter scenario would be that since they are retired their
expenses will have decreased and hopefully the companies
productivity will have increased enough that the retirees can
live off the income of their investments. </p>

<p>The alternative is that people realize that they can not live
off their investments (if they made any), Social Security is bust
and so they must continue working past retirement age. This is
the norm in most third world countries and was expected even in
this country until this century. There simply was no retirement.
You worked until you died. </p>

<p>The first Baby Boomers are almost 50 now and should begin
retiring between 2002 and 2012. Ever wonder why congress is so
set on getting the budget balanced in 7 years? Because if they
don't do it by then they never will! This is their last chance to
save Social Security and the whole house of cards. </p>

<p>Kenneth Coleman of <i>The Fed Tracker </i>believes that
another reason the year 2002 is significant is that Europe is
supposed to have a single currency by that date. If they succeed,
this would provide an alternative to the U.S. Dollar as the
reserve currency of the world. Losing reserve status could cause
further downward pressure on the greenback and further value
erosion. </p>

<p>Allen Keyte of <i>World Affairs Review,</i> on the other hand,
sees a stronger Dollar in the near term due to intervention by
foreign banks. </p>

<p>Japanese Banks have a lot to lose if the Yen remains too
strong too long. Whether you believe in conspiracies or believe
that the other &#147;National&#148; banks will rescue the Bank of
Japan simply because it is in the world's best interest; We can
expect a concerted effort to try to prevent a collapse of Japan's
economy. As a result we can expect the Dollar to appreciate
against the Yen in the next year. The long term trend for the
Dollar, however, is still down, down, down. </p>

<p>What can we do to prepare for 2002? Develop a regular
accumulation program by investing a portion of our assets in the
one item that is not a debt to anyone. Physical Gold! Everything
else is simply an IOU. Bonds are obviously debts, stocks are
paper, as is cash, bank deposits, options, futures, everything
except Gold and precious metals. The only other true asset may be
home ownership (without a mortgage) but if BB's decrease their
demand for housing (due to empty nests and a desire to cut
expenses) housing values may still plummet. </p>

<p>In addition to holding a portion of our assets in gold I would
suggest an annuity. Although annuities are debts, they are
guaranteed to appreciate at a fixed rate for the years until
retirement (say 15 more) at which point they are guaranteed to
pay for the rest of your life. </p>

<p>The best and safest annuities are from Swiss life insurance
agencies and denominated in Swiss Francs. That way as the Dollar
depreciates your investment actually grows and your spendable
income increases. In addition, Swiss annuities are not dependent
upon the value of the U.S. stock market but are invested
prudently by the world's best money managers. </p>

<h2><a href="Dec_95.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="The Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)">The Moore Inflation
Predictor (MIP)</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/dec_955.gif" width="455" height="310"> The
November CPI index has been our first surprise in a long time.
The MIP was predicting a flat to slightly increasing CPI &#133;
instead we got a relatively sharp decrease. This is a prime
example of an <i>Abnormally Severe Market Aberration. </i></p>

<p>Shutting down the government for a couple of weeks is not your
normal occurrence and no statistical model (no matter how good)
can predict these type of events. </p>

<p>With up to 800 thousand government employees unemployed and
the rest of the country uncertain about the future, spending was
down and prices dropped in response. </p>

<p>In addition, the Treasury didn't hold its regular Bond
auctions, (since it wasn't authorized to pay the money back).
Instead it &#147;borrowed&#148; <b>60 Billion Dollars</b> from
two federal retirement accounts. This had the effect of reducing
the supply of Bonds on the market, causing the recent Bond rally.
As of this writing we are in another Government shut down and the
Treasury has arranged for alternative financing through February
or March. If this plays out as November did our Gold positions
may not perform as well as expected. </p>

<p>On the other hand, if panic begins to settle into the market,
Gold could skyrocket and fulfill Prechter's expectations. </p>

<p>Panic in the market is not as far fetched as it appeared only
a few weeks ago. One of the pillars of this year's Stock and Bond
market rally is the premise that the Republicans will make good
on their promise to balance the budget. Should doubt be cast upon
the viability of that premise the shocks could be devastating. </p>

<p>As I stated last month we are in an overall downtrend so the
down moves should be stronger than the up moves (<i>i.e.</i>
Bonds will move more during their cycle than Gold during its
cycle). So at this point we are waiting for a buy signal from the
Relative Strength Indicator for Bonds and a peak in Gold.
According to the MIP these are due in late January. </p>

<p>However, at this point a good case can be made for caution.
There is more to the battle between Congress than whether we
balance the Budget in 7 years or 9 years. </p>

<p>The battle is over the entire philosophy of Government. This
is the High Noon show down between the Republican
&#147;Earps&#148; and the Democratic &#147;Clantons&#148;
(spelled Clinton this time around). </p>

<p>This show down is over control and power! Clinton has taken
the posture that even though people voted overwhelmingly in favor
of smaller government and a balanced budget, when it comes to
making hard sacrifices the people will cave in. In other words,
government as usual. Postpone the inevitable, and do whatever it
takes to get re-elected. </p>

<p>The Republicans are also out for power and control (and to get
re-elected) but want to use it to balance the budget, restore
competitiveness to industry and in turn restore wealth to the
entire country. Unfortunately, even if they balance the budget
(which is questionable at the moment), they will not even have
begun to address the problem of the National Debt. </p>

<p>We must remember the deficit is the amount the Government is
in the hole<b> this year </b>(<i>i.e.</i> how much more they
spent over what came in).<b> </b>The debt is the total amount
owed to all creditors (including Bond holders). </p>

<p>By the year 2002 the debt could reach $6 Trillion. Because
interest rates are down the debt has not been increasing as fast
as it could be&#133;but it is still multiplying due to compound
interest. Remember compound interest is one of the most powerful
forces on earth. When used to your advantage it can provide for
your retirement. When used against you it can bankrupt even the
U.S. Government! </p>

<p>So what does this mean for us as investors? First of all, the
demographics are against us, political inertia is against us and
compound interest is against us. </p>

<p>Bob Dole was quoted as saying on 11/10/95 &#147;Don't sell
your Gold yet&#148;&#133;This appears to be good advice! The
possibility of the house of cards crashing down is still real. A
crisis of confidence in the Government's ability (or desire) to
repay debtors could cause a stock and bond market crash and a
flight to precious metals. </p>

<p>This is one of the primary reasons we recommend a core
survival holding of 5-10% of your assets and/or one year's living
expenses. These are minimums for insurance purposes. As events
unfold it may be prudent to have greater portions in Gold
(usually in the form of stocks or mutual funds) as investments. </p>

<p>The long term factors seem to favor Gold holdings. In addition
to those above, the demographics of China and its exploding
demand for Gold should be positive for the yellow metal but the
question is the short term. </p>

<p>In the very short term (<i>i.e.</i> 2 months) we may have a
crisis that causes it to skyrocket. If that is papered over, the
medium term (<i>i.e.</i> 1 year) looks negative for Gold with the
MIP in a down trend. The Long term (over 1 year) Gold will shine
again. </p>

<h2><a href="Dec_95.htm#In This Issue . . ." name="Charts">Charts</a></h2>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Fund Name</b></td>
        <td valign="top"><b>Symbol</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Invesco Strategic Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">FGLDX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Van Eck Gold Resources</td>
        <td valign="top">GRFRX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Fidelity Select Amer. Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">FSAGX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">USAA Investment Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">USAGX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">United Svcs. World Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">UNWPX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Oppenheimer Gold &amp; Spec Min</td>
        <td valign="top">OPGSX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Franklin Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">FKRCX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Keystone Precious Metals Hld</td>
        <td valign="top">KSPMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Lexington Strategic Silver</td>
        <td valign="top">STSLX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Van Eck Int'l Invest Gold A</td>
        <td valign="top">INIVX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Benham Gold Equities Index</td>
        <td valign="top">BGEIX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Lexington Gold Fund</td>
        <td valign="top">LEXMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Bull &amp; Bear Gold Investors</td>
        <td valign="top">BBGIX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Lexington Strategic Investments</td>
        <td valign="top">STIVX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Vanguard Spec Gold &amp; Prec Met</td>
        <td valign="top">VGPMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Fidelity Sel Prec Metals &amp; Min</td>
        <td valign="top">FDPMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">United Svcs. Gold Shares</td>
        <td valign="top">USERX</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h3><b>Conservative Portfolio</b> </h3>

<h4><b>(Mutual Funds)</b> </h4>

<p>Buy Benham 2020 on 7/5@ $21.59 </p>

<p>Sell 9/15 $22.20 +2.8% </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 FGLDX on 9/15 @ $5.78 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 STSLX on 9/15 @ $4.44 </p>

<h3><b>Aggressive</b> <b>Portfolio</b> </h3>

<h4><b>(Individual Stocks)</b> </h4>

<p>Buy 1/2 CDE on 9/15 @ 20 7/8 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 ECO on 9/15 @ 11 1/8 </p>

<h3><b>Speculative Portfolio</b> </h3>

<h4><b>(Options)</b> </h4>

<p>Buy Silver Call Options </p>

<h3><b>Special Situations Portfolio</b> </h3>

<p>Buy Microsoft ZMFAA call options on 9/6 @ $13.88 </p>

<p>Sold ZMFAA (on Hotline Dec 15th) </p>

<p>@ $ 10.25 </p>

<h3><b>CPI DATA</b> </h3>
<div align="left">

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <th><p align="left">&nbsp;</p>
        </th>
        <th><b>1994 Index</b></th>
        <th><b>12 Mo. Chg.</b></th>
        <th><b>1995 Index</b></th>
        <th><strong>12 Mo. Chg.</strong></th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Jan</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">146.2</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.52%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">150.5</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.80%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Feb</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">146.7</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.52%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">150.9</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.86%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Mar</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">147.2</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.51%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">151.4</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.85%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Apr</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">147.4</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.36%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">151.9</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">3.05%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>May</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">147.5</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.29%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">152.2</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">3.19%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Jun</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">148.0</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.49%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">152.5</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">3.04%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Jul</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">148.4</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.77%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">152.5</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.76%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Aug</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">149.0</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.90%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">152.9</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.62%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Sep</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">149.4</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.96%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">153.2</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.54%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Oct</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">149.5</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.61%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">153.7</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.81%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Nov</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">149.7</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.67%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">153.6</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.61%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="right" valign="top"><p align="left"><b>Dec</b></p>
        </td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">149.7</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">2.67%</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">&nbsp;</td>
        <td align="right" valign="top">&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
</table>
</div>

<h3><b>Silver and 5 Month Moving Average</b> </h3>

<p><img src="../images/Dec_951.gif" width="455" height="311"> </p>

<h3><b>Gold and 9 Month Moving Average</b> </h3>

<p><img src="../images/Dec_952.gif" width="455" height="310"> </p>

<p><b>Silver has crossed below it's moving Average. </b></p>

<p><b>Gold is still above.</b> </p>

<p><b>A Sell for metals should be close at hand.</b> </p>

<p><em>The Generous Man will Prosper. </em></p>

<p><em>Proverbs 11:25 </em></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include" u-include="../_private/navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center">[ <a href="../index.htm">HOME</a> | <a
href="../cpi-u/cpi-u.htm">CPI-U</a> | <a
href="../Charts/charts.htm">CHARTS</a> | <a href="newsltr.htm">NEWSLETTERS</a>
| <a href="../FTF_TOC.htm">TOC</a> ]<br>
[ <a href="../ftfsearch.htm">SEARCH</a> | <a
href="../ftforder.htm">SUBSCRIPTIONS</a> |<a
href="../feedback.htm"> FEEDBACK</a> ]</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="60891" -->

<address>
    Send Questions or Comments to <a
    href="mailto:FinTrend@aol.com"><!--webbot bot="Substitution"
    s-variable="companyemail" startspan -->FinTrend@aol.com<!--webbot
    bot="Substitution" endspan i-checksum="52814" --></a>. <br>
    Last Modified: <!--webbot bot="TimeStamp" s-type="EDITED"
    s-format="%B %d, %Y" startspan -->October 30, 1996<!--webbot
    bot="TimeStamp" endspan i-checksum="31568" -->. <br>
    Copyright © 1995, 1996 Bonanza Press. All rights reserved. 
</address>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>