
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-46</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B047-252</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1i.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022744 text/html 11525
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:27:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:33 GMT
Content-length: 11307
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana and Public Safety</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>III. Marihuana and Public Safety</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The significant role of the law enforcement community and the
popular press in promoting the idea that marihuana use leads to
undesirable and antisocial behavior has been discussed in the
Report. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the genesis of
the, perceived problem and the theoretical basis for these
allegations. </p>

<p>The early campaigns against marihuana use can be viewed as an
extension of the temperance and moral reform movements which
swept the country during the 1920's. They were generally
spearheaded by persons who opposed the use of opiates, alcohol
and tobacco on the grounds that all such substances were
physically, mentally and morally debilitating. The presumed
dependence of the user on the drug, the loss of self-control and
the unhealthy preoccupation with pleasure-seeking activities
purportedly induced by these substances were seen as contrary to
the traditional values of our society. </p>

<p>Reiteration of these themes by practicing professionals,
respected members of officialdom and the popular press ultimately
gave rise, to what Lindesmith (rev. ed., 1968: 188-189) has
termed the &quot;evil causes evil&quot; fallacy, and which Goode
(1972) has de-scribed as follows: </p>

<p>The impetus behind public and even expert conceptions of drugs
and drug use is that a phenomenon so patently undesirable and
universally condemned as the use of narcotics or marihuana must,
inevitably, have both pathological causes as well as pathological
consequences. Thus, the task of science and medical research is
seen as &quot;discovering&quot; these negative concomitants of
illicit drug use. In this way, we can all feel better about
condemning the phenomenon itself because our moral and
ideological feelings can thereby be, backed up and verified by
the Indisputable data of positive science (p. 1). </p>

<p>This same philosophical leaning of persons who view marihuana
as a significant danger to both the individual and society
carries with it a corollary that use be prohibited and the user
punished. </p>

<p>Perhaps the most persistent controversy with respect to
marihuana use is the degree to which it poses a danger to public
safety. Public and professional opinion surveys have repeatedly
demonstrated the existence of a widespread belief that marihuana
use leads to the commission of deviant, delinquent, criminal and
violent acts. In addition, some persons have recently expressed
concern that marihuana impairs driving skills and performance
and, in this way, also constitutes a public safety hazards. </p>

<p>This chapter will review the evidence pertaining to the
effects of marihuana on criminal and violent behavior, deviant
and aggressive sexual behavior and driving skills and
performance. Then an effort will be made to assess both the
nature and strength of the purported relationships between
marihuana use and these behaviors.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana<br>
</b></p>

<p>The degree to which marihuana constitutes a danger to public
safety is dependent, in large measure, upon the drug's
observable, effects on the behavior of the user. No drug,
including marihuana, produces the same effect at all times, under
all conditions and in all individuals. Rather, the quality (form
and intensity) and the quantity (extent and frequency) of the
perceived effects are determined by the complex interaction of
both pharmacological and extrapharmacological factors. As Goode
(1972) has noted: </p>

<p><i>We should bear this qualification in mind when looking at
the relationship between the ingestion of a drug and any
subsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly &quot;caused&quot;
by the effects of the drug. Drug effects vary, and, in addition,
even standard effects do not automatically translate into
specific forms of human behavior</i> (P. 18).<br>
</p>

<p>In a paper prepared for the Commission, Tinklenberg (1971 :
1-8) has enumerated some of the basic factors which should be
taken into consideration in evaluating the relationship between
marihuana and crime. They are equally relevant, however, for the
assessment of any behavioral effect presumably attributable to
marihuana, and for that reason they are summarized below. </p>

<p><b>Definition and Congeners</b>. The concentration of the
principal active chemicals in cannabis (THC and their
metabolites) in any given amount of marihuana varies widely
according to where the plant is grown, how it is cultivated,
harvested and cured. These variations permit a wide range of
pharmacological potencies and unknown variations in their effects
on behavior. </p>

<p><b>Drug-Drug Interactions.</b> Given the strong possibility of
intentional or inadvertent adulteration of marihuana with other
psychoactive drugs, it may be that behavioral changes attributed
to marihuana may actually derive from the adulterants or from the
interaction of THC and the adulterants (which may well be
occasioned by the deliberate rather than unknown simultaneous or
sequential use, of other psychoactive drugs). </p>

<p><b>Dose-Response Functions.</b> With respect to the question
of how drugs affect behavior, it is likely that marihuana
influences behavior in different ways and degrees, depending upon
dosage levels. Although it is common to infer that higher doses
of a given drug will induce more of a particular response and
lower doses less, such inferences may be inaccurate in that drug
effects can show a curvilinear dose-response relationship (as
seems to be the case with alcohol). </p>

<p><b>Time-Action Functions.</b> Time-action function describes
the changing effects of marihuana during the course of the drug
action. During the brief periods in which the drug effects are
most intense, there may be a more pronounced alteration in
behavior than during most of the points on the drug time-action
continuum. </p>

<p><b>Individual Variation.</b> Different individuals apparently
respond quite differently to the same dose-time factors of
marihuana as well as other drugs. In some laboratory studies,
where, high doses of marihuana induced considerable euphoria and
enhanced conviviality in most subjects, a few subjects who
received the same dosage in the same setting experienced
paranoia, excessive agitation and aggressive tendencies. </p>

<p><b>Cumulative Effects</b>. The effects of marihuana on
individual behavior have been shown to vary according to the
amount of previous experience with the drug. There is increasing
evidence that chronic users respond quite differently to
marihuana than do occasional users. The cumulative extent of
previous experience may have an important influence on subsequent
behavioral responses. </p>

<p><b>Psychological and Environmental Variables.</b> The
behavioral response to marihuana and to other drugs is at least
partially dependent upon such psychosocial variables as the
expectations of the user regarding its influence on his behavior.
These expectations are in turn derived from. the personalities of
the, individuals involved, recent events in their lives, and the
physical, interpersonal and social milieu in which the marihuana
use occurs. The behavioral responses to marihuana use are likely
to correlate with such psychological and environmental variables
quite independently of any pharmacological effects the drug may
exert. </p>

<p><b>Personality Factors</b>. A certain number of individuals in
any given population demonstrate characteristic and relatively
enduring patterns of antisocial behavior regardless of their
immediate circumstances, possible drug use and the like. These
individuals, variously described as antisocial, criminal or
emotionally unstable, typically manifest, from childhood on,
recurrent tendencies toward deviance in many areas of life. For
some of these people, those predisposed toward both criminality
and drug abuse, crime and drug use do coexist. However, the
assumption that the drug causes crime or vice versa is not
necessarily valid. One should not automatically conclude from
this that the use of drugs has no influence on their criminal
behavior. Drug use may possibly provide a form of reinforcement
which may increase or decrease the likelihood of a criminal act. </p>

<p><b>Crime Process Factors.</b> Crime process factors refer to
the complexities of criminal behavior and the possible influence
of marihuana on that behavior. A multifactored perspective of the
etiology of crime , including personal, social and situational
variables, allows for the possibility that at each step in the
chain of events leading to the commission of a criminal act,
marihuana use may contribute to enhance or diminish the
possibility of this outcome. <br>
</p>

<p>In short, any interpretation of the data to be presented below
which fails to take into account at least some of these variables
will likely result in a &quot;post hoc, ergo propter hoc&quot;
fallacy-that is, the invalid assumption that simply because one
event occurs later than another event (one commits a crime after
smoking marihuana) that the latter is caused by the former
(marihuana caused the crime).<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>