
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B001-232</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/amhab/amhabc9b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122031940 text/html 63914
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:19:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:00 GMT
Content-length: 63696
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Policy and Organized Crime</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>Consultant Paper: Part 1: Drug Policy and Organized Crime </h2>

<p>Drug Policy and Organized Crime </p>

<p>By Professor Mark H. Moore. Submitted: January 3, 1986. Dr.
Mark H. Moore is Daniel and Guggenheim Professor of Criminal
Justice Policy and Management at the John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. He is
former Special Assistant to the Administrator of the Drug
Enforcement Administration. </p>

<p>Introduction: Drug Policy, Law Enforcement and Organized Crime
</p>

<p>Criminal laws prohibiting the production, distribution, and
possession of narcotics and dangerous drugs are the basis of drug
policy in the United States. These laws target the drugs that
have no recognized legitimate medical uses: heroin, cocaine,
marihuana, and hallucinogens. Enforcement efforts against these
drugs can be uncompromising, for there are no legitimate uses or
users to be protected. </p>

<p>Other drugs, however, pose similar threats to public health
and welfare, but they do have recognized legitimate uses. These
drugs include morphine, methadone, barbiturates, amphetamines,
and tranquilizers. With respect to these drugs the aim of the
legal regime and associated enforcement strategies is more
complex. It is not simply to eliminate the drugs but to preserve
a legitimate sector in which the benefits of these drugs may be
enjoyed, while minimizing illicit use. Towards this end the laws
license a limited number of people to produce, import, sell,
distribute and use them. To prevent the drugs from leaking from
and to illicit distributors and users, licensees have to secure
their inventories, and deal only with other licensees. To make
sure that the licensees meet these responsibilities, they must
keep records and make them available to investigators for
inspection. Failures to meet their responsibilities expose the
licensees to both civil and criminal penalties. To make sure that
no one can operate outside the boundaries of the legitimate
system, the unlicensed production, distribution or use of these
legitimate drugs is prohibited. </p>

<p>Drug Laws as a Comprehensive Drug Policy </p>

<p>It has become customary to think of the drug laws as operating
principally on the &quot;supply side&quot; of illegal drug
markets. For most practical purposes this is appropriate, for
these laws are the principal policy instruments directed at the
supply of illicit drugs. It is also generally true that the
principal targets of enforcement are suppliers rather than users.
However, these laws impose criminal liability on the illicit
possession and use of drugs, as well as to illicit production and
distribution. And indeed, each year more than 500,000 drug users
are arrested for possession. Therefore, criminal enforcement is
directed at the &quot;demand side&quot; of illicit drug use as
well as the &quot;supply side.&quot; To the extent that these
laws attack both the supply and the demand for illicit drugs,
they can be understood as a comprehensive drug policy, designed
to distinguish legitimate and useful drug use from illicit use
and to minimize illicit use in the society. </p>

<p>To produce this result, three different mechanisms are relied
on. One is the moral force of the law itself. To the extent that
individual citizens are guided in their decisions about drug use
by the explicit instruction provided by the law, or to the extent
that the existence of the law mobilizes widespread informal
interventions by parents, friends and relatives, the existence of
laws that define illicit use may succeed in reducing overall
levels of illicit use without any public enforcement activities. </p>

<p>A second, more widely understood mechanism is general
deterrence: the notion that citizens might be discouraged from
illicitly selling or using drugs by the fear that they will be
arrested and punished. This notion differs from the first in that
it depends on citizens' fears of punishment to motivate
compliance with the laws, rather than their desires to conform or
seek virtue. The more severe the penalties, and the higher the
probability of being caught, the more compliance will result. </p>

<p>A third mechanism is incapacitation: the notion that
imprisonment may physically prevent drug dealers and users from
continuing their activities. This concept differs from the second
in that it operates only on those dealers and users who are
caught, and only for as long as they remain under legal
supervision. If enough drug dealers and drug users are locked up,
then the problem of illicit drug dealing and drug use will
disappear. </p>

<p>Limitations of Drug Laws as a Drug Abuse Policy </p>

<p>To describe these mechanisms is to reveal the limitations of
the drug laws as a comprehensive drug abuse policy. The problem
is not that they are directed only at the &quot;supply side&quot;
of illegal drug abuse. Nor is it that they fail to produce
reductions in the level of illicit drug use. The problem is that
the drug laws are imperfectly effective. They leave behind a
residual market, composed of drug dealers and users, who failed
to get the message that they should abandon their drug
activities. Moreover, while the levels of drug distribution and
use that remain are undoubtedly lower than they would be in a
world of legalized drugs, the character of the market on both the
supply and the demand side are fundamentally altered and
generally worsened as a result of their illegality. </p>

<p>On the demand side the users who are not dissuaded from using
drugs discover that they confront high prices and low quality in
the drugs they buy. In addition, they are exposed to social
stigmatization and criminal prosecution. These circumstances
produce disastrous results for their economic status, physical
health, and social well-being. Of course, to the extent that
these consequences are unpleasant to the users, they provide a
continuing incentive for users to abandon their drug use. And, to
the extent that the users do so, an important social objective is
achieved. But to the extent they do not respond, their lives are
made miserable with little corresponding social benefit. The
society is left with drug users who are more dependent, dangerous
and unhealthy than they would otherwise be. </p>

<p>On the supply side the residual capacity takes the form of an
illicit industry. Some of that industry operates outside the
boundaries of the United States, and therefore to some degree
beyond the reach of its law. Another portion operates under the
cover of predominantly legal drug production and distribution -
within reach of the law, but a morally and legally ambiguous
target. The vast majority of the illicit industry, however,
consists of wholly illicit traffickers in the United States. </p>

<p>The Illicit Drug Industry: A Problem for Drug and Organized
Crime Policy </p>

<p>The existence of this illicit industry creates two different
kinds of problems. Viewed from the vantage point of drug abuse
policy, the principal problem created by the illicit industry is
that it continues to supply drugs to illicit markets. To the
extent that this continues, old drug users nay continue their
harmful activities, and new users may be recruited into dangerous
patterns of drug use. Thus, to achieve the objectives of drug
policy, the society must find ways to constrict the supply
capacities of the illicit industry. </p>

<p>Viewed from the vantage point of those concerned with the
control of organized crime, the existence of the illicit industry
creates a different kind of problem. To a degree, the illicit
drug industry engages in the sort of activities that make
organized crime a specially important social problem. Not only do
the illegal dealers frustrate the aims of drug policy by
continuing to supply drugs, but they grow rich in the process and
taunt the society with their financial success. Moreover, the
industry seems to spawn violence. Sometimes the violence spills
out into the general population. But even when the violence
remains confined to participants in the industry, its sheer
viciousness creates a general sense of lawlessness and brutality
that is threatening to the community. The illicit dealers also
seem to become heavily involved in corrupting government
agencies. Such activities undermine community security, and the
integrity of its basic institutions. Finally, the illicit drug
industry may gives birth to unusually large and powerful criminal
organizations, or nourish those that already exist. From the
vantage point of organized crime policy, then, the drug laws
create a major problem to be solved. </p>

<p>Drug Policy as a Portfolio of Policy Instruments </p>

<p>To deal with these side effects and residual problems, the
drug laws must be complemented by other policy instruments. To
deal with the limitations of drug laws in suppressing the demand
for drugs, a comprehensive drug policy necessarily includes drug
treatment and preventive education programs. Treatment programs
must be provided to help users make the transition to non-use and
to save lives that would otherwise be lost. Preventive education
programs must be operated to give more detailed explanations to
individuals of why illicit drug use is undesirable. Indeed, given
the focus of drug enforcement on the supply side of the market
and the obvious limitations of the drug laws in discouraging use
among those who are already dependent, it is generally
appropriate to think of drug treatment and education programs as
the principal instruments focused on the &quot;demand side&quot;
of the illicit drug markets. </p>

<p>To deal with the limitations of the laws in suppressing the
supply of illicit drugs and preventing the appearance of
organized criminal activity, traditional enforcement methods must
be supplemented by some special policy instruments. Diplomacy and
foreign aid must be joined to enforcement and regulation to reach
the pieces of the illicit supply system that operate outside the
United States. An effective regulatory enforcement system must be
created to prevent the diversion of narcotics and dangerous drugs
from legitimate to illicit markets in the United States. And
perhaps some special enforcement strategies that are effective in
constricting the capacity of the supply system to move drugs to
illicit markets or in dispersing well organized drug traffickers
must be designed and used. </p>

<p>The Objectives of the Paper </p>

<p>The purpose of this paper is not to design an effective
overall drug policy. Nor is it to consider the wisdom of relying
on criminal laws against drug distribution and use to the degree
we do now. My opinion is that our current drug policy is a wise
one, and that the balance of risks favors the continuation of
criminal laws directed against the distribution and use of
narcotics and dangerous drugs. </p>

<p>The aim of this paper is to take the existence of the current
drug laws and policies as a starting point and to design a
strategy to reduce supply consistent with the aims of our current
drugs abuse policy. In designing such a policy, special attention
will be given to the relationship between the strategy to reduce
supply that is necessary to achieve the goals of our current drug
abuse policy and organized crime policy. </p>

<p>As we have seen, there is some tension between these policies.
Making drug distribution illegal establishes fertile soil from
which existing organized crime groups might take sustenance or
new groups might arise. Thus, the continuing prohibitions of drug
distribution may exacerbate the organized crime problem. On the
other hand, to the extent that organized crime groups are now
active in producing or distributing drugs, and to the extent that
our organized crime policy makes available resources and
techniques that are effective in immobilizing such groups,
organized crime policy may make an important contribution to drug
policy. </p>

<p>In balancing these concerns the dominant emphasis will be
given to designing a supply reduction strategy that can achieve
the purpose of drug abuse policy. This perspective will be
adopted not because it is obvious that an effective drug control
policy is more important than an effective organized crime
policy, but simply because, if it were true that it was more
important to combat organized crime than to keep drugs from
illicit users, the simple solution would be to legalize the drugs
so that no illegal firms could arise. Since the society does not
choose this option, it must be that we are willing to pay a price
in terms of the objectives of organized crime policy to achieve
the objectives of drug control policy. The only interesting
questions, then, are how to minimize that price, and how best to
deploy the special resources and capabilities or organized crime
control policies to further the objectives of drug policy. That
is what we will try to discover. </p>

<p>The Analytic Framework </p>

<p>As we have seen, the character of the illicit drug industry is
important to the ultimate success of both drug abuse policy, and
organized crime control policy. To define objectives, set
reasonable expectations for success, and guide strategic choices
in targeting supply reduction efforts, an analysis of the illicit
drug industry is essential. </p>

<p>The Crucial Distinction Between the &quot;Industry&quot; and
the &quot;Firms&quot; </p>

<p>In carrying out this analysis, it is important to distinguish
the concept of the industry from the concept of individual firms
within the industry. The industry includes everyone who is
engaged in producing, importing, or distributing narcotics and
dangerous drugs to illicit markets in the United States. A firm
within that industry is nothing more than a collection of assets
whose specific uses are determined by the authoritative decisions
of an identifiable organizational unit. </p>

<p>Obviously, the firms that make up the industry could take a
variety of forms. They could represent different production
capacities, such as a boat, a person who knows the chemistry to
produce psychoactive drugs, or $50,000 in cash. They could be
involved in all aspects of the deal from financing through
production, transportation, and distribution, or they could
specialize in only one of these functions. For any given function
the firm may be more or less dominant in more or less local
geographic markets. They could consist of a single entrepreneur
linked to others only through the fragile ties of economic
interest, or they could include many people linked to one another
by family or cultural ties. They could be relative newcomers or
have a long history in the industry. They could enter the
industry with hopes for a single, big score, or they could plan
to become or remain a permanent fixture. </p>

<p>Often, the distinction between the industry and the firms that
comprise it is blurred, and the industry is viewed as a single
firm. This casual assumption is justified on one of two different
grounds. One is that the observed performance of the illicit
market is so impressive in terms of its operations and
adaptability that it is hard to believe that it is not guided by
a single intelligence. Nothing short of a single coherent
enterprise could accomplish the enormously complicated tasks of
collecting raw materials, processing then, and transporting the
finished product through the mine fields created by enforcement
agencies. Nor could anything other than an enterprise guided by a
single intelligence adapt successfully to the frequent changes in
supply reduction strategies. </p>

<p>The problem with this argument is that legitimate industries
accomplish similar feats of production, distribution and
adaptation all the time without a single intelligence guiding
them. The reason legitimate industries are successful is that
there are many guiding intelligences, but none predominant. The
aggregate result of the individual choices made by individual
economic actors may look organized in the sense that the industry
gradually moves from places where enforcement has become heavy to
areas where it is weaker, or it shifts from one drug to another
depending on consumer demand. But this orderly response need not
be the result of a wise choice by a single, powerful firm. It
could be the natural result of the firms in the heavily enforced
areas being wiped out, and the firms in the less heavily enforced
areas growing to meet the demand. In short, the adaptations are
made at the expense of individual firms, not under their control
- nor, necessarily, to their advantage. </p>

<p>The second line of argument supporting the notion that the
industry should be viewed as a single firm is somewhat more
sophisticated. It is based on the hypothesis that some illicit
firms will develop crucial specialized capabilities, and that
these will give the firm important advantages in producing and
distributing illegal drugs, or effective control over others who
do. These special capabilities could be access to capital,
connections with foreign sources of raw materials, knowledge of
how to produce the drugs, a special tie to corrupt officials, or
a general capacity for disciplined violence that could be brought
to bear on anyone who produced or distributed drugs without their
permission. This argument depends essentially on the idea that
there are some natural economies of scale in the illicit
industry, and that these will tend to produce a concentrated
industry. This is a more powerful kind of argument than the
first, but it is only an assertion. It needs to be examined with
both logic and evidence. </p>

<p>The Analysis of Industrial Organization </p>

<p>The form of analysis that is appropriate is an analysis of
industrial organization. An analysis of this kind rigorously
maintains the distinction between the industry and the firms that
comprise it. Indeed, the principal objective of an analysis of
industrial organization is to understand the relationships among
the structure of the industry, the conduct of the firms within
the industry, and the long run performance of the industry. </p>

<p>The Definition of Industry Structure. The concept of industry
&quot;structure&quot; explicitly captures the distinction between
the industry and the firms that comprise it. It focuses attention
on how the activities of the overall industry are divided among
different organizational units called Firms. One key concern in
examining structure is the degree of concentration in the
industry. The fewer the firms, the more concentrated the
industry. A second is the extent of horizontal and vertical
integration. Integration refers to the proportion of activities
essential to creating a product and delivering it to a market
that are contained within a single firm. Vertical integration is
measured by the extent to which a firm includes all the steps
from extraction of raw materials to final sales to ordinary
consumers. Horizontal integration is measured by the proportion
of a given step in the production and distribution of a product
that is controlled by a single firm. </p>

<p>The Definition of Industry Conduct. &quot;Conduct&quot; refers
to the distinctive ways that the firms within the industry go
about their business. Specific questions might focus on the
production technologies now commonly utilized, major factors
influencing costs within the industry, levels of investment in
research and development, the rate at which new products are
introduced, or the geographic organization of the industry's
markets. Conduct might also be concerned with institutional
relationships in the industry; e.g., the competitive strategies
being pursued by firms within the industry, the relationships
with governmental regulators, and even patters of collective
bargaining and labor relations. </p>

<p>The Definition of Industry Performance.
&quot;Performance&quot; focuses on the question of how successful
the industry is over the long run in delivering a product at low
cost, expanding the market, and adapting to changing
circumstances. Performance is ultimately what an industry analyst
is trying to understand. Indeed, the observations about structure
and conduct are made principally to explain and predict
performance. The more decentralized and competitive the industry,
and the lower the costs of bringing new products or new
production technologies on line, the more adaptable and dynamic
the industry. The larger the economies of scale in operating,
marketing, or bringing new products or production technologies on
line, the more concentrated the industry is likely to be. The
more concentrated the industry, the higher the prices and the
slower the rate of innovation. Propositions such as these link
observations of structure and conduct to explanations and
predictions of performance. </p>

<p>Objectives in Attacking the Illicit Drug Industry </p>

<p>To a great extent this framework of analysis can be carried
over and used in examining the character of the illicit drug
industry. But some crucial differences are worth noting. By far
the most important is that the implicit evaluative perspective
reverses when we are analyzing illicit industries. </p>

<p>An Evaluative Perspective. In standard industry analyses one
generally hopes for high performance from the industry. The more
successful it is in delivering products at low prices, expanding
its market to new areas, adapting to changing economic
circumstances, and maintaining high rates of innovation, the
better the result for the society. </p>

<p>In the case of the illicit drug industry, of course, the
society's hopes run in the opposite direction. High performance
from the illicit drug industry means that it adapts well to
government efforts to eliminate it and continues to supply drugs
at low cost to illicit markets. Over the long run, this means
higher levels of illicit drug use. In analyzing the illicit drug
market, then, what one hopes for is a failing industry: one that
cannot overcome the hurdles set by the government in trying to
get its products to market. These hopes are generally frustrated
by the sheer inventiveness and adaptability of illicit
entrepreneurs in pursuit of money. Nonetheless, one keeps hoping
that this industry will stumble rather than flourish. Indeed,
making it fail is an explicit purpose of public policy. </p>

<p>A second important difference is that in the analysis of the
illegal drug industry, the structure and conduct of the industry
have an elevated importance. As noted above, in traditional
analyses of industrial organization, structure and conduct have
importance primarily as factors that influence the performance of
the industry. In the analysis of the illegal drug industry, they
retain that importance: to the extent that structure and conduct
enhance or hinder the industry's long-run performance in
delivering drugs to illicit markets at low prices, they are a
source of interest, and a possible target of enforcement actions.
</p>

<p>What increases the importance of structure and conduct in the
analysis of illegal drug markets, however, is that they are
valued by the society independently of their impact on the
performance of the industry. Crucial questions about the conduct
of the firms within the illegal drug industry include the extent
to which they rely on violence to maintain internal discipline or
eliminate competition, and the extent to which they rely on
corruption to ward off the threat of enforcement. To the extent
that they do rely on violence and corruption as essential
elements of their business, their conduct has importance to the
society quite apart from how these practices affect their ability
to supply drugs. </p>

<p>Similarly, the society seems to be deeply concerned about the
structure of the illicit drug industry. Specifically, the society
seems to regard the problem as worse if the industry is highly
concentrated and composed of a few large, durable firms than if
it were less concentrated and populated by smaller and more
transient firms. No doubt, this view derives primarily from a
dominant concern about the performance of the industry, and an
assumption that an illicit industry, composed of a few large and
durable firms, would be more effective over the long run in
supplying drugs at low cost to consumers. It is important to keep
in mind, however, that a highly concentrated industry might
perform less well over the long run in delivering drugs to
illicit markets than a more atomistic market. Economic theory
tells us that prices would be higher in a concentrated market,
and it is quite possible that innovativeness and adaptability to
attacks would be less. The firms might represent more formidable
enforcement targets, but the result of dismantling them might be
larger and more durable than would be true in an atomistic
market. </p>

<p>Even if this were true, however, it seems likely that the
society would still regard an illicit industry, composed of a few
large, durable firms, as worse than one composed of many small
transient firms. The reason is that large, durable firms
constitute a social problem independent of their ability to
supply drugs. Large, durable criminal organizations can bring
much more powerful pressures to bear on their employees,
competitors, the government officials who are pledged to attack
them, and even the communities in which they operate than could
smaller or more transient firms. It is partly that the large,
durable firms become very wealthy; partly that they can maintain
truly frightening capacities for disciplined violence; but
perhaps most fundamentally that they will be around for a long
time and therefore able to reward cooperation and punish
opposition that makes them so powerful. </p>

<p>Thus, the concepts of structure, conduct and performance help
to clarify the society's objectives in dealing with the illicit
drug industry. The concerns of drug abuse policy are captured
principally by questions about the performance of the industry,
since it is the long run performance of the industry that will
decisively shape overall levels of drug abuse. The concerns of
organized crime policy are captured principally by questions
about conduct and structure. The concept of conduct captures the
concern about levels of violence and corruption associated with
an illegal industry. The concept of structure captures the
special concerns that are raised for organized crime policy by
the existence of very large, durable organizations, whose wealth,
disciplined use of violence, and long memories make them
especially powerful. A successful supply reduction strategy,
then, would leave an illicit drug industry, which is high cost,
ineffective in supplying drugs to illicit markets, not very
adaptable, reluctant to rely on bribery and violence, and
composed of small, transient firms. </p>

<p>Competition among Objectives. We are accustomed to thinking
that any supply reduction strategy will move us towards improved
performance on all of these objectives, and therefore there are
no trade-offs between the objectives of drug abuse policy and
organized crime control policy. We have already seen that there
is a certain tension between the aims of these two different
policies insofar as the criminal laws against drug distribution
and use create the basic conditions under which an illicit
industry night arise. But now it is possible to see a new tension
as well, one that is not only between drug abuse policy and
organized crime control objectives, but also between different
objectives of organized crime control policy. </p>

<p>Ironically, a supply reduction strategy that increased the
degree of concentration in the illicit industry might achieve
some important objectives of a supply reduction strategy.
Economic theory predicts, for example, that the actual supply of
drugs will be less in a concentrated industry than in a more
decentralized competitive industry. It is also likely that the
violence would be less, or at least more disciplined and focused
on those who were actually involved in the industry in a tightly
organized, concentrated industry. Thus, a supply reduction
strategy might succeed in reducing the overall performance of the
industry and even changing its conduct to reliance on threats and
bribery rather than overt violence, but do so only at the price
of increasing the size, power, and durability of criminal
organizations. Whether this would be preferred to a strategy that
reduced the concentration in the industry, but enhanced its
performance and shifted its conduct to more random patterns of
violence depends on how the society values these competing
objectives, and how much improved performance and violence it
would have to accept as the price of reduced concentration. That
would be a difficult choice. </p>

<p>The Definition of Improvements. At any rate, the directions in
which improvement lie, are clear, and so are the objectives of a
supply reduction strategy. The first and most important objective
is to frustrate the performance of the illicit industry - to
constrict its capacity to supply drugs to illicit markets. The
second is to shape the conduct of the residual industry so that
it is less violent and less corrupting. The third is to disperse
the industry so that the firms that comprise it are small and
transient rather than large and durable. How are one can go in
achieving these objectives, and how sharp the trade-offs among
them can only be answered by a close look at the factors that
shape the structure, conduct and performance of the industry. </p>

<p>Major Factors Shaping the Industry </p>

<p>As in any industry performance is determined at least partly
by engineering or mechanical factors: e.g., the physical
requirements of production and distribution. To get drugs to
illegal markets, firms must have access to raw materials, have
the knowledge and the equipment required to transform the raw
materials into finished products, be able to maintain and protect
inventories, and be able to transport finished products to
individual markets. </p>

<p>In addition, the performance of the industry will be shaped by
economic factors: i.e., the perceptions of opportunities and
risks. Those who make investments of the time and energy in
producing or diverting raw materials, in learning the techniques
and acquiring the equipment for producing illegal drugs, in
storing and transporting the drugs, and so on, must have some
assurance that they will make money from their investments. They
must have some capital to give them the time and the capacity to
arrange the deals that will ultimately produce satisfactory
returns. They must also have a certain tolerance for risk - not
only the risk that they might be imprisoned for their activities,
but also that they might take economic losses as a result of
successful enforcement actions against them, betrayals by their
associates, or more common economic disasters, such as
shipwrecks, plane crashes, spoiled production runs, or sudden
changes in exchange rates. Unless there is a reasonable chance in
their minds that they can make enough money from illicit drug
deals to compensate them for their time and their risks, the
deals will not be made. </p>

<p>A third factor influencing performance is the structure of
criminal liability that surrounds the industry, for it is the
laws and the way that they are enforced that determines many of
the opportunities and risks facing illicit drug dealers. A simple
way to think about how this factor operates is to think of the
criminal laws and the specific methods of enforcement as a kind
of tax confronting the illegal dealers. To maximize their return,
they seek to avoid as much of the tax as possible. They do this
by avoiding activities that are heavily taxed, by taking
advantage of loopholes in the tax laws or weakness in
enforcement, by concealing as much of their operation from the
tax collectors as possible, or by corrupting the tax collectors.
Such activities affect both the scale and the character of the
illicit industry. </p>

<p>The Apparent Influence of Geography </p>

<p>Geography looks like a factor that plays an important role in
determining the conduct and performance of the illicit industry.
Indeed, much of our thinking about supply reduction strategies is
guided by the notion that there are important &quot;source
countries&quot; that become the targets of diplomatic and
enforcement initiatives. Thus, for many years, Turkey and France
were regarded as the principal sources of heroin, although they
have now been replaced by Mexico and Southeast Asia. Similarly,
Colombia is now considered the principal source of cocaine, and
Jamaica a primary source of marijuana. </p>

<p>The reason that geography seems important is that different
countries represent different clusters of conditions that give
them a comparative advantage as a supplier of drugs to illicit
markets in the United States. Sometimes a country becomes an
important source country because of agricultural conditions that
make it an especially attractive (perhaps even unique) place in
which to produce raw materials. Thus, for a while, we imagine
that opium poppies could be successfully grown in only a few
countries in the world, and we now hope this is true of coca
leaves. In short, a country may become an importance source of
supply due to a physical advantage. </p>

<p>Other times it seems that a country has become a major source
as the result of a long tradition of producing the relevant raw
materials, or a large domestic industry that is based on them. In
effect, the country has a unique institutional and economic
advantage because it has a large infrastructure already invested
in the cultivation of the opium, coca leaves, or marijuana. </p>

<p>Still other times, it seems that the country's advantage comes
from week laws governing the legitimate or illicit drug
industries, or weak governmental commitment and capacity for
controlling the illicit drug industry. Just as Las Vegas can
become the center of gambling simply by establishing a legal
regime that tolerates it, Jamaica may become a principal source
of marijuana by being particularly lax with respect to the
suppression of illicit cultivation. </p>

<p>Thus, while geography looks like it plays an important
independent role in determining the character of the illicit drug
markets, this apparent influence actually derives from the more
basic causes already noted: the physical relations governing
production and distribution, the economic/ institutional
relations that give economic actors reasonable assurances that
investments in particular activities will be rewarded, and the
legal regime that has an independent effect on the risks and
opportunities confronting illicit dealers. Thus, geography may
drop out of any close analysis of the factors shaping the
performance of the illicit supply system, and be replaced by a
separate consideration of how certain countries seem to represent
unusually favorably combinations of the underlying causal
factors, and which ones seem particularly important. </p>

<p>The Irrelevance of Physical Requirements </p>

<p>While it is tempting to search for the explanation of the
structure, conduct and performance of the illicit industry in the
physical mechanics of producing and distributing drugs, there is
very little in these relationships that is unusual, or that could
constrain or shape the performance of the industry. Many of the
raw materials necessary to produce narcotics and dangerous drugs
are widely available. This is true primarily because they have
many legitimate uses, but also simply because they can be grown
or artificially produced in many different locations. Of course,
and occasional local shortage in basic raw materials may sometime
appear. But, given the alternative sources of supply, it is hard
to imagine that the shortage would last. Indeed, it is hard to
imagine long run shortages in the availability of opium poppies,
marijuana, coca leaves, or even chemicals used to produced
synthetic opiates, hallucinogens, and other psychoactive drugs. </p>

<p>It is equally difficult to imagine that either the knowledge
or the equipment necessary for manufacturing illicit drugs could
be in long run short supply. The chemical structure of the
illicit drugs are well known. Indeed, they are so well known that
illicit labs are now experimenting with small manipulations of
the chemical structure of existing drugs to determine if the
newly created drugs will produce similar or superior psychoactive
effects. These so-called &quot;designer drugs&quot; challenge the
legal regime regulating drugs because they may be legal to
produce and distribute until enough experience has accumulated to
declare them a significant abuse threat. </p>

<p>The equipment required for the production of the drugs is also
commonplace. Indeed, heroin &quot;labs&quot; in Mexico often
consisted of little more than wash-tubs and rubber hoses. And the
drugs can be made in many different quantities with few
implications for the costs of production. So, there seems to be
little in the technology of production that would have a decisive
impact on the structure, conduct or performance of the industry. </p>

<p>The Impact of Illicitness on Industry Conduct </p>

<p>My strong conviction is that the dominant factor shaping the
illicit drug industry is the simple fact that it is illicit. This
fact has broad and significant implications for its structure,
conduct and performance. The immediate consequences of
illicitness register in the conduct of the illicit firms, but the
changes in conduct have important implications for structure and
performance. </p>

<p>The Risk of Arrest. The most obvious consequence of
illicitness is that those who produce, import, distribute or use
drugs illegally are exposed to the threat of arrest, prosecution
and imprisonment. Moreover, in some countries, they are
threatened by the seizure of any property or assets used in their
illegal drug dealing - a threat whose significance may dwarf not
only any fine they may receive, but also some jail terms. </p>

<p>The obvious effect of threatening illicit producers,
distributors and users with jail is that the dealers who remain
in the business will take steps to reduce their risks, or to
compensate themselves for the risks of being is the business. The
principal devices for reducing risks are to keep operations
secret so that enforcement agencies cannot discover them, or to
corrupt the agencies so that even if their operations are
discovered, they are not punished. The principal devices used to
keep their operations secret are to deal with a small number of
people, to conceal the traces of their activities, and to screen
and discipline their employees, associates and customers to make
sure they are not undercover agents, and do not become police
informants. The principal ways of corrupting enforcement agencies
are to offer money to be allowed to continue to operate, and to
inform on their competitors and associates so that the police can
make arrests without harming their operations. </p>

<p>Such efforts can only be partially effective in eliminating
the risk of punishment. To deal in large quantities of drugs and
make money from the enterprise, one must inevitably deal with a
large number of people, only some of whom are trusted and
effectively disciplined. Thus, the risk of informants and
undercover agents among one's employees, associates or customers
is always present. Similarly, drug dealing always involves
leaving traces of one's activities that cannot be entirely
concealed: physical inventories of raw materials or drugs,
records of financial transactions, even records of phone calls
among the conspirators. These, too, are vulnerable to discovery
by enforcement agencies. Also, there are so many agencies and
agents involved in drug enforcement activities that one can never
be sure whether all those who pose a threat have been corrupted.
Since the risk can never be quite eliminated, the dealer's
response is to demand additional compensation for the risks in
trafficking drugs. He demands higher prices for drugs than he
would if there was no risk of going to jail. </p>

<p>The Risk of Rip-Offs. A less obvious but by no means less
important consequences of the illicit status of drug production,
importation and distribution is that illegal dealers are
confronted by threats from other criminals as well as by
enforcement agencies. Indeed, associates, competitors and
ordinary armed robbers probably create greater risks for illicit
drug dealers than enforcement agencies. Partly this is because
dealers are very tempting targets. They are likely to have large
amounts of cash, or large quantities of drugs that can be
converted to cash. Also, they are unlikely to turn to enforcement
agencies to help protect their operations. They have to supply
protection against armed attack or stealing. Those in the
criminal milieu may know more than enforcement agencies about who
is &quot;holding&quot; or currently doing business, and these
other criminals may be less constrained by the niceties of due
process than the enforcement agencies. Thus, other criminals may
be more strongly motivated and better positioned to attack
illegal drug dealers than the enforcement agencies, and therefore
pose a graver threat to the illicit dealers. </p>

<p>The implications of this fact are that the dealers must make
special provisions to protect themselves from this threat. To a
degree, the same methods of secrecy and discipline may be as
helpful against other crooks as against the police. But it seems
likely that the threat from other crooks is more apt to be met by
capacities for violence. In general, if an armed confrontation
between the dealers and enforcement agencies occurs, the dealers
know they will lose. They may win a local fire-fight, but there
is no way they can compete over the long run with enforcement
agencies in violent confrontations. Consequently, they rely most
heavily on secrecy and corruption to deal with the threat of
enforcement. </p>

<p>With other criminals, however, the balance of armed power is
less clear. Thus, it is tempting to build capacities for violence
to protect oneself and one's business from &quot;take-off&quot;
artists, and to establish credible threats effective against
betrayals by associates. This capacity for violence can also be
used externally to drive out competitors. But the vulnerability
to other criminals associated with illicitness provides the most
immediate and compelling justification for developing a capacity
for violence, as well as for secrecy and corruption. The
existence of these capacities for violence among dealers and
those who would steal from them produces the bulk of the violence
within the illegal drug industry. </p>

<p>Thus, the conduct of the firms within the illicit industry is
profoundly influenced by the fact of their illicitness. They are
forced to maintain secrecy, and to prevent the infiltration of
police agents. They must develop capacities to bribe, suborn, or
mislead government agents. Also they must develop capacities for
violence to enforce contracts with associates, protect their
property from armed robbers, and to discipline employees.
Finally, because the risks of arrest or rip-offs cannot ever
wholly be eliminated, they must price their products not only to
cover costs, but also to compensate themselves for the risk of
arrest or financial loss they are taking by engaging in such a
risky business. These effects on the conduct of firms have
implications for structure and performance. </p>

<p>The Impact of Illicitness on Structure </p>

<p>The consequences of illicit status for the structure of the
illicit industry are hard to estimate, for they will be
determined by a balance of conflicting influences. On one hand,
the desire to prevent the police and other criminals from
learning about their operation will motivate illicit
entrepreneurs to keep their small firms, transient, and neither
vertically nor horizontally integrated. </p>

<p>The Virtues of Small Firms and Decentralization. Smallness has
the virtues of involving only a small number of people and a
small number of transactions. This implies both that the
intrinsic vulnerability of the operations is less, and that the
contributions of any special efforts to discipline or secure the
operation will go further because there are fewer associates,
employees or transactions over which to spread these efforts. </p>

<p>Transience has similar advantages to smallness. If the
problems for illicit dealers is to avoid others knowing they are
in business, they can accomplish this by getting into the
business and out of it before anyone knows who they are. Indeed,
from the perspective of avoiding detection, the best operation is
one that is both small and transient. But that firm is not worth
disrupting, also, for it could never amount to much in terms of
its ability to supply drugs, its contribution to violence and
corruption, or to become a powerful institution to the community.
</p>

<p>Vertical and horizontal disintegration also have important
advantages in avoiding detection. A vertically integrated firm
would require some system of information-gathering and
record-keeping to exploit the advantages of explicit coordination
across the different phases of the operation. But these records
would become an important source of evidence against the dealers.
Similarly, almost by definition, vertically integrated firm would
be large and involve many transactions, and each element of the
firm would know what other elements were doing. Thus, a
vertically integrated firm would present more possible points of
penetration and would be much more vulnerable to any given
penetration, than a firm organized as a set of largely separate
cells that operated relatively autonomously. </p>

<p>Similarly, a horizontally integrated firm would also have to
be large and would have to be in contact with all firms engaged
in the activities at other stages of the production process.
Thus, a horizontally integrated firm in the business of
off-loading mother ships would come to know the principal
importing firms that arranged for the mother ships to appear off
the coast, and the principal firms engaged in storage and
distribution. This would make such a firm vulnerable to betrayal
by the others, compared with a firm that handled less of the
overall off-loading business. </p>

<p>Thus, to escape detection, firms in the illicit drug industry
would choose to be small, transient and disintegrated. This, in
turn, would lead to a highly fragmented - even atomistic -
structure in the industry. </p>

<p>The Virtues of Scale and Concentration. On the other hand, it
is possible there are some economies of scale in the production
and distribution of illicit drugs, or some opportunities for
controlling competition that would lead to relatively large,
durable firms, and a relatively high degree of concentration in
the industry. Ironically, the principal potential for economies
of scale do not seem to lie in the areas of production or
marketing. Instead they lie in the development of capacities for
corruption and violence that will give some firms special
opportunities to operate safely and efficiently in the dangerous
illicit markets. </p>

<p>The capacity for disciplined, irresistible violence may be a
particularly important factor of production in illicit supply
systems, and may be an area where there are natural economies of
scale. As we have seen, a capacity for violence is terribly
important in disciplining employees to keep then from becoming
informants. It is also important in being able to enforce
contracts with business associates and in protecting life and
property from other criminals in a world where one cannot rely on
the ordinary courts and police to perform this function.
Moreover, once developed for these purposes, the capacity for
violence can become important in eliminating competition, or
forcing it to be small and transient rather than large and
durable. For all these reasons, a firm had a substantial capacity
for violence would have an obvious competitive advantage in
supply drugs to illicit markets. </p>

<p>To argue that violent firms would have a competitive advantage
is not quite the same as saying that the obvious value of a
capacity for violence will tend to produce large, durable firms,
and a concentrated structure in the industry. That argument rests
on an additional assertion that there are economies of scale in
the development of this special capacity for violence. This
assertion, in turn, rests on the ideal that a useful capacity for
violence consists not in the production of actual violence, but
instead in a reputation for irresistible violence that can
overwhelm (in force, viciousness, sustainability or all three)
any degree of violence that another illegal entrepreneur can
imagine mounting. This is important, for it is quite obvious that
real violence can be produced quite easily and inexpensively.
What is valuable violence, however, is violence that need not be
used but will still intimidate and discourage others because it
is there to be used and cannot be successfully resisted. To have
this capacity, a firm must have available not only a large
quantity of violence and demonstrate its willingness to use it,
but also be a sufficiently permanent and relentless institution
so that the possibility of an opponent challenging it and
escaping without retaliation seems remote. </p>

<p>This capacity seems to have some natural monopolistic
features. One can easily imagine how a single organization could
gradually corner the market for irresistible violence and create
a fairly impregnable local monopoly. One can less easily but
still plausibly imagine a small number of firms with such
capabilities co-existing in an uneasy truce, and ignoring a
certain number of violations of their tacit understandings, as
well as a small amount of minor competition from transient
outsiders. What is hard to imagine as a stable equilibrium is a
world in which there are large numbers of closely matched firms
vying for the position of a recognized dominant capacity for
violence. In that world the factor of production that has value -
namely, a dominating capacity for violence that is sufficient to
discipline employees, enforce contracts, and protect reliably
against take-offs - is not available to any firm. Each firm is
therefore vulnerable to all threats that a solid reputation for
irresistible violence would guard against. </p>

<p>If the reputation for irresistible violence is valuable, it
takes substantial investment to build the capabilities, and if it
only has value when it is greater than any other competing
firm's, the importance of this factor of production will tend to
produce high degrees of concentration in the industry. This will
lead to the development of a few large, durable firms in any
local market. This is true at least in part because this
reputation for violence can substitute for a small scale in
preventing the detection of the operation. If employees,
associates, competitors and customers are all afraid to give
information about the operations of a firm to the police or other
criminals, then it can operate at any given scale with less risk
than another firm that is similar in all respects other than its
capacity and reputation for violence. </p>

<p>The capacity for corrupting government officials may also be
an important factor of production and distribution. This might
also be an important factor of production and distribution that
might also tend to create larger more durable firms and higher
degrees of concentration than one might hypothesize, if one were
thinking only of how the illicit firms might escape detection.
The easiest way to think about the problem of corruption is to
imagine that the various government officials and agencies,
responsible for enforcing laws against illegal production and
distribution, have a de facto power to grant a license to illegal
entrepreneurs to operate legally - or at least with no treat from
them. Obviously, the value of this license to the illicit dealers
depends on the extent to which a given official or agency
monopolizes the legal threat to them. If a given official or
agency is the only official threat against an illicit dealer, the
value of his protection will obviously be higher than if the
official threat against an illicit dealer, the value of his
protection will obviously be higher than if the official or agent
is only one of many potential threats against the dealer. </p>

<p>Thus, the question of whether corruption will tend to
concentrate in the industry depends crucially on the organization
of the enforcement agencies. If the enforcement agencies were
organized in a single agency, and if the hierarchical control
within the agencies was very powerful, and if the illicit firm
could corrupt that agency, it would be able to gain and hold a
monopoly in the area principally by using the enforcement agency
to help it eliminate competition, while keeping it safe. If, on
the other hand, the enforcement agencies had fragmented
jurisdictions, and quite imperfect control over their agents,
then they might be more vulnerable to some degree of corruption,
but the significance of the corruption would be much less.
Essentially, the enforcement agency could not sell an exclusive
right to operate safely. It could only sell little pieces of
insurance against threats from specific agents or agencies. Even
this would produce some higher degree of concentration in the
industry than if corruption were not part of the operating
strategies of the illicit firms, since it would establish some
barriers to entry and protect the position of some firms. But it
would by no means guarantee a monopoly. </p>

<p>The Net Result of Conflicting Pressures. Therefore, there are
pressures that push the drug industry towards small firms and an
atomistic structure, and others that are consistent with the
development of local monopolies and relatively concentrated
structures. My strong hunch is that the net result of this will
be to produce an illicit industry that includes a heterogeneous
distribution of firms. There will be a few firms that are in
strong position to exploit the economies of scale that come from
a reputation for trustworthiness, and for irresistible violence
in the case of betrayal. Such firms may come to account for a
relatively large fraction of the drugs reaching illicit markets,
but they will be a small fraction of the total number of firms
operating. This will be true partly because it is unlikely that
these firms will become either horizontally or vertically
integrated. The risks of long chains of command in the case of
vertical integration, or a wide network of contacts in the case
of horizontal integration are apt to be much greater than the
potential benefits. It is also true because these firms will not
be able to prevent (and will not find it worth preventing)
occasional competition from transient or small operations which
have their own sources of supply, and their own local markets.
Therefore, there will be a great many firms of different sizes in
the industry. </p>

<p>If one were thinking about analogies from legitimate
industries, my hunch is that the best analogy might be something
like the real estate industry, rather than the auto industry or
even the fast-food industry. Many developers put together large,
uncertain deals, rather than producing or distribution a product.
Moreover, the deals are likely to involve several different
partners, and the partnerships and roles may change from deal to
deal. Those in the industry who have a reputation for
trustworthiness, &quot;deep-pockets,&quot; strong political
connections, and effective lawyers are likely to account for a
large fraction of the total dollar value of the deals made. But
there will be a great many others in the industry who do smaller
deals. </p>

<p>The Impact of Illicitness on Performance </p>

<p>Because illicitness affects conduct and structure, it also has
an enormously importantly impact on industry performance. The
crucial result is that drug prices are much higher than they
otherwise would be. This is partly because the defensive
strategies mounted by dealers against enforcement agencies and
other criminals translate into higher operating costs per unit of
drug delivered, and partly because dealers demand additional
compensation for their risks. This is shown by the fact that the
price of drugs in illicit markets is higher than the price of
equivalent drugs in legal markets by factors of 20 or 30. </p>

<p>Almost as important is that the drugs are less conveniently
available than they otherwise would be. Dealers have an incentive
to conceal their activities rather than advertise then. Growth in
the market tends to happen within intimate networks of friends,
rather than through public advertising and widespread
availability. In all likelihood, these are slower and less
effective methods of market development than the same mechanisms
joined with a legitimate distribution system. </p>

<p>We can combine the effect on price and the effect on
availability in a single concept called the &quot;effective
price&quot; of drugs in illicit markets. That would include not
only the monetary cost, but also the amount of time a customer
would have to spend looking for the drug, and the chance that he
might fail to find the drug, or be cheated by an unscrupulous
dealer. In these terms, illicitness results in much higher
effective prices for illicit drugs than if they were legal. Note
that this is probably true even if publicly supported enforcement
activities were relatively ineffective. For, even if the threat
from the enforcement agencies were removed, the threat from other
criminals would remain, and that by itself would be enough by
itself to increase dramatically the effective prices of illicit
drugs. So illicitness has a profound impact on the performance of
the industry. </p>

<p>The fact that the price of drugs is increased by the illicit
status of the industry is evaluated in different ways from
different vantage points. Viewed from the perspective of drug
abuse policy, this is desireable because it will reduce overall
levels of drug use in the population by discouraging new users
from continuing their drug use, and motivating older users to
seek treatment and abandon their use. Viewed from the perspective
of organized crime policy, the increased prices mean a larger
flow of revenues to illicit dealers and criminal organizations.
This is damaging to the objectives of organized crime policy, for
it creates the impression that crime pays, and provides the
necessary financial means to enlarge illegal operations, or to
consolidate a position vis-a-vis other criminal organizations or
the enforcement agencies. Regardless of whether the economic
proceeds are used by illegal dealers for consumption or
investment, the higher revenues become a problem for organized
crime policy. </p>

<p>It is also possible that over the long run, the higher
revenues become a problem for drug abuse policy. This would be
true, for example, if the conspicuous consumption of wealthy drug
dealers attracted more people into the industry, or if the
investments made by more disciplined dealers allowed them not
only to dominate the supply system, but to increase its overall
capacity to supply drugs. In each case, the revenues from the
industry would be operating to increase the overall supply
capacity of the system, just as excess profits in a legitimate
industry would attract new investment into that industry. </p>

<p>It is important to keep in mind, however, that the reasons
that prices are high in the drug industry is precisely because
dealers are confronted by risks of violence and financial loss
from both the government and other criminals. This fact remains
true and continues to discourage many from entering the business.
Indeed, the greater the risks, the greater the profits must be to
attract any one into the business. That is the explicit purpose
of making the drug business illegal and attacking it
aggressively. As long as that threat remains substantial, the
overall supply capacity of the industry will be much smaller than
otherwise, even though people in the industry are making money.
People do not flock to the industry, even with high prices and
high revenues, because the risks are also high.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>