
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-51</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B035-211</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/child5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064354 text/html 81436
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:43:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:29:10 GMT
Content-length: 81217
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LSD, My Problem Child · From Remedy to Inebriant </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Albert Hofmann">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr>
<center>

<h3>5. From Remedy to Inebriant </h3>
</center>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; During the first years after its discovery, LSD
brought me the same happiness and gratification that any
pharmaceutical chemist would feel on learning that a substance he
or she produced might possibly develop into a valuable
medicament. For the creation of new remedies is the goal of a
pharmaceutical chemist's research activity; therein lies the
meaning of his or her work.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Nonmedical Use of LSD </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; This joy at having fathered LSD was tarnished
after more than ten years of uninterrupted scientific research
and medicinal use when LSD was swept up in the huge wave of an
inebriant mania that began to spread over the Western world,
above all the United States, at the end of the 1950s. It was
strange how rapidly LSD adopted its new role as inebriant and,
for a time, became the number-one inebriating drug, at least as
far as publicity was concerned. The more its use as an inebriant
was disseminated, bringing an upsurge in the number of untoward
incidents caused by careless, medically unsupervised use, the
more LSD became a problem child for me and for the Sandoz firm. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was obvious that a substance with such fantastic
effects on mental perception and on the experience of the outer
and inner world would also arouse interest outside medical
science, but I had not expected that LSD, with its unfathomably
uncanny, profound effects, so unlike the character of a
recreational drug, would ever find worldwide use as an inebriant.
I had expected curiosity and interest on the part of artists
outside of medicine&#151;performers, painters, and
writers&#151;but not among people in general. After the
scientific publications around the turn of the century on
mescaline&#151;which, as already mentioned, evokes psychic
effects quite like those of LSD&#151;the use of this compound
remained confined to medicine and to experiments within artistic
and literary circles. I had expected the same fate for LSD. And
indeed, the first non-medicinal self-experiments with LSD were
carried out by writers, painters, musicians, and other
intellectuals. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; LSD sessions had reportedly provoked extraordinary
aesthetic experiences and granted new insights into the essence
of the creative process. Artists were influenced in their
creative work in unconventional ways. A particular type of art
developed that has become known as psychedelic art. It comprises
creations produced under the influenced of LSD and other
psychedelic drugs, whereby the drugs acted as stimulus and source
of inspiration. The standard publication in this field is the
book by Robert E. L. Masters and Jean Houston, <i>Psychedelic Art</i>
(Balance House, 1968). Works of psychedelic art are not created
while the drug is in effect, but only afterward, the artist being
inspired by these experiences. As long as the inebriated
condition lasts, creative activity is impeded, if not completely
halted. The influx of images is too great and is increasing too
rapidly to be portrayed and fashioned. An overwhelming vision
paralyzes activity. Artistic productions arising directly from
LSD inebriation, therefore, are mostly rudimentary in character
and deserve consideration not because of their artistic merit,
but because they are a type of psychoprogram, which offers
insight into the deepest mental structures of the artist,
activated and made conscious by LSD. This was demonstrated later
in a large-scale experiment by the Munich psychiatrist Richard P.
Hartmann, in which thirty famous painters took part. He published
the results in his book <i>Malerei aus Bereichen des Unbewussten:
Kunstler Experimentieren unter LSD</i> [Painting from spheres of
the unconscious: artists experiment with LSD], Verlag M. Du Mont
Schauberg, Cologne, 1974). <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; LSD experiments also gave new impetus to
exploration into the essence of religious and mystical
experience. Religious scholars and philosophers discussed the
question whether the religious and mystical experiences often
discovered in LSD sessions were genuine, that is, comparable to
spontaneous mysticoreligious enlightenment. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This nonmedicinal yet earnest phase of LSD
research, at times in parallel with medicinal research, at times
following it, was increasingly overshadowed at the beginning of
the 1960s, as LSD use spread with epidemic-like speed through all
social classes, as a sensational inebriating drug, in the course
of the inebriant mania in the United States. The rapid rise of
drug use, which had its beginning in this country about twenty
years ago, was not, however, a consequence of the discovery of
LSD, as superficial observers often declared. Rather it had
deep-seated sociological causes: materialism, alienation from
nature through industrialization and increasing urbanization,
lack of satisfaction in professional employment in a mechanized,
lifeless working world, ennui and purposelessness in a wealthy,
saturated society, and lack of a religious, nurturing, and
meaningful philosophical foundation of life. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The existence of LSD was even regarded by the drug
enthusiasts as a predestined coincidence&#151;it had to be
discovered precisely at this time in order to bring help to
people suffering under the modern conditions. It is not
surprising that LSD first came into circulation as an inebriating
drug in the United States, the country in which
industrialization, urbanization, and mechanization, even of
agriculture, are most broadly advanced. These are the same
factors that have led to the origin and growth of the hippie
movement that developed simultaneously with the LSD wave. The two
cannot be dissociated. It would be worth investigating to what
extent the consumption of psychedelic drugs furthered the hippie
movement and conversely. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The spread of LSD from medicine and psychiatry into
the drug scene was introduced and expedited by publications on
sensational LSD experiments that, although they were carried out
in psychiatric clinics and universities, were not then reported
in scientific journals, but rather in magazines and daily papers,
greatly elaborated. Reporters made themselves available as guinea
pigs. Sidney Katz, for example, participated in an LSD experiment
in the Saskatchewan Hospital in Canada under the supervision of
noted psychiatrists; his experiences, however, were not published
in a medical journal. Instead, he described them in an article
entitled &quot;My Twelve Hours as a Madman&quot; in his magazine <i>MacLean's
Canada National Magazine,</i> colorfully illustrated in fanciful
fullness of detail. The widely distributed German magazine <i>Quick,</i>
in its issue number 12 of 21 March 1954, reported a sensational
eyewitness account on &quot;Ein kuhnes wissenschaftliches
Experiment&quot; [a daring scientific experiment] by the painter
Wilfried Zeller, who took &quot;a few drops of lysergic
acid&quot; in the Viennese University Psychiatric Clinic. Of the
numerous publications of this type that have made effective lay
propaganda for LSD, it is sufficient to cite just one more
example: a large-scale, illustrated article in <i>Look</i>
magazine of September 1959. Entitled &quot;The Curious Story
Behind the New Cary Grant,&quot; it must have contributed
enormously to the diffusion of LSD consumption. The famous movie
star had received LSD in a respected clinic in California, in the
course of a psychotherapeutic treatment. He informed the Look
reporter that he had sought inner peace his whole life long, but
yoga, hypnosis, and mysticism had not helped him. Only the
treatment with LSD had made a new, self-strengthened man out of
him, so that after three frustrating marriages he now believed
himself really able to love and make a woman happy. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The evolution of LSD from remedy to inebriating
drug was, however, primarily promoted by the activities of Dr.
Timothy Leary and Dr. Richard Alpert of Harvard University. In a
later section I will come to speak in more detail about Dr. Leary
and my meetings with this personage who has become known
worldwide as an apostle of LSD. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Books also appeared on the U.S. market in which the
fantastic effects of LSD were reported more fully. Here only two
of the most important will be mentioned: <i>Exploring Inner Space</i>
by Jane Dunlap (Harcourt Brace and World, New York, 1961) and <i>My
Self and I </i>by Constance A. Newland (N A.L. Signet Books, New
York, 1963). Although in both cases LSD was used within the scope
of a psychiatric treatment, the authors addressed their books,
which became bestsellers, to the broad public. In her book,
subtitled &quot;The Intimate and Completely Frank Record of One
Woman's Courageous Experiment with Psychiatry's Newest Drug, LSD
25,&quot; Constance A. Newland described in intimate detail how
she had been cured of frigidity. After such avowals, one can
easily imagine that many people would want to try the wondrous
medicine for themselves. The mistaken opinion created by such
reports&#151; that it would be sufficient simply to take LSD in
order to accomplish such miraculous effects and transformations
in oneself&#151;soon led to broad diffusion of
self-experimentation with the new drug. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Objective, informative books about LSD and its
problems also appeared, such as the excellent work by the
psychiatrist Dr. Sidney Cohen, <i>The Beyond Within</i>
(Atheneum, New York, 1967), in which the dangers of careless use
are clearly exposed. This had, however, no power to put a stop to
the LSD epidemic. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As LSD experiments were often carried out in
ignorance of the uncanny, unforeseeable, profound effects, and
without medical supervision, they frequently came to a bad end.
With increasing LSD consumption in the drug scene, there came an
increase in &quot;horror trips&quot;&#151;LSD experiments that
led to disoriented conditions and panic, often resulting in
accidents and even crime. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The rapid rise of nonmedicinal LSD consumption at
the beginning of the 1960s was also partly attributable to the
fact that the drug laws then current in most countries did not
include LSD. For this reason, drug habitués changed from the
legally proscribed narcotics to the still-legal substance LSD.
Moreover, the last of the Sandoz patents for the production of
LSD expired in 1963, removing a further hindrance to illegal
manufacture of the drug. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The rise of LSD in the drug scene caused our firm a
nonproductive, laborious burden. National control laboratories
and health authorities requested statements from us about
chemical and pharmacological properties, stability and toxicity
of LSD, and analytical methods for its detection in confiscated
drug samples, as well as in the human body, in blood and urine.
This brought a voluminous correspondence, which expanded in
connection with inquiries from all over the world about
accidents, poisonings, criminal acts, and so forth, resulting
from misuse of LSD. All this meant enormous, unprofitable
difficulties, which the business management of Sandoz regarded
with disapproval. Thus it happened one day that Professor Stoll,
managing director of the firm at the time, said to me
reproachfully: &quot;I would rather you had not discovered
LSD.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At that time, I was now and again assailed by
doubts whether the valuable pharmacological and psychic effects
of LSD might be outweighed by its dangers and by possible
injuries due to misuse. Would LSD become a blessing for humanity,
or a curse? This I often asked myself when I thought about my
problem child. My other preparations, Methergine,
Dihydroergotamine, and Hydergine, caused me no such problems and
difficulties. They were not problem children; lacking extravagant
properties leading to misuse, they have developed in a satisfying
manner into therapeutically valuable medicines. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The publicity about LSD attained its high point in
the years 1964 to 1966, not only with regard to enthusiastic
claims about the wondrous effects of LSD by drug fanatics and
hippies, but also to reports of accidents, mental breakdowns,
criminal acts, murders, and suicide under the influence of LSD. A
veritable LSD hysteria reigned.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Sandoz Stops LSD Distribution </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; In view of this situation, the management of
Sandoz was forced to make a public statement on the LSD problem
and to publish accounts of the corresponding measures that had
been taken. The pertinent letter, dated 23 August 1965, by Dr. A.
Cerletti, at the time director of the Pharmaceutical Department
of Sandoz, is reproduced below: </p>

<p> <center></p>

<h4>Decision Regarding LSD 25 and Other Hallucinogenic Substances</h4>
</center>

<blockquote>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; More than twenty years have elapsed since
    the discovery by Albert Hofmann of LSD 25 in the SANDOZ
    Laboratories. Whereas the . fundamental importance of this
    discovery may be assessed by its impact on the development of
    modern psychiatric research, it must be recognized that it
    placed a heavy burden of responsibility on SANDOZ, the owner
    of this product. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The finding of a new chemical with outstanding
    biological properties, apart from the scientific success
    implied by its synthesis, is usually the first decisive step
    toward profitable development of a new drug. In the case of
    LSD, however, it soon became clear that, despite the
    outstanding properties of this compound, or rather because of
    the very nature of these qualities, even though LSD was fully
    protected by SANDOZ-owned patents since the time of its first
    synthesis in 1938, the usual means of practical exploitation
    could not be envisaged. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; On the other hand, all the evidence obtained
    following the initial studies in animals and humans carried
    out in the SANDOZ research laboratories pointed to the
    important role that this substance could play as an
    investigational tool in neurological research and in
    psychiatry. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; It was therefore decided to make LSD available
    free of charge to qualified experimental and clinical
    investigators all over the world. This broad research
    approach was assisted by the provision of any necessary
    technical aid and in many instances also by financial
    support. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; An enormous amount of scientific documents,
    published mainly in the international biochemical and medical
    literature and systematically listed in the &quot;SANDOZ
    Bibliography on LSD&quot; as well as in the &quot;Catalogue
    of Literature on Delysid&quot; periodically edited by SANDOZ,
    gives vivid proof of what has been achieved by following this
    line of policy over nearly two decades. By exercising this
    kind of &quot;nobile officium&quot; in accordance with the
    highest standards of medical ethics with all kinds of
    self-imposed precautions and restrictions, it was possible
    for many years to avoid the danger of abuse (i.e., use by
    people neither competent nor qualified), which is always
    inherent in a compound with exceptional CNS activity. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; In spite of all our precautions, cases of LSD
    abuse have occurred from time to time in varying
    circumstances completely beyond the control of SANDOZ. Very
    recently this danger has increased considerably and in some
    parts of the world has reached the scale of a serious threat
    to public health. This state of affairs has now reached a
    critical point for the following reasons: (1) A worldwide
    spread of misconceptions of LSD has been caused by an
    increasing amount of publicity aimed at provoking an active
    interest in laypeople by means of sensational stories and
    statements; (2) In most countries no adequate legislation
    exists to control and regulate the production and
    distribution of substances like LSD; (3) The problem of
    availability of LSD, once limited on technical grounds, has
    fundamentally changed with the advent of mass production of
    lysergic acid by fermentation procedures. Since the last
    patent on LSD expired in 1963, it is not surprising to find
    that an increasing number of dealers in fine chemicals are
    offering LSD from unknown sources at the high price known to
    be paid by LSD fanatics. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Taking into consideration all the
    above-mentioned circumstances and the flood of requests for
    LSD which has now become uncontrollable, the pharmaceutical
    management of SANDOZ has decided to stop immediately all
    further production and distribution of LSD. The same policy
    will apply to all derivatives or analogues of LSD with
    hallucinogenic properties as well as to Psilocybin, Psilocin,
    and their hallucinogenic congeners. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; For a while the distribution of LSD and
psilocybin was stopped completely by Sandoz. Most countries had
subsequently proclaimed strict regulations concerning possession,
distribution, and use of hallucinogens, so that physicians,
psychiatric clinics, and research institutes, if they could
produce a special permit to work with these substances from the
respective national health authorities, could again be supplied
with LSD and psilocybin. In the United States the National
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) undertook the distribution of
these agents to licensed research institutes. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All these legislative and official precautions,
however, had little influence on LSD consumption in the drug
scene, yet on the other hand hindered and continue to hinder
medicinal-psychiatric use and LSD research in biology and
neurology, because many researchers dread the red tape that is
connected with the procurement of a license for the use of LSD.
The bad reputation of LSD&#151;its depiction as an &quot;insanity
drug&quot; and a &quot;satanic invention&quot; - constitutes a
further reason why many doctors shunned use of LSD in their
psychiatric practice. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the course of recent years the uproar of
publicity about LSD has quieted, and the consumption of LSD as an
inebriant has also diminished, as far as that can be concluded
from the rare reports about accidents and other regrettable
occurrences following LSD ingestion. It may be that the decrease
of LSD accidents, however, is not simply due to a decline in LSD
consumption. Possibly the recreational users, with time, have
become more aware of the particular effects and dangers of LSD
and more cautious in their use of this drug. Certainly LSD, which
was for a time considered in the Western world, above all in the
United States, to be the number-one inebriant, has relinquished
this leading role to other inebriants such as hashish and the
habituating, even physically destructive drugs like heroin and
amphetamine. The last-mentioned drugs represent an alarming
sociological and public health problem today.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Dangers of Nonmedicinal LSD Experiments </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; While professional use of LSD in psychiatry
entails hardly any risk, the ingestion of this substance outside
of medical practice, without medical supervision, is subject to
multifarious dangers. These dangers reside, on the one hand, in
external circumstances connected with illegal drug use and, on
the other hand, in the peculiarity of LSD's psychic effects. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The advocates of uncontrolled, free use of LSD and
other hallucinogens base their attitude on two claims: (l) this
type of drug produces no addiction, and (2) until now no danger
to health from moderate use of hallucinogens has been
demonstrated. Both are true. Genuine addiction, characterized by
the fact that psychic and often severe physical disturbances
appear on withdrawal of the drug, has not been observed, even in
cases in which LSD was taken often and over a long period of
time. No organic injury or death as a direct consequence of an
LSD intoxication has yet been reported. As discussed in greater
detail in the chapter &quot;LSD in Animal Experiments and
Biological Research,&quot; LSD is actually a relatively nontoxic
substance in proportion to its extraordinarily high psychic
activity.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Psychotic Reactions</h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Like the other hallucinogens, however, LSD is
dangerous in an entirely different sense. While the psychic and
physical dangers of the addicting narcotics, the opiates,
amphetamines, and so forth, appear only with chronic use, the
possible danger of LSD exists in every single experiment. This is
because severe disoriented states can appear during any LSD
inebriation. It is true that through careful preparation of the
experiment and the experimenter such episodes can largely be
avoided, but they cannot be excluded with certainty. LSD crises
resemble psychotic attacks with a manic or depressive character. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the manic, hyperactive condition, the feeling of
omnipotence or invulnerability can lead to serious casualties.
Such accidents have occurred when inebriated persons confused in
this way&#151;believing themselves to be invulnerable&#151;walked
in front of a moving automobile or jumped out a window in the
belief that they were able to fly. This type of LSD casualty,
however, is not so common as one might be led to think on the
basis of reports that were sensationally exaggerated by the mass
media. Nevertheless, such reports must serve as serious warnings.
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On the other hand, a report that made the rounds
worldwide, in 1966, about an alleged murder committed under the
influence on LSD, cannot be true. The suspect, a young man in New
York accused of having killed his mother-in-law, explained at his
arrest, immediately after the fact, that he knew nothing of the
crime and that he had been on an LSD trip for three days. But an
LSD inebriation, even with the highest doses, lasts no longer
than twelve hours, and repeated ingestion leads to tolerance,
which means that extra doses are ineffective. Besides, LSD
inebriation is characterized by the fact that the person
remembers exactly what he or she has experienced. Presumably the
defendant in this case expected leniency for extenuating
circumstances, owing to unsoundness of mind. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The danger of a psychotic reaction is especially
great if LSD is given to someone without his or her knowledge.
This was demonstrated in an episode that took place soon after
the discovery of LSD, during the first investigations with the
new substance in the Zurich University Psychiatric Clinic, when
people were not yet aware of the danger of such jokes. A young
doctor, whose colleagues had slipped LSD into his coffee as a
lark, wanted to swim across Lake Zurich during the winter at
-20!C (-4!F) and had to be prevented by force. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There is a different danger when the LSD-induced
disorientation exhibits a depressive rather than manic character.
In the course of such an LSD experiment, frightening visions,
death agony, or the fear of becoming insane can lead to a
threatening psychic breakdown or even to suicide. Here the LSD
trip becomes a &quot;horror trip.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The demise of a Dr. Olson, who had been given LSD
without his knowledge in the course of U.S. Army drug
experiments, and who then committed suicide by jumping from a
window, caused a particular sensation. His family could not
understand how this quiet, well-adjusted man could have been
driven to this deed. Not until fifteen years later, when the
secret documents about the experiments were published, did they
learn the true circumstances, whereupon the president of the
United States publicly apologized to the dependents. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The conditions for the positive outcome of an LSD
experiment, with little possibility of a psychotic derailment,
reside on the one hand in the individual and on the other hand in
the external milieu of the experiment. The internal, personal
factors are called set, the external conditions setting. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The beauty of a living room or of an outdoor
location is perceived with particular force because of the highly
stimulated sense organs during LSD inebriation, and such an
amenity has a substantial influence on the course of the
experiment. The persons present, their appearance, their traits,
are also part of the setting that determines the experience. The
acoustic milieu is equally significant. Even harmless noises can
turn to torment, and conversely lovely music can develop into a
euphoric experience. With LSD experiments in ugly or noisy
surroundings, however, there is greater danger of a negative
outcome, including psychotic crises. The machine- and
appliance-world of today offers much scenery and all types of
noise that could very well trigger panic during enhanced
sensibility. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Just as meaningful as the external milieu of the
LSD experience, if not even more important, is the mental
condition of the experimenters, their current state of mind,
their attitude to the drug experience, and their expectations
associated with it. Even unconscious feelings of happiness or
fear can have an effect. LSD tends to intensify the actual
psychic state. A feeling of happiness can be heightened to bliss,
a depression can deepen to despair. LSD is thus the most
inappropriate means imaginable for curing a depressive state. It
is dangerous to take LSD in a disturbed, unhappy frame of mind,
or in a state of fear. The probability that the experiment will
end in a psychic breakdown is then quite high. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Among persons with unstable personality structures,
tending to psychotic reactions, LSD experimentation ought to be
completely avoided. Here an LSD shock, by releasing a latent
psychosis, can produce a lasting mental injury. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The psyche of very young persons should also be
considered as unstable, in the sense of not yet having matured.
In any case, the shock of such a powerful stream of new and
strange perceptions and feelings, such as is engendered by LSD,
endangers the sensitive, still-developing psycho-organism. Even
the medicinal use of LSD in youths under eighteen years of age,
in the scope of psychoanalytic or psychotherapeutic treatment, is
discouraged in professional circles, correctly so in my opinion.
Juveniles for the most part still lack a secure, solid
relationship to reality. Such a relationship is needed before the
dramatic experience of new dimensions of reality can be
meaningfully integrated into the world view. Instead of leading
to a broadening and deepening of reality consciousness, such an
experience in adolescents will lead to insecurity and a feeling
of being lost. Because of the freshness of sensory perception in
youth and the still-unlimited capacity for experience,
spontaneous visionary experiences occur much more frequently than
in later life. For this reason as well, psychostimulating agents
should not be used by juveniles. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Even in healthy, adult persons, even with adherence
to all of the preparatory and protective measures discussed, an
LSD experiment can fail, causing psychotic reactions. Medical
supervision is therefore earnestly to be recommended, even for
nonmedicinal LSD experiments. This should include an examination
of the state of health before the experiment. The doctor need not
be present at the session; however, medical help should at all
times be readily available. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Acute LSD psychoses can be cut short and brought
under control quickly and reliably by injection of chlorpromazine
or another sedative of this type. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The presence of a familiar person, who can request
medical help in the event of an emergency, is also an
indispensable psychological assurance. Although the LSD
inebriation is characterized mostly by an immersion in the
individual inner world, a deep need for human contact sometimes
arises, especially in depressive phases.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>LSD from the Black Market </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Nonmedicinal LSD consumption can bring dangers
of an entirely different type than hitherto discussed: for most
of the LSD offered in the drug scene is of unknown origin. LSD
preparations from the black market are unreliable when it comes
to both quality and dosage. They rarely contain the declared
quantity, but mostly have less LSD, often none at all, and
sometimes even too much. In many cases other drugs or even
poisonous substances are sold as LSD. These observations were
made in our laboratory upon analysis of a great number of LSD
samples from the black market. They coincide with the experiences
of national drug control departments. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The unreliability in the strength of LSD
preparations on the illicit drug market can lead to dangerous
overdosage. Overdoses have often proved to be the cause of failed
LSD experiments that led to severe psychic and physical
breakdowns. Reports of alleged fatal LSD poisoning, however, have
yet to be confirmed. Close scrutiny of such cases invariably
established other causative factors. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The following case, which took place in 1970, is
cited as an example of the possible dangers of black market LSD.
We received for investigation from the police a drug powder
distributed as LSD. It came from a young man who was admitted to
the hospital in critical condition and whose friend had also
ingested this preparation and died as a result. Analysis showed
that the powder contained no LSD, but rather the very poisonous
alkaloid strychnine. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If most black market LSD preparations contained
less than the stated quantity and often no LSD at all, the reason
is either deliberate falsification or the great instability of
this substance. LSD is very sensitive to air and light. It is
oxidatively destroyed by the oxygen in the air and is transformed
into an inactive substance under the influence of light. This
must be taken into account during the synthesis and especially
during the production of stable, storable forms of LSD. Claims
that LSD may easily be prepared, or that every chemistry student
in a half-decent laboratory is capable of producing it, are
untrue. Procedures for synthesis of LSD have indeed been
published and are accessible to everyone. With these detailed
procedures in hand, chemists would be able to carry out the
synthesis, provided they had pure lysergic acid at their
disposal; its possession today, however, is subject to the same
strict regulations as LSD. In order to isolate LSD in pure
crystalline form from the reaction solution and in order to
produce stable preparations, however, special equipment and not
easily acquired specific experience are required, owing (as
stated previously) to the great instability of this substance. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Only in completely oxygen-free ampules protected
from light is LSD absolutely stable. Such ampules, containing 100
µg (= 0.1 mg) LSD-tartrate (tartaric acid salt of LSD) in 1 cc
of aqueous solution, were produced for biological research and
medicinal use by the Sandoz firm. LSD in tablets prepared with
additives that inhibit oxidation, while not absolutely stable, at
least keeps for a longer time. But LSD preparations often found
on the black market&#151;LSD that has been applied in solution
onto sugar cubes or blotting paper&#151;decompose in the course
of weeks or a few months. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; With such a highly potent substance as LSD, the
correct dosage is of paramount importance. Here the tenet of
Paracelsus holds good: the dose determines whether a substance
acts as a remedy or as a poison. A controlled dosage, however, is
not possible with preparations from the black market, whose
active strength is in no way guaranteed. One of the greatest
dangers of non-medicinal LSD experiments lies, therefore, in the
use of such preparations of unknown provenience.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>The Case of Dr. Leary </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Dr. Timothy Leary, who has become known
worldwide in his role of drug apostle, had an extraordinarily
strong influence on the diffusion of illegal LSD consumption in
the United States. On the occasion of a vacation in Mexico in the
year 1960, Leary had eaten the legendary &quot;sacred
mushrooms,&quot; which he had purchased from a shaman. During the
mushroom inebriation he entered into a state of mystico-religious
ecstasy, which he described as the deepest religious experience
of his life. From then on, Dr. Leary, who at the time was a
lecturer in psychology at Harvard University in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, dedicated himself totally to research on the
effects and possibilities of the use of psychedelic drugs.
Together with his colleague Dr. Richard Alpert, he started
various research projects at the university, in which LSD and
psilocybin, isolated by us in the meantime, were employed. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The reintegration of convicts into society, the
production of mystico-religious experiences in theologians and
members of the clergy, and the furtherance of creativity in
artists and writers with the help of LSD and psilocybin were
tested with scientific methodology. Even persons like Aldous
Huxley, Arthur Koestler, and Allen Ginsberg participated in these
investigations. Particular consideration was given to the
question, to what degree mental preparation and expectation of
the subjects, along with the external milieu of the experiment,
are able to influence the course and character of states of
psychedelic inebriation. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In January 1963, Dr. Leary sent me a detailed
report of these studies, in which he enthusiastically imparted
the positive results obtained and gave expression to his beliefs
in the advantages and very promising possibilities of such use of
these active compounds. At the same time, the Sandoz firm
received an inquiry about the supply of 100g LSD and 25 kg
psilocybin, signed by Dr. Timothy Leary, from the Harvard
University Department of Social Relations. The requirement for
such an enormous quantity (the stated amounts correspond to 1
million doses of LSD and 2.5 million doses of psilocybin) was
based on the planned extension of investigations to tissue,
organ, and animal studies. We made the supply of these substances
contingent upon the production of an import license on behalf of
the U.S. health authorities. Immediately we received the order
for the stated quantities of LSD and psilocybin, along with a
check for $10,000 as deposit but without the required import
license. Dr. Leary signed for this order, but no longer as
lecturer at Harvard University, rather as president of an
organization he had recently founded, the International
Federation for Internal Freedom (IFIF). Because, in addition, our
inquiry to the appropriate dean of Harvard University had shown
that the university authorities did not approve of the
continuation of the research project by Leary and Alpert, we
canceled our offer upon return of the deposit. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Shortly thereafter, Leary and Alpert were
discharged from the teaching staff of Harvard- University because
the investigations, at first conducted in an academic milieu, had
lost their scientific character. The experiments had turned into
LSD parties. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The LSD trip&#151;LSD as a ticket to an adventurous
journey into new worlds of mental and physical
experience&#151;became the latest exciting fashion among academic
youth, spreading rapidly from Harvard to other universities.
Leary's doctrine&#151;that LSD not only served to find the divine
and to discover the self, but indeed was the most potent
aphrodisiac yet discovered&#151;surely contributed quite
decisively to the rapid propagation of LSD consumption among the
younger generation. Later, in an interview with the monthly
magazine Playboy, Leary said that the intensification of sexual
experience and the potentiation of sexual ecstasy by LSD was one
of the chief reasons for the LSD boom. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After his expulsion from Harvard University, Leary
was completely transformed from a psychology lecturer pursuing
research, into the messiah of the psychedelic movement. He and
his friends of the IFIF founded a psychedelic research center in
lovely, scenic surroundings in Zihuatanejo, Mexico. I received a
personal invitation from Dr. Leary to participate in a top-level
planning session on psychedelic drugs, scheduled to take place
there in August 1963. I would gladly have accepted this grand
invitation, in which I was offered reimbursement for travel
expenses and free lodging, in order to learn from personal
observation the methods, operation, and the entire atmosphere of
such a psychedelic research center, about which contradictory, to
some extent very remarkable, reports were then circulating.
Unfortunately, professional obligations kept me at that moment
from flying to Mexico to get a picture at first hand of the
controversial enterprise. The Zihuatanejo Research Center did not
last long. Leary and his adherents were expelled from the country
by the Mexican government. Leary, however, who had now become not
only the messiah but also the martyr of the psychedelic movement,
soon received help from the young New York millionaire William
Hitchcock, who made a manorial house on his large estate in
Millbrook, New York, available to Leary as new home and
headquarters. Millbrook was also the home of another foundation
for the psychedelic, transcendental way of life, the Castalia
Foundation. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On a trip to India in 1965 Leary was converted to
Hinduism. In the following year he founded a religious community,
the League for Spiritual Discovery, whose initials give the
abbreviation &quot;LSD.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Leary's proclamation to youth, condensed in his
famous slogan &quot;Turn on, tune in, drop out !&quot;, became a
central dogma of the hippie movement. Leary is one of the
founding fathers of the hippie cult. The last of these three
precepts, &quot;drop out,&quot; was the challenge to escape from
bourgeois life, to turn one's back on society, to give up school,
studies, and employment, and to dedicate oneself wholly to the
true inner universe, the study of one's own nervous system, after
one has turned on with LSD. This challenge above all went beyond
the psychological and religious domain to assume social and
political significance. It is therefore understandable that Leary
not only became the <i>enfant terrible </i>of the university and
among his academic colleagues in psychology and psychiatry, but
also earned the wrath of the political authorities. He was,
therefore, placed under surveillance, followed, and ultimately
locked in prison. The high sentences&#151;ten years' imprisonment
each for convictions in Texas and California concerning
possession of LSD and marijuana, and conviction (later
overturned) with a sentence of thirty years' imprisonment for
marijuana smuggling&#151;show that the punishment of these
offenses was only a pretext: the real aim was to put under lock
and key the seducer and instigator of youth, who could not
otherwise be prosecuted. On the night of 13-14 September 1970,
Leary managed to escape from the California prison in San Luis
Obispo. On a detour from Algeria, where he made contact with
Eldridge Cleaver, a leader of the Black Panther movement living
there in exile, Leary came to Switzerland and there petitioned
for political asylum.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Meeting with Timothy Leary </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Dr. Leary lived with his wife, Rosemary, in the
resort town Villars-sur-Ollon in western Switzerland. Through the
intercession of Dr. Mastronardi, Dr. Leary's lawyer, contact was
established between us. On 3 September 1971, I met Dr. Leary in
the railway station snack bar in Lausanne. The greeting was
cordial, a symbol of our fateful relationship through LSD. Leary
was medium-sized, slender, resiliently active, his brown face
surrounded with slightly curly hair mixed with gray, youthful,
with bright, laughing eyes. This gave Leary somewhat the mark of
a tennis champion rather than that of a former Harvard lecturer.
We traveled by automobile to Buchillons, where in the arbor of
the restaurant A la Grande Forêt, over a meal of fish and a
glass of white wine, the dialogue between the father and the
apostle of LSD finally began. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I voiced my regret that the investigations with LSD
and psilocybin at Harvard University, which had begun
promisingly, had degenerated to such an extent that their
continuance in an academic milieu became impossible. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My most serious remonstrance to Leary, however,
concerned the propagation of LSD use among juveniles. Leary did
not attempt to refute my opinions about the particular dangers of
LSD for youth. He maintained, however, that I was unjustified in
reproaching him for the seduction of immature persons to drug
consumption, because teenagers in the United States, with regard
to information and life experience, were comparable to adult
Europeans. Maturity, with satiation and intellectual stagnation,
would be reached very early in the United States. For that
reason, he deemed the LSD experience significant, useful, and
enriching, even for people still very young in years. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In this conversation, I further objected to the
great publicity that Leary sought for his LSD and psilocybin
investigations, since he had invited reporters from daily papers
and magazines to his experiments and had mobilized radio and
television. Emphasis was thereby placed on publicity rather than
on objective information. Leary defended this publicity program
because he felt it had been his fateful historic role to make LSD
known worldwide. The overwhelmingly positive effects of such
dissemination, above all among America's younger generation,
would make any trifling injuries, any regrettable accidents as a
result of improper use of LSD, unimportant in comparison, a small
price to pay. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; During this conversation, I ascertained that one
did Leary an injustice by indiscriminately describing him as a
drug apostle. He made a sharp distinction between psychedelic
drugs&#151;LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, hashish&#151;of whose
salutary effects he was persuaded, and the addicting narcotics
morphine, heroin, etc., against whose use he repeatedly
cautioned. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My impression of Dr. Leary in this personal meeting
was that of a charming personage, convinced of his mission, who
defended his opinions with humor yet uncompromisingly; a man who
truly soared high in the clouds pervaded by beliefs in the
wondrous effects of psychedelic drugs and the optimism resulting
therefrom, and thus a man who tended to underrate or completely
overlook practical difficulties, unpleasant facts, and dangers.
Leary also showed carelessness regarding charges and dangers that
concerned his own person, as his further path in life
emphatically showed. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; During his Swiss sojourn, I met Leary by chance
once more, in February 1972, in Basel, on the occasion of a visit
by Michael Horowitz, curator of the Fitz Hugh Ludlow Memorial
Library in San Francisco, a library specializing in drug
literature. We traveled together to my house in the country near
Burg, where we resumed our conversation of the previous
September. Leary appeared fidgety and detached, probably owing to
a momentary indisposition, so that our discussions were less
productive this time. That was my last meeting with Dr. Leary. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; He left Switzerland at the end of the year, having
separated from his wife, Rosemary, now accompanied by his new
friend Joanna Harcourt-Smith. After a short stay in Austria,
where he assisted in a documentary film about heroin, Leary and
friend traveled to Afghanistan. At the airport in Kabul he was
apprehended by agents of the American secret service and brought
back to the San Luis Obispo prison in California. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After nothing had been heard from Leary for a long
time, his name again appeared in the daily papers in summer 1975
with the announcement of a parole and early release from prison.
But he was not set free until early in 1976. I learned from his
friends that he was now occupied with psychological problems of
space travel and with the exploration of cosmic relationships
between the human nervous system and interstellar space&#151;that
is, with problems whose study would bring him no further
difficulties on the part of governmental authorities.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Travels in the Universe of the Soul </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus the Islamic scholar Dr. Rudolf Gelpke
entitled his accounts of self-experiments with LSD and
psilocybin, which appeared in the publication <i>Antaios</i>, for
January 1962, and this title could also be used for the following
descriptions of LSD experiments. LSD trips and the space flights
of the astronauts are comparable in many respects. Both
enterprises require very careful preparations, as far as measures
for safety as well as objectives are concerned, in order to
minimize dangers and to derive the most valuable results
possible. The astronauts cannot remain in space nor the LSD
experimenters in transcendental spheres, they have to return to
earth and everyday reality, where the newly acquired experiences
must be evaluated. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The following reports were selected in order to
demonstrate how varied the experiences of LSD inebriation can be.
The particular motivation for undertaking the experiments was
also decisive in their selection. Without exception, this
selection involves only reports by persons who have tried LSD not
simply out of curiosity or as a sophisticated pleasure drug, but
who rather experimented with it in the quest for expanded
possibilities of experience of the inner and outer world; who
attempted, with the help of this drug key, to unlock new
&quot;doors of perception&quot; (William Blake); or, to continue
with the comparison chosen by Rudolf Gelpke, who employed LSD to
surmount the force of gravity of space and time in the accustomed
world view, in order to arrive thereby at new outlooks and
understandings in the &quot;universe of the soul.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The first two of the following research records are
taken from the previously cited report by Rudolf Gelpke in
Antaios.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Dance of the Spirits in the Wind </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; (0.075 mg LSD on 23 June 1961, 13:00 hours)<i> </i>
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>After I had ingested this dose, which could be considered
    average, I conversed very animatedly with a professional
    colleague until approximately 14:00 hours. Following this, I
    proceeded alone to the Werthmüller bookstore where the drug
    now began to act most unmistakably. I discerned, above all,
    that the subjects of the books in which I rummaged peacefully
    in the back of the shop were indifferent to me, whereas
    random details of my surroundings suddenly stood out
    strongly, and somehow appeared to be &quot;meaningful.&quot;
    . . . Then, after some ten minutes, I was discovered by a
    married couple known to me, and had to let myself become
    involved in a conversation with them that, I admit, was by no
    means pleasant to me, though not really painful either. I
    listened to the conversation (even to myself) &quot; as from
    far away. &quot; The things that were discussed (the
    conversation dealt with Persian stories that I had
    translated) &quot;belonged to another world&quot;: a world
    about which I could indeed express myself (I had, after all,
    recently still inhabited it myself and remembered the
    &quot;rules of the game&quot;!), but to which I no longer
    possessed any emotional connection. My interest in it was
    obliterated&#151;only I did not dare to let myself observe
    that. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; After I managed to dismiss myself, I strolled
    farther through the city to the marketplace. I had no
    &quot;visions,&quot; saw and heard everything as usual, and
    yet everything was also altered in an indescribable way;
    &quot;imperceptible glassy walls&quot; everywhere. With every
    step that I took, I became more and more like an automaton.
    It especially struck me that I seemed to lose control over my
    facial musculature&#151;I was convinced that my face was
    grown stiff, completely expressionless, empty, slack and
    mask-like. The only reason I could still walk and put myself
    in motion, was because I remembered that, and how I had
    &quot;earlier&quot; gone and moved myself. But the farther
    back the recollection went, the more uncertain I became. I
    remember that my own hands somehow were in my way: I put them
    in my pockets, let them dangle, entwined them behind my back
    . . . as some burdensome objects, which must be dragged
    around with us and which no one knows quite how to stow away.
    I had the same reaction concerning my whole body. I no longer
    knew why it was there, and where I should go with it. All
    sense for decisions of that kind had been lost . They could
    only be reconstructed laboriously, taking a detour through
    memories from the past. It took a struggle of this kind to
    enable me to cover the short distance from the marketplace to
    my home, which I reached at about 15:10. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; In no way had I had the feeling of being
    inebriated. What I experienced was rather a gradual mental
    extinction. It was not at all frightening; but I can imagine
    that in the transition to certain mental disturbances -
    naturally dispersed over a greater interval&#151;a very
    similar process happens: as long as the recollection of the
    former individual existence in the human world is still
    present, the patient who has become unconnected can still (to
    some extent) find his way about in the world: later, however,
    when the memories fade and ultimately die out, he completely
    loses this ability. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Shortly after I had entered my room, the
    &quot;glassy stupor&quot; gave way. I sat down, with a view
    out of a window, and was at once enraptured: the window was
    opened wide, the diaphanous gossamer curtains, on the other
    hand, were drawn, and now a mild wind from the outside played
    with these veils and with the silhouettes of potted plants
    and leafy tendrils on the sill behind, which the sunlight
    delineated on the curtains breathing in the breeze. This
    spectacle captivated me completely. I &quot;sank&quot; into
    it, saw only this gentle and incessant waving and rocking of
    the plant shadows in the sun and the wind. I knew what
    &quot;it&quot; was, but I sought after the name for it, after
    the formula, after the &quot;magic word&quot; that I knew and
    already I had it: Totentanz, the dance of the dead.... This
    was what the wind and the light were showing me on the screen
    of gossamer. Was it frightening? Was I afraid?
    Perhaps&#151;at first. But then a great cheerfulness
    infiltrated me, and I heard the music of silence, and even my
    soul danced with the redeemed shadows to the whistle of the
    wind. Yes, I understood: this is the curtain, and this
    curtain itself IS the secret, the &quot;ultimate&quot; that
    it concealed. Why, therefore, tear it up? He who does that
    only tears up himself. Because &quot;there behind,&quot;
    behind the curtain, is &quot;nothing.&quot;. . . </p>
</blockquote>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Polyp from the Deep </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; (0.150 mg LSD on 15 April 1961, 9:15 hours)<i> </i>
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Beginning of the effect already after about 30 minutes
    with strong inner agitation, trembling hands, skin chills,
    taste of metal on the palate. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 10:00: The environment of the room transforms
    itself into phosphorescent waves, running hither from the
    feet even through my body. The skin&#151;and above all the
    toes&#151;is as electrically charged; a still constantly
    growing excitement hinders all clear thoughts.... <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 10:20: I lack the words to describe my current
    condition. It is as if an &quot;other&quot; complete stranger
    were seizing possession of me bit by bit. Have greatest
    trouble writing (&quot;inhibited&quot; or
    &quot;uninhibited&quot;?&#151;I don't know!). <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; This sinister process of an advancing
    self-estrangement aroused in me the feeling of powerlessness,
    of being helplessly delivered up. Around 10:30, through
    closed eyes I saw innumerable, self-intertwining threads on a
    red background. A sky as heavy as lead appeared to press down
    on everything; I felt my ego compressed in itself, and I felt
    like a withered dwarf.... Shortly before 13:00 I escaped the
    more and more oppressing atmosphere of the company in the
    studio, in which we only hindered one another reciprocally
    from unfolding completely into the inebriation. I sat down in
    a small, empty room, on the floor, with my back to the wall,
    and saw through the only window on the narrow frontage
    opposite me a bit of gray- white cloudy sky. This, like the
    whole environment in general, appeared to be hopelessly
    normal at this moment. I was dejected, and my self seemed so
    repulsive and hateful to me that I had not dared (and on this
    day even had actually repeatedly desperately avoided) to look
    in a mirror or in the face of another person. I very much
    wished this inebriation were finally finished, but it still
    had my body totally in its possession. I imagined that I
    perceived, deep within its stubborn oppressive weight, how it
    held my limbs surrounded with a hundred polyp arms&#151;yes,
    I actually experienced this in a mysterious rhythm;
    electrified contacts, as of a real, indeed imperceptible, but
    sinister omnipresent being, which I addressed with a loud
    voice, reviled, bid, and challenged to open combat. &quot;It
    is only the projection of evil in your self,&quot; another
    voice assured me. &quot;It is your soul monster!&quot; This
    perception was like a flashing sword. It passed through me
    with redeeming sharpness. The polyp arms fell away from
    me&#151;as if cut through&#151;and simultaneously the
    hitherto dull and gloomy gray-white of the sky behind the
    open window suddenly scintillated like sunlit water. As I
    stared at it so enchanted, it changed (for me!) to real
    water: a subterranean spring overran me, which had ruptured
    there all at once and now boiled up toward me, wanted to
    become a storm, a lake, an ocean, with millions and millions
    of drops&#151;and on all of these drops, on every single one
    of them, the light danced.... As the room, window, and sky
    came back into my consciousness (it was 13:25 hours), the
    inebriation was certainly not at an end&#151;not yet&#151;but
    its rearguard, which passed by me during the ensuing two
    hours, very much resembled the rainbow that follows the
    storm. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Both the estrangement from the environment and the
estrangement from the individual body, experienced in both of the
preceding experiments described by Gelpke&#151;as well as the
feeling of an alien being, a demon, seizing possession of
oneself&#151;are features of LSD inebriation that, in spite of
all the other diversity and variability of the experience, are
cited in most research reports. I have already described the
possession by the LSD demon as an uncanny experience in my first
planned self-experiment. Anxiety and terror then affected me
especially strongly, because at that time I had no way of knowing
that the demon would again release his victim. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The adventures described in the following report,
by a painter, belong to a completely different type of LSD
experience. This artist visited me in order to obtain my opinion
about how the experience under LSD should be understood and
interpreted. He feared that the profound transformation of his
personal life, which had resulted from his experiment with LSD,
could rest on a mere delusion. My explanation&#151;that LSD, as a
biochemical agent, only triggered his visions but had not created
them and that these visions rather originated from his own
soul&#151;gave him confidence in the meaning of his
transformation.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>LSD Experience of a Painter </h4>

<blockquote>
    <p>. . . Therefore I traveled with Eva to a solitary mountain
    valley. Up there in nature, I thought it would be
    particularly beautiful with Eva. Eva was young and
    attractive. Twenty years older than she, I was already in the
    middle of life. Despite the sorrowful consequences that I had
    experienced previously, as a result of erotic escapades,
    despite the pain and the disappointments that I inflicted on
    those who loved me and had believed in me, I was drawn again
    with irresistible power to this adventure, to Eva, to her
    youth. I was under the spell of this girl. Our affair indeed
    was only beginning, but I felt this seductive power more
    strongly than ever before. I knew that I could no longer
    resist. For the second time in my life I was again ready to
    desert my family, to give up my position, to break all
    bridges. I wanted to hurl myself uninhibitedly into this
    lustful inebriation with Eva. She was life, youth. Over again
    it cried out in me, again and again to drain the cup of lust
    and life until the last drop, until death and perdition. Let
    the Devil fetch me later on! I had indeed long ago done away
    with God and the Devil. They were for me only human
    inventions, which came to be utilized by a skeptical,
    unscrupulous minority, in order to suppress and exploit a
    believing, naive majority. I wanted to have nothing to do
    with this mendacious social moral. To enjoy, at all costs, I
    wished to enjoy et <i>après nous le deluge.</i> &quot;What
    is wife to me, what is child to me&#151;let them go begging,
    if they are hungry.&quot; I also perceived the institution of
    marriage as a social lie. The marriage of my parents and
    marriages of my acquaintances seemed to confirm that
    sufficiently for me. Couples remained together because it was
    more convenient; they were accustomed to it, and &quot;yes,
    if it weren't for the children . . .&quot; Under the pretense
    of a good marriage, each tormented the other emotionally, to
    the point of rashes and stomach ulcers, or each went his own
    way. Everything in me rebelled against the thought of having
    to love only one and the same woman a life long. I frankly
    perceived that as repugnant and unnatural. Thus stood my
    inner disposition on that portentous summer evening at the
    mountain lake. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; At seven o'clock in the evening both of us took
    a moderately strong dose of LSD, some 0.1 milligrams. Then we
    strolled along about the lake and then sat on the bank. We
    threw stones in the water and watched the forming wave
    circles. We felt a slight inner restlessness. Around eight
    o'clock we entered the hotel lounge and ordered tea and
    sandwiches. Some guests still sat there, telling jokes and
    laughing loudly. They winked at us. Their eyes sparkled
    strangely. We felt strange and distant and had the feeling
    that they would notice something in us. Outside it slowly
    became dark. We decided only reluctantly to go to our hotel
    room. A street without lights led along the black lake to the
    distant guest house. As I switched on the light, the granite
    staircase, leading from the shore road to the house, appeared
    to flame up from step to step. Eva quivered all at once,
    frightened. &quot;Hellish&quot; went through my mind, and all
    of a sudden horror passed through my limbs, and I knew: now
    it's going to turn out badly. From afar, from the village, a
    clock struck nine. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Scarcely were we in our room, when Eva threw
    herself on the bed and looked at me with wide eyes. It was
    not in the least possible to think of love. I sat down on the
    edge of the bed and held both of Eva's hands. Then came the
    terror. We sank into a deep, indescribable horror, which
    neither of us understood. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Look in my eyes, look at me,&quot; I
    implored Eva, yet again and again her gaze was averted from
    me, and then she cried out loud in terror and trembled all
    over her body. There was no way out. Outside was only gloomy
    night and the deep, black lake. In the public house all the
    lights were extinguished; the people had probably gone to
    sleep. What would they have said if they could see us now?
    Possibly they would summon the police, and then everything
    would become still much worse. A drug
    scandal&#151;intolerable agonizing thoughts. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; We could no longer move from the spot. We sat
    there surrounded by four wooden walls whose board joints
    shone infernally. It became more unbearable all the time.
    Suddenly the door was opened and &quot;something
    dreadful&quot; entered. Eva cried out wildly and hid herself
    under the bed covers. Once again a cry. The horror under the
    covers was yet worse. &quot;Look straight in my eyes!&quot; I
    called to her, but she rolled her eyes back and forth as
    though out of her mind. She is becoming insane, I realized.
    In desperation I seized her by the hair so that she could no
    longer turn her face away from me. I saw dreadful fear in her
    eyes. Everything around us was hostile and threatening, as if
    everything wanted to attack us in the next moment. You must
    protect Eva, you must bring her through until morning, then
    the effects will discontinue, I said to myself. Then again,
    however, I plunged into nameless horror. There was no more
    time or reason; it seemed as if this condition would never
    end. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The objects in the room were animated to
    caricatures; everything on all sides sneered scornfully. I
    saw Eva's yellow-black striped shoes, which I had found so
    stimulating, appearing as two large, evil wasps crawling on
    the floor. The water piping above the washbasin changed to a
    dragon head, whose eyes, the two water taps, observed me
    malevolently. My first name, George, came into my mind, and
    all at once I felt like Knight George, who must fight for
    Eva. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Eva's cries tore me from these thoughts. Bathed
    in perspiration and trembling, she fastened herself to me.
    &quot;I am thirsty,&quot; she moaned. With great effort,
    without releasing Eva's hand, I succeeded in getting a glass
    of water for her. But the water seemed slimy and viscous, was
    poisonous, and we could not quench our thirst with it. The
    two night-table lamps glowed with a strange brightness, in an
    infernal light. The clock struck twelve. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; This is hell, I thought. There is indeed no
    Devil and no demons, and yet they were perceptible in us,
    filled up the room, and tormented us with unimaginable
    terror. Imagination, or not? Hallucinations,
    projections?&#151;insignificant questions when confronted
    with the reality of fear that was fixed in our bodies and
    shook us: the fear alone, it existed. Some passages from
    Huxley's book <i>The Doors of Perception</i> came to me and
    brought me brief comfort. I looked at Eva, at this
    whimpering, horrified being in her torment, and felt great
    remorse and pity. She had become strange to me; I scarcely
    recognized her any longer. She wore a fine golden chain
    around her neck with the medallion of the Virgin Mary. It was
    a gift from her younger brother. I noticed how a benevolent,
    comforting radiation, which was connected with pure love,
    emanated from this necklace. But then the terror broke loose
    again, as if to our final destruction. I needed my whole
    strength to constrain Eva. Loudly I heard the electrical
    meter ticking weirdly outside of the door, as if it wanted to
    make a most important, evil, devastating announcement to me
    in the next moment. Disdain, derision, and malignity again
    whispered out of all nooks and crevices. There, in the midst
    of this agony, I perceived the ringing of cowbells from afar
    as a wonderful, promising music. Yet soon it became silent
    again, and renewed fear and dread once again set in. As a
    drowning man hopes for a rescuing plank, so I wished that the
    cows would yet again want to draw near the house. But
    everything remained quiet, and only the threatening tick and
    hum of the current meter buzzed round us like an invisible,
    malevolent insect. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Morning finally dawned. With great relief I
    noticed how the chinks in the window shutters lit up. Now I
    could leave Eva to herself; she had quieted down. Exhausted,
    she closed her eyes and fell asleep. Shocked and deeply sad,
    I still sat on the edge of the bed. Gone was my pride and
    self- assurance; all that remained of me was a small heap of
    misery. I examined myself in the mirror and started: I had
    become ten years older in the course of the night. Downcast,
    I stared at the light of the night-table lamp with the
    hideous shade of intertwined plastic cords. All at once the
    light seemed to become brighter, and in the plastic cords it
    began to sparkle and to twinkle; it glowed like diamonds and
    gems of all colors, and an overwhelming feeling of happiness
    welled up in me. All at once, lamp, room, and Eva
    disappeared, and I found myself in a wonderful, fantastic
    landscape. It was comparable to the interior of an immense
    Gothic church nave, with infinitely many columns and Gothic
    arches. These consisted, however, not of stone, but rather of
    crystal. Bluish, yellowish, milky, and clearly transparent
    crystal columns surrounded me like trees in an open forest.
    Their points and arches became lost in dizzying heights. A
    bright light appeared before my inner eye, and a wonderful,
    gentle voice spoke to me out of the light. I did not hear it
    with my external ear, but rather perceived it, as if it were
    clear thoughts that arise in one. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; I realized that in the horror of the passing
    night I had experienced my own individual condition:
    selfishness. My egotism had kept me separated from mankind
    and had led me to inner isolation. I had loved only myself,
    not my neighbor; loved only the gratification that the other
    offered me. The world had existed only for the satisfaction
    of my greed. I had become tough, cold, and cynical. Hell,
    therefore, had signified that: egotism and lovelessness.
    Therefore everything had seemed strange and unconnected to
    me, so scornful and threatening. Amid flowing tears, I was
    enlightened with the knowledge that true love means surrender
    of selfishness and that it is not desires but rather selfless
    love that forms the bridge to the heart of our fellow man.
    Waves of ineffable happiness flowed through my body. I had
    experienced the grace of God. But how could it be possible
    that it was radiating toward me, particularly out of this
    cheap lampshade? Then the inner voice answered: God is in
    everything. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The experience at the mountain lake has given
    me the certainty that beyond the ephemeral, material world
    there also exists an imperishable, spiritual reality, which
    is our true home. I am now on my way home. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; For Eva everything remained just a bad dream.
    We broke up a short time thereafter. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The following notes kept by a twenty-five-year-old
advertising agent are contained in The LSD Story by John Cashman
(Fawcett Publications, Greenwich, Conn., 1966). They were
included in this selection of LSD reports, along with the
preceding example, because the progression that they
describe&#151;from terrifying visions to extreme euphoria, a kind
of death-rebirth cycle&#151;is characteristic of many LSD
experiments.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>A Joyous Song of Being <i> </i></h4>

<blockquote>
    <p>My first experience with LSD came at the home of a close
    friend who served as my guide. The surroundings were
    comfortably familiar and relaxing. I took two ampuls (200
    micrograms) of LSD mixed in half a glass of distilled water.
    The experience lasted for close to eleven hours, from 8
    o'clock on a Saturday evening until very nearly 7 o'clock the
    next morning. I have no firm point of comparison, but I am
    positive that no saint ever saw more glorious or joyously
    beautiful visions or experienced a more blissful state of
    transcendence. My powers to convey the miracles are shabby
    and far too inadequate to the task at hand. A sketch, and an
    artless one at that, must suffice where only the hand of a
    great master working from a complete palette could do justice
    to the subject. I must apologize for my own limitations in
    this feeble attempt to reduce the most remarkable experience
    of my life to mere words. My superior smile at the fumbling,
    halting attempts of others in their attempts to explain the
    heavenly visions to me has been transformed into a knowing
    smile of a conspirator&#151;the common experience requires no
    words. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; My first thought after drinking the LSD was
    that it was having absolutely no effect. They had told me
    thirty minutes would produce the first sensation, a tingling
    of the skin. There was no tingling. I commented on this and
    was told to relax and wait. For the lack of anything else to
    do I stared at the dial light of the table radio, nodding my
    head to a jazz piece I did not recognize. I think it was
    several minutes before I realized that the light was changing
    color kaleidoscopically with the different pitch of the
    musical sounds, bright reds and yellows in the high register,
    deep purple in the low. I laughed. I had no idea when it had
    started. I simply knew it had. I closed my eyes, but the
    colored notes were still there. I was overcome by the
    remarkable brilliance of the colors. I tried to talk, to
    explain what I was seeing, the vibrant and luminous colors.
    Somehow it didn't seem important. With my eyes open, the
    radiant colors flooded the room, folding over on top of one
    another in rhythm with the music. Suddenly I was aware that
    the colors were the music. The discovery did not seem
    startling. Values, so cherished and guarded, were becoming
    unimportant. I wanted to talk about the colored music, but I
    couldn't. I was reduced to uttering one-syllable words while
    polysyllabic impressions tumbled through my mind with the
    speed of light. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The dimensions of the room were changing, now
    sliding into a fluttering diamond shape, then straining into
    an oval shape as if someone were pumping air into the room,
    expanding it to the bursting point. I was having trouble
    focusing on objects. They would melt into fuzzy masses of
    nothing or sail off into space, self-propelled, slow-motion
    trips that were of acute interest to me. I tried to check the
    time on my watch, but I was unable to focus on the hands. I
    thought of asking for the time, but the thought passed. I was
    too busy seeing and listening. The sounds were exhilarating,
    the sights remarkable. I was completely entranced. I have no
    idea how long this lasted. I do know the egg came next. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The egg, large, pulsating, and a luminous
    green, was there before I actually saw it. I sensed it was
    there. It hung suspended about halfway between where I sat
    and the far wall. I was intrigued by the beauty of the egg.
    At the same time I was afraid it would drop to the floor and
    break. I didn't want the egg to break. It seemed most
    important that the egg should not break. But even as I
    thought of this, the egg slowly dissolved and revealed a
    great multihued flower that was like no flower I have ever
    seen. Its incredibly exquisite petals opened on the room,
    spraying indescribable colors in every direction. I felt the
    colors and heard them as they played across my body, cool and
    warm, reedlike and tinkling. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The first tinge of apprehension came later when
    I saw the center of the flower slowly eating away at the
    petals, a black, shiny center that appeared to be formed by
    the backs of a thousand ants. It ate away the petals at an
    agonizingly slow pace. I wanted to scream for it to stop or
    to hurry up. I was pained by the gradual disappearance of the
    beautiful petals as if being swallowed by an insidious
    disease. Then in a flash of insight I realized to my horror
    that the black thing was actually devouring me. I was the
    flower and this foreign, creeping thing was eating me! <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; I shouted or screamed, I really don't remember.
    I was too full of fear and loathing. I heard my guide say:
    &quot;Easy now. Just go with it. Don't fight it. Go with
    it.&quot; I tried, but the hideous blackness caused such
    repulsion that I screamed: &quot;I can't! For God's sake help
    me! Help me!&quot; The voice was soothing, reassuring:
    &quot;Let it come. Everything is all right. Don't worry. Go
    with it. Don't fight.&quot; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; I felt myself dissolving into the terrifying
    apparition, my body melting in waves into the core of
    blackness, my mind stripped of ego and life and, yes even
    death. In one great crystal instant I realized that I was
    immortal. I asked the question: &quot;Am I dead?&quot; But
    the question had no meaning. Meaning was meaningless.
    Suddenly there was white light and the shimmering beauty of
    unity. There was light everywhere, white light with a clarity
    beyond description. I was dead and I was born and the
    exultation was pure and holy. My lungs were bursting with the
    joyful song of being. There was unity and life and the
    exquisite love that filled my being was unbounded. My
    awareness was acute and complete. I saw God and the devil and
    all the saints and I knew the truth. I felt myself flowing
    into the cosmos, levitated beyond all restraint, liberated to
    swim in the blissful radiance of the heavenly visions. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; I wanted to shout and sing of miraculous new
    life and sense and form, of the joyous beauty and the whole
    mad ecstasy of loveliness. I knew and understood all there is
    to know and understand. I was immortal, wise beyond wisdom,
    and capable of love, of all loves. Every atom of my body and
    soul had seen and felt God. The world was warmth and
    goodness. There was no time, no place, no me. There was only
    cosmic harmony. It was all there in the white light. With
    every fiber of my being I knew it was so. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; I embraced the enlightenment with complete
    abandonment. As the experience receded I longed to hold onto
    it and tenaciously fought against the encroachment of the
    realities of time and place. For me, the realities of our
    limited existence were no longer valid. I had seen the
    ultimate realities and there would be no others. As I was
    slowly transported back to the tyranny of clocks and
    schedules and petty hatreds, I tried to talk of my trip, my
    enlightenment, the horrors, the beauty, all of it. I must
    have been babbling like an idiot. My thoughts swirled at a
    fantastic rate, but the words couldn't keep pace. My guide
    smiled and told me he understood. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The preceding collection of reports on
&quot;travels in the universe of the soul,&quot; even though they
encompass such dissimilar experiences, are still not able to
establish a complete picture of the broad spectrum of all
possible reactions to LSD, which extends from the most sublime
spiritual, religious, and mystical experiences, down to gross
psychosomatic disturbances. Cases of LSD sessions have been
described in which the stimulation of fantasy and of visionary
experience, as expressed in the LSD reports assembled here, is
completely absent, and the experimenter was for the whole time in
a state of ghastly physical and mental discomfort, or even felt
severely ill. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Reports about the modification of sexual experience
under the influence of LSD are also contradictory. Since
stimulation of all sensory perception is an essential feature of
LSD effects, the sensual orgy of sexual intercourse can undergo
unimaginable enhancements. Cases have also been described,
however, in which LSD led not to the anticipated erotic paradise,
but rather to a purgatory or even to the hell of frightful
extinction of every perception and to a lifeless vacuum. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Such a variety and contradiction of reactions to a
drug is found only in LSD and the related hallucinogens. The
explanation for this lies in the complexity and variability of
the conscious and subconscious minds of people, which LSD is able
to penetrate and to bring to life as experienced reality. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a href="child6.html"><p>Chapter 6</a> <!--webbot
    bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
    tag="BODY" startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a>
    | <a href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
    href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
    <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
    href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
    href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="63531" --> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>