
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B030-212</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065316 text/html 26295
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:53:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:17 GMT
Content-length: 26076
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 5</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>5. The god of the East</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Toward the middle of the last century the poet
Charles Baudelaire became a member of the famed Club des
Haschischins in Paris. He was initiated into the mysteries of
hashish, one of the derivatives of psychedelic hemp, and he later
wrote of the drug in something less than glowing terms.
Baudelaire declared that the &quot;accursed sweetmeat&quot;
resulted in &quot;an appalling thing, the marriage of a man to
himself.&quot; It led to &quot;the individual's belief in his own
god-head.&quot; In short, it made a man feel he <i>was</i> God. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A similar objection to the psychedelic experience
was lodged more than a hundred years later by Professor R. C.
Zaehner of Oxford, an authority on Eastern religions and a Roman
Catholic. Zaehner set himself the task of replying to Huxley's
enthusiastic claims for mescaline, and to play fair the professor
took mescaline himself. &quot;I disliked the experience,&quot; he
reported, and what especially displeased him, as he put it, was
the fact of losing control of oneself. &quot;My conscious
resistance to the drug was, indeed, very strong.&quot; That was
not a very propitious set, as the cultists say, and as a
consequence no doubt Zaehner's experience was limited to a sort
of silly jag which often occurs in the early stages of a complete
experience. Everything seemed utterly ridiculous and totally
funny, and Zaehner laughed himself to tears. He described <i>The
Golden Bough</i> as one of the great comic classics, and he said
the trouble with Jung was &quot;he doesn't realize how dull his
collective unconscious is.&quot; Cultists believe this period of
cosmic laughter reflects a first dawning of the awareness that
words and normal perception patterns are both artificial and
inadequate. In any case, Zaehner never went beyond it, and even
in his most mirthful moments, he said, he managed to distinguish
between funny and sacred objects. Shown a reproduction of a
praying figure in a nativity scene by Piero della Francesca, he
remarked that this was &quot;a holy thing not to be looked at
when you're drugged.&quot; Later he evaluated the experience as
in a sense anti-religious&#151;not conformable with religious
experience or in the same category&#151; and he reported with
some pride that his normal religious consciousness &quot;was
never completely swamped.&quot; Zaehner's book, <i>Mysticism,
Sacred and Profane</i>, is so far the most authoritative attack
upon psychedelics from the viewpoint of orthodox religion, and in
it the professor denies the idea that drugs might give rise to a
genuine state of mystical consciousness. Zaehner concedes that
psychedelics might promote what he terms natural mysticism and
monistic mysticism, in which the subject feels a sense of union
either with nature or with some impersonal Absolute; but they do
not promote <i>Theistic mysticism</i>, in which the subject
encounters the transcendent, personal God of Judaism and
Christianity. That at least is Zaehner's opinion, to which he
adds: &quot;In the case of Huxley, as in that of the maniac, the
personality seems to be dissipated into the objective world,
while in the case of theistic mystics the human personality is
wholly absorbed into the Deity, who is felt and experienced as
being something totally distinct and other than the objective
world.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In Theistic mysticism, Zaehner explains, the
subject is conscious only of God and loses his awareness of all
other things. In Huxley's brand of mysticism, one identifies
himself with the external world&#151;to the apparent exclusion of
God. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From his own point of view, Zaehner may be right.
But there is reason to dispute even his basic premise&#151;that
psychedelic drugs cannot promote Theistic mysticism&#151;and his
statements in any case are somewhat confusing if not confused.
The Zaehner test for authenticity does not compare the
psychedelic experience to mysticism as such. It compares it to
Western mysticism. And that is just the point. There also is
Eastern mysticism, which is older even than Western mysticism,
and in fact it is just here that the drug movement offers its
second major challenge to orthodox theology. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Zaehner to the contrary, Westerners under the
influence of psychedelics very often have reported overwhelming
awareness of a transcendent God; on the other hand, they also
have reported the experience of alien concepts which frankly
astonished&#151;or even terrified&#151;them, and these by and
large have been the concepts of Eastern mysticism. Within the
drug movement, moreover, it seems fair to say that the tendency
has been toward the latter type of experience. There are
subjective factors which may help to account for this tendency,
and we shall discuss them later. But for the moment we can say
that psychedelic experience on the whole frequently appears to
validate Eastern ideas about God, man, and the universe. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This of course is a very broad statement and
possibly a very hazardous one; it assumes that it is possible to
speak of Eastern ideas as such, as if these constituted a
monolithic system of belief. The fact is otherwise, it scarcely
needs to be said, and in one sense it is just as misleading to
speak of Eastern religion as it is to speak of Western religion,
thus bedding down together the Unitarian, the Roman Catholic, and
the Seventh-day Adventist. It is not even proper to speak in
general terms of Hinduism as such, or Buddhism as such, or even
Hinyana Buddhism and Mahayana Buddhism as such. Each is a major
system which contains various levels of sophistication and paths
to the truth; in India, for example, you will find one Hindu
worshiping a whole pantheon of Gods (330 million, according to
one count, including the elephant-headed Gunputty), while another
Hindu contemplates a metaphysical abstraction: you will find one
Hindu who denies the world and another Hindu who is totally
involved in the world. As you delve into Eastern thought you
reach a level of interpretation which seems to correspond with at
least some elements in Western thought; at a still deeper level
it becomes almost impossible to say anything positive at all. But
we shall call attention to some of these finer points, and
meanwhile the fact remains that there is <i>something</i> the
Westerner refers to mentally when he uses that term, Eastern
ideas. Perhaps in what follows it might be more correct to say
that we are describing Eastern ideas as they are generally viewed
in the West, from a more or less superficial point of view, and
that for the most part (in this chapter) we are describing the
ideas of India rather than those of China or Japan: that is to
say, we are talking more about Hinduism than Buddhism, and a
rather rudimentary Hinduism at that. Within such a context, then,
riding roughshod over nuances, it might be said that psychedelic
experience is Eastern in so far as it appears to validate
immanence rather than transcendence, monism rather than
pluralism, reincarnation rather than resurrection, nirvana rather
than heaven, maya rather than hell, ignorance rather than evil,
liberation rather than salvation, and self-knowledge rather than
grace, redemption, or atonement. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As applied to the concept of God, transcendence
refers to a form of deity whose nature is wholly different from
man's. Theistic transcendence implies a wholly-other God who is
some sort of supreme Person, in the sense at least that he can
and does enter into a personal relationship with man. In strict
transcendence, God and man are no more the same person than a
master and his servant are the same person. In immanence, on the
other hand, men partake of God's nature; God dwells in men, and
they are in fact a part of God. The concept of immanence as such
is perfectly acceptable from the viewpoint of Western Theism, so
long as it does not deny altogether the element of transcendence.
Thus it is fine to say that in God we live and move and have our
being, in the orthodox interpretation of that phrase, just so we
do not develop some fancy notion that we <i>are</i> him. The
relationship in this case is crudely that of a father and son
perhaps, as opposed to that of a master and his servant. But in
pure immanence, or pantheism, God's nature and man's nature are
identical. God is just another word for mankind as a whole, or
the universe as a whole, or reality as a whole, or the life force
as a whole. In pantheism it is neither insanity nor heresy to
imagine you are God, because in fact you are God. Western
theology on the whole has tended to emphasize the transcendent
aspect of God&#151;certainly so at least in comparison to Eastern
theology, which has tended to emphasize the immanent aspect of
God. In Asia, moreover, the emphasis has been given to pure
immanence or pantheism, and God in any case is not conceived from
a Theistic viewpoint as in any sense a person or being who dwells
apart. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Consider next the doctrines of monism and
pluralism. Pluralism insists upon the integrity of the individual
soul, self, or ego. In monism, the individual personality has no
lasting reality. It is a passing phenomenon, illusory in nature,
and, in the end, all of the individual selves will be absorbed
again into the godhead: into the One, the Whole, the Absolute,
like drops of water in a termless sea. The godhead perhaps has
temporarily divided itself for some practical purpose, as the
hand is divided into five fingers; or more likely the godhead is
simply amusing itself, making all the world a stage on which it
acts out the various roles&#151;a method of killing eternity, as
it were. In Hinduism, this monistic Absolute is known variously
as Atman or Brahman, and all individual selves are but aspects of
Atman or the supreme Self. A Hindu holy man contemplates the
sacred syllable OM, emblematic of the Atman godhead, and he asks,
&quot;What is that?&quot; He is told, &quot;Thou art that.&quot;
Thus the wise Hindu is never jealous, for of whom should he be
jealous? He sees no other, hears no other, knows no other, for
what other is there to see, hear, or know? He hates no living
creature&#151;not even the tiger&#151;for he knows that all
creatures are simply food: are born from food, live upon food,
and then become food. As the hissing Hamadryad in <i>Mary Poppins</i>
put it: &quot;It may be that to eat and be eaten are the same
thing in the end.... Bird and beast and stone and star&#151;we
are all one, all one.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As cream in butter, as salt in the sea, Atman is in
everything and is everything. Atman is like a flame which assumes
the shape of each object it consumes. As the air in a jar is
nevertheless the same as the air outside the jar, although it
takes the shape of the jar, so the Self in every self is
nevertheless Atman. And the wise Hindu knows this. He knows that
he himself is the youth, the maiden, the old man bent upon his
staff, the dark butterfly, the green parrot with red eyes, the
thundercloud, seasons, and seas. Buddhists, in reverence, refuse
to limit reality even to a universal Self, and thus they never
speak of Atman. They speak instead of the Void or of the Clear
Light of the Void. But the Void is not a void in the Western
sense; the expression is a <i>via negativa</i> which seeks to
avoid the trap of language, because there are no words&#151;even
Atman&#151;to describe that which is beyond all words and beyond
all determinations. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But call it Atman or call it the Void,
enlightenment comes when the individual self realizes it has no
separate identity beyond this Absolute. Such liberating awareness
is referred to as <i>moksha</i> by Hindus and <i>satori</i> by
Zen Buddhists, and with it comes that perfect peace in which the
individual self achieves nirvana and is absorbed into the
Absolute. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the Theistic mysticism of the West, strictly
speaking the soul is not absorbed by the Absolute, or by God.
Rather, the soul and God retain their distinctive identities, and
their relationship is one of love. Love is the key word that
distinguishes Theistic mysticism from Eastern mysticism; it
implies a relationship between two separate entities, and it
therefore preserves both the transcendent nature of God and the
everlasting integrity of the individual human soul. The soul is
not sucked up by the Absolute as water is sucked up by a sponge;
the soul relates to the godhead in an act of love, and the soul
in fact may be referred to, in this relationship, as the Bride of
Christ. As Buber expressed it in terms of his I-Thou
relationship, I-Thou necessarily implies both an I and a Thou; I
is not Thou and Thou is not I, but I and Thou are united in love:
hence the significance of that hyphen. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the Asian doctrine of absorption, of course, the
achievement of nirvana can mean different things, depending upon
the interpretation. It can mean an actual release from the world,
physically and psychically, or simply a new state of
consciousness in which one is no longer deceived by his intellect
and therefore views the world as it actually is, beyond language
and appearances. But nirvana commonly has been associated with
the former interpretation, and this leads directly to the Asian
concept of reincarnation&#151;as opposed to resurrection.
Resurrection was an Egyptian idea; it supposes that man has but
one life upon the earth and thus only one chance to win his just
and lasting reward, whatever that might be. On the judgment day
of Western theology, the soul will be reunited with its body to
find eternal life in a pluralistic heaven. Saint Thomas among
others found it necessary to insist upon resurrection; with his
rejection of dualistic idealism, it seemed the only way to
provide for the personal immortality of the individual soul, and
this point was the main basis for Thomas' famous quarrel with
Averroism. Averroes had denied the possibility of personal
immortality and had proposed instead the theory of monopsychism:
the idea that mankind as a whole has a single mind in which all
individuals participate. It is said that Thomas considered
personal immortality the most important issue of the thirteenth
century; he defended it vigorously, and Averroism was
anathematized by the bishop of Paris in 1270. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But resurrection and the permanence of the
individual soul also are denied by the East. In the alternative
doctrine of reincarnation, the separate self does not really
exist, and it is only the realization of this fact which permits
the achievement of nirvana. But realization is difficult&#151;far
more difficult than good works or avoiding sin. So a man is given
not one life in which to achieve it, but many lives. The soul
passes from body to body in a cycle of death and rebirth, as a
leech proceeds from one blade of grass to the next, and each life
offers a fresh opportunity to make the great discovery in which
one recognizes at last the nature of the Grand Illusion. With the
discovery comes the death of the individual personality, which
never was, and absorption into the monistic Absolute or the
everlasting peace of nirvana. This doctrine also has been
interpreted symbolically as a poetic expression of the many
stages that one man passes through in one lifetime, just as
nirvana has been interpreted to mean a state of awareness rather
than literal absorption into nirvana which leaves the earth
behind. But the goal in any case bears no similarity to the
phenomenal heaven of the West. State of mind or state of Being,
it is not a place, and the individual personality is not an
aspect of it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the same sense, there is no Eastern equivalent
to the Western hell. If there is a hell, it is the world itself,
or at least the deceiving world of appearances&#151;the
phenomenal illusion which is known as <i>maya</i> or <i>sangsara</i>.
A man lives in hell when he fails to recognize reality. He lives
in hell when he denies his own true nature and is therefore
tormented by lust and desire. It is his mistaken sense of
individuality which causes all of his pleasure and all of his
pain, and there is far more pain than pleasure. He is a victim of
dualism, hopelessly enmeshed in <i>meum et thrum</i>. Because he
imagines that there is an other, he envies or desires the other.
Because he imagines that his little self is his real Self, he
weeps at the thought of his own mortality &#151;for he knows full
well that the little self is finite and that one day it must
perish forever. But with enlightenment comes peace, serenity, and
release from this hell. The wise man knows that there is no
other, so he does not envy or desire the other; he is free from
craving. The wise man knows that there is no little self, so he
does not weep for his own mortality; he knows that there is only
Atman or the Void, there is only the One, and he is that One, and
therefore he is in fact immortal and can never perish. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It also follows, from the Eastern viewpoint, that
evil deeds are a product of ignorance. Evil in the Western sense
is just one more example of dualistic perception. It suggests
there is a very real, if negative, force which causes man to sin
against the light. But ask the Western moralist what would happen
if a potential murderer were somehow spirited away to a tropical
island and left there alone. This would-be killer would have
nobody to kill, and so of course he would not kill anybody. On
judgment day, shall he be judged a murderer or not? The problem
is easily resolved in the East, where all men in a manner of
speaking are stranded upon that island. It is impossible to kill
anybody else, because nowhere in the universe is there anybody
else. There is no other, except as imagined. In doing harm to
what he supposes is another person, therefore, a man does harm
only to himself. Homicide is impossible; there can only be
partial suicides. And so it is, according to the doctrine of <i>maya</i>,
that men do wrong through ignorance. They sin against others, and
thereby against themselves, because they are deluded as to their
true nature&#151;because they fail to understand that they and
their fellows are but elements of a monistic whole. Thus
knowledge is the path to righteousness, and he who has knowledge
will never sin. Thus the goal of wisdom is liberation from <i>maya</i>.
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It follows that Eastern liberation is not the same
as Western salvation. The Westerner must work for his own
salvation, but ultimately it comes to him only through the love
and mercy of God. In an act of grace, the transcendent deity may
bestow his gifts upon some erring soul. For Christians, man's
redemption was secured by the sacrifice on the cross, a direct
intervention of the supernatural power on behalf of mankind. But
in the East there is no supernatural power to intervene. There is
no forgiveness, for there is no God who is able to forgive. The
burden of liberation falls entirely upon the individual, who must
lift that burden himself; he cannot pray that it be lifted from
him. He must strive for liberation through self-knowledge, and in
doing so he is helped or hindered by his karma&#151;the sum total
of a man's thoughts and actions during his lifetime or his
lifetimes. He will be helped if it is good karma, hindered if it
is bad karma. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Bad karma might seem at first to correspond with
Western guilt, but it does not really. Guilt implies that sinful
action is provoked by the active powers of darkness&#151;by the
force called evil&#151;and that free-willed man has perversely
chosen darkness over light. A clear-cut choice and the freedom to
choose are basic assumptions in the doctrine of guilt,-and the
whole idea is foreign to Eastern thinking. There may be a choice,
but there is nothing clear-cut about it. It is obscured by maya,
which prevents a man from seeing it. If he could see it, there is
no question what his action would be; he would do the right thing
without a moment's hesitation, because the right thing is simply
the logical thing: it is the selfish, or if you will the Selfish,
course to follow. Bad karma arises from ignorance, not
perversity. It has been equated with cause-and-effect and with
heredity. One remains a prisoner in the Net of Illusion because
one has not been thinking the right thoughts&#151;has not gained
the proper knowledge, in other words&#151;and heredity is another
way of saying that karma follows you from one generation to the
next, or from one reincarnation to the next. Evangelists such as
Billy Graham have complained bitterly that people no longer
believe in guilt, and Saint Augustine in his time felt called
upon to condemn a similar trend. In the latter case, the false
prophet was the astrologer, who suggested that a man's faults lay
in his stars, while the tempter's voice today belongs to Freud.
And perhaps America at least is moving toward an Eastern view of
sin. It has been said that an American takes delight in his
analysis, talks about it freely, and has a penchant even to boast
about it, while a European is still ashamed of his libido and
would not dream of discussing it in public. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But the world as illusion does not sit very well
with traditional American concepts, and some would view this idea
as a greater threat to our values than pantheism, monism, or any
of the other Eastern isms. It seems to assert that life itself is
a curse, and indeed the Hindu speaks of life as a terrible wheel
of death and rebirth; reincarnation in his eyes is a curse, and a
new birth is something to be avoided at any cost. This might be
taken as a direct challenge to the Christian doctrine that being
as being is good <i>(esse qua esse bottom est),</i> and, as
mentioned, some elements within the drug movement seem to have
found it an attractive idea. Moreover, it could be argued that
modern physics supports the basic proposition with its formula
that energy equals mass times the velocity of light squared
(E=MC2)&#151;suggesting that matter after all is not the solid,
substantial stuff we had supposed it to be. Nor is this just
another idea of some woolly-headed philosopher; it is an idea
that blew up Hiroshima and Nagasaki. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; These various ideas represent the religious
tradition of half the world. Insofar as it confirms them,
therefore, the psychedelic experience cannot be dismissed as
non-religious on the grounds laid down by Zaehner and Baudelaire,
who really meant that it is non-Western. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It seems fair to say, moreover, that most drug
cultists <i>do</i> interpret the LSD experience as a confirmation
of Eastern metaphysics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Timothy Leary, the high priest of LSD, has often
appeared a bit vague on this point in his public statements.
While he expresses himself for the most part in Hindu and
Buddhist terminology, he tends to speak of the experience simply
as &quot;religious&quot; in nature&#151;suggesting that the
religions of the East and West are fundamentally the same.
Shortly after he founded his League for Spiritual Discovery,
however, I asked Leary if there are not in fact certain basic
differences between the Eastern and Western views. He agreed that
there certainly are. I then asked him whether he thought LSD
experience supports the pantheistic Eastern God or the
transcendent Western God. And he told me there is no question
about it&#151;the experience supports the Eastern God, not the
Western. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Even so, is it necessary to regard Eastern thinking
merely as threat and challenge? As we have already indicated,
many of the Eastern concepts are subject to different levels of
interpretation&#151;and some of them at least, at certain levels,
may be entirely compatible with Western trends of thought.
Furthermore, we might demonstrate that these Eastern ideas are
not so foreign to the West as they may seem. </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden6.htm">Chapter 6</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>