
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B032-49</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065554 text/html 25647
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:55:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:45 GMT
Content-length: 25428
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 13</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>13. OM or Omega?</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There may often be good reasons for bad laws. The
sexual act, for example, is condoned only if the partners
involved are a male and a female who are married (to each other),
and any deviation from that pattern is proscribed as sinful and
evil. It is difficult to believe, however, that there is anything
intrinsically wicked in the performance of a mechanical act
engaged in by consenting partners. Young people especially are
more and more inclined to ask, &quot;Why not?&quot; And the
reasons offered are not very convincing. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But the reasons offered may not be the real
reasons. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Human society is founded pragmatically on the
family unit, and it has therefore been necessary to encourage
matrimony and to challenge at once any conduct or philosophy
which appears to threaten the stability of that institution. Thus
the marriage relationship is represented as the only legitimate
source of sexual gratification, and thus also the myth is
promulgated that sex outside the marriage bed is a personal sin
against your body and soul&#151;a violation of heavenly law. But
the law is man-made, not celestial, and the sin in fact may be
real enough&#151;but it is social, not personal. It is a sin
against the social structure and therefore a sin against the
common good. Such an idea of course is hard to convey, and
society (or life) has relied instead upon a necessary fiction.
There are many today who recognize the fiction and who seek to
destroy it; but they fail to recognize the reason for the
fiction, or the purpose it has served, or the problems involved
in replacing it. Their efforts therefore are met with a blind and
instinctive resistance, which they assess as mere prudishness.
But it is more than prudishness; it is life trying to protect
itself, as best it can, in the only way it knows how. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the same sense, perhaps, there would appear to
be an instinctive reaction against the drug movement's monistic
pronouncements&#151;as also its quietistic emphasis upon the pure
experience of the here-now present moment. Assuming that life (or
society) has some dumb understanding of its own welfare, or its
own destiny, we might inquire into the source of this reaction. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As for monism, an analogy could be made to the
human body and the cells which compose it. The body is a monistic
whole in which the cells all partake, although the cells can have
no notion of that fact: each is assigned its specialized
function, thus enabling the body to go about its business. What
would happen, then, if these dutiful cells or selves should
somehow gain awareness of the greater Self in which they
participate? What would happen if they ceased their functioning
to con template the body? Most likely, the body would not like
that very much and would order the cells to stop it at once. For
the greater Self has its greater business to attend to. If the
hand indeed is divided into five fingers, the better to do its
work, this clearly implies, does it not, that there is work to be
done? And it cannot be done if the fingers are curled inward in a
self-admiring fist. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A similar interpretation is possible in the case of
&quot;presentness.&quot; As we have seen, a here-now rejection of
the intellect's perception is a rejection in essence of the past
and the future&#151;especially the future&#151;and this brings us
again to another East-West dichotomy which seems at least to be
basic in nature. It is said that the orthodox East looks backward
to a primordial totality (and in this sense perhaps it
acknowledges the past, but not in the sense of using the past to
predict future action). The demythologized East does not look
backward; but neither does it look forward: it is concerned alone
with the here-now present moment. This is another way of saying
that it accepts the status quo. The West on the other hand looks
both backward and forward&#151;but especially forward. It looks
to the future. And it does so with the implication that there is
unfinished business to be conducted there; otherwise its constant
peering into the future is a matter simply of perceptual
deception, as charged. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <i>Thus the myth of the Demiurge comes into
conflict with the myth of Ulysses.</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Ulysses myth is a Western myth. It does not
accept the status quo of the present moment but suggests instead
that life is evolving. This process in turn points toward a
future purpose, and acceptance of the present moment would defeat
that purpose. Darwin of course showed that life is constantly
transforming itself&#151;changing its forms, in the manner of
Proteus&#151;but he failed to show that it is truly evolving in
the sense of having a definite direction, purpose, and goal.
Others in the West, however, have said that life is evolving in
precisely this sense. Hegel has said it, Nietzsche has said it,
Bergson has said it, Altizer has said it, Maslow has said
it&#151;and Teilhard de Chardin has said it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Hegel depicted the universe as an absolute Mind
which is seeking to fulfill itself and know itself. Nietzsche
proclaimed the Overman and the will to power; man is but a
bridge, he said, and life is that which must ever surpass itself.
Bergson spoke of a vital force which advances, creatively, toward
a distant future end which cannot be predicted because it is not
predetermined. Altizer asserted that God himself is evolving,
from transcendence to immanence, and he specifically rejected
&quot;the backward movement of Oriental mysticism.&quot; He
rejected the orthodox Eastern view of a &quot;lost paradise&quot;
we can only regain through &quot;a reversal of the cosmos.&quot;
&quot;Above all,&quot; said Altizer, &quot;a reborn and radical
Christian faith must renounce every temptation to return to an
original or primordial sacred, or to follow a backward path
leading to an earlier and presumably purer form of the
Word.&quot; In the same context, Maslow has distinguished between
Being and Becoming; between a &quot;high Nirvana&quot; and
&quot;low Nirvana&quot;; between the &quot;the Heaven ahead&quot;
(of growth) and &quot;the Heaven behind&quot; (of regression).
Nowhere in recent times, however, has the concept of a
goal-directed cosmos been given richer expression than is found
in the metaphysical system of the scientist-priest Teilhard, who
developed a profoundly unorthodox theory of universal evolution. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Teilhard, a Jesuit, had been forbidden to publish
that theory during his lifetime; but his views have attracted
widespread attention since his death in 1955, and respect for his
system has continued to grow both inside and outside the Roman
Catholic Church. For many of the faithful, with the passage of
time, Teilhard's ideas have appeared to be more and more profound
and less and less unorthodox&#151;which is hardly surprising, for
they represent in fact an attempted reconciliation of scientific
knowledge and religious tradition. It is difficult to say whether
Teilhard was a mystical scientist or a scientific mystic, but he
is worth listening to in either case. He speaks to the
contemporary situation. And what is more, he addresses himself
directly to the issues raised by psychedelic quietism. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Teilhard proposed, to start, that evolution is not
just willy-nilly Darwinian transformism. It has a definite
direction. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the beginning, in the primordial chaos, the
individual particles of unorganized matter contained certain
elementary &quot;liberties,&quot; but matter by and large was
subject to the laws of chance and statistical determinism. After
a time, however, the particles began to organize&#151;first in
simple forms, then in complex forms. As eons passed, the forms
became increasingly complex. And this complexity resulted at last
in a new phenomenon: it resulted in consciousness. For
consciousness is a product of complexity. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At first there was a primitive animal
consciousness. Then, further complexification produced the human
brain&#151;and rational consciousness. For the first time,
evolution became aware of itself. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This, then, is evolution's direction: toward
increasing complexity and (as a result) increasing consciousness.
Thus, by tracing the pattern of <i>psychical</i> rather than <i>physical</i>
development, Teilhard laid the basis for a neo-anthropocentricity
which restores man to the center of things as the most complex
and conscious creation. Man is not just a speck lost in a remote
corner of infinite space. If the universe is a super-organism
which is in the process now of realizing itself, then man is the
&quot;head&quot; of that organism. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But evolution did not stop with the emergence of
the human brain. From that point on, complexification continued
in the form of <i>social</i> <i>organization</i> and human
technology. Teilhard saw no reason to distinguish these from
&quot;natural&quot; (biological) evolution; for there is nothing
unnatural in nature, and the wireless is simply an extension of
the evolving human mind. The computer and the space probe are
similar extensions, Teilhard would have insisted, had he lived to
see their era, for what do they represent if not an enlargement
of our total awareness? By the same logic, government at all
levels is an expansion of overall consciousness, through
complexification, which allows us to deal with an ever wider area
of concern, and the United Nations may be the harbinger of a
global mind with global awareness. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As we saw in an earlier chapter, Teilhard held that
this process is directed from within by an indwelling Christ who
took charge of evolution by partially inserting himself into
matter. Teilhard stated further that the process will lead
eventually to a final state of super-organization and
super-awareness he referred to as the Omega point. At this stage,
in a hyper-centration of cosmic matter, mankind will reflect upon
itself at a single point&#151;and will leave the earth behind to
become pure spirit. Mankind will abandon this world to rejoin the
godhead&#151;not by space ship, but spiritually and inwardly. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Ideally, this should happen. But, said Teilhard,
there is no predestined guarantee that this will happen. The
Omega point must be attained by conscious effort. And already
there are ominous portents. Even now, &quot;a whirlpool is
beginning to appear ahead of us, in the stream that carries us
along.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In a magnificent construction, Teilhard divided the
human race into two camps, the pessimists and the optimists, and
the latter camp he divided into buddhists, pluralists, and
monists. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Man must choose his evolutionary path, said
Teilhard. And each of these divisions represents a potential
choice or possible path. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 1. The first choice is pessimism or optimism. The
question in this case is fundamental, and it is simply Hamlet's
question asked on a grand scale. To Be or not to Be? That is the
question the whole universe must ask itself. Does it make any
sense to exist, or would it be better perhaps if there was no
life at all? In the early stages of evolution, the universe
instinctively chooses life over non-life and Being over
non-Being; it instinctively chooses to Be. But what happens when
life becomes conscious and therefore aware of itself? Is it not
possible that Being will reject its own existence, seeing no
point to it all, and that thinking men will go on strike against
an evolutionary course which seems to have no real meaning and no
final purpose? Even now the world has split into two opposing
factions, and those in one faction say that life is not
worthwhile. Why bother, then, to go any further? These are the
pessimists; let us leave them behind. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 2. That leaves the optimists, and they must choose
between the optimism of withdrawal and the optimism of evolution.
The optimists of withdrawal are the buddhists, who wish to quit
the world at once; they acknowledge that Being as Being is good,
but they deny that the awareness of true Being can be found in
the forward-looking world of appearances. There is nowhere to go,
they say. We are already there. The idea of a goal ahead is
delusional, they say, and we need only to realize this; the
solution, it follows, is to &quot;break away from the
evolutionary determinism, break the spell, withdraw.&quot; Let
them cut the threads, then, and let them retire to their
future-denying nirvana. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 3. That leaves the optimists of evolution:
&quot;the believers in some ultimate value in the tangible
evolution of things.&quot; They are faithful to the future,
&quot;faithful to Earth.&quot; But they too have a decision to
make, and their choice is between pluralism and monism. The
pluralists are concerned primarily with their personal freedom
and individual uniqueness, &quot;in opposition to others.&quot;
For the monists, &quot;nothing exists or finally matters except
the Whole.&quot; Which shall it be? &quot;This,&quot; said
Teilhard, &quot;is the ultimate choice, by way of which Mankind
must finally be divided, knowing its own mind.&quot; And
Teilhard, for his part, chose monism. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Only in union, said Teilhard, can man ever hope to
achieve his final destiny, and a separatist individualism is
ultimately self-destructive: &quot;the element burns up all its
future in a flying spark.&quot; Let us plunge forward into
monism, &quot;even though something in us perish.&quot; For it is
written that he who loses his soul shall save it&#151;and in true
associations, as opposed to collective heaps, the combination of
separate elements does not eliminate their differences. It exalts
them. As in the specialized cells of the body, &quot;true union
differentiates.&quot; This is true even in the case of the
anthill or beehive&#151;the palace of honey&#151;where
specialization is based upon such biological functions as
nutrition and reproduction. How much truer it must be, then, in
the case of a <i>spiritual</i> association in which individual
personalities will conspire together to create &quot;a common
consciousness.&quot; In such a union &quot;each element achieves
completeness, not directly in a separate consummation, but by
incorporation in a higher pole of consciousness in which alone it
can enter into contact with all others.&quot; Tillich was
expressing the same thought when he denied that union with the
Ground of Being means a loss of self in a larger whole. &quot;If
the self participates in the power of being-itself,&quot; said
Tillich, &quot;it receives itself back. For the power of being
acts through the power of the individual selves. It does not
swallow them as every limited whole, every collectivism, and
every conformism does.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Teilhard died before psychedelic quietism became an
issue, but his second set of alternatives&#151;withdrawal or
evolution&#151; goes nevertheless to the heart of that issue. And
Teilhard has not left us to wonder which of the two alternatives
he would recommend as the proper and logical choice. This is
implicit, he said, in the fact that life up to now has followed
&quot;a precise line of direction.&quot; There has been an
unmistakable progression toward an increase of consciousness and
a greater awareness. What we must do, therefore, is select that
path which points ahead in the same direction&#151;&quot;the one
which seems best able to develop and preserve in us the highest
degree of consciousness.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It might be argued that the meta-experience
represents an advanced level of consciousness, as opposed to a
regression, and it is possible even to interpret Eastern doctrine
as evolutionary. There is, for example, the concept of &quot;the
days and nights of Brahma,&quot; contained in the Hindu holy
book, the <i>Bhagavad-Gita</i>. This suggests the image mentioned
earlier of a games-playing God who acts out the cosmic drama for
his own amusement, pretending to be Many when actually he is One.
The drama continues for a thousand ages&#151;until the
Self-deception is at last revealed, and the One once more is
aware of his Oneness. Whereupon the whole cycle is repeated,
forever and ever. There is some support for this idea in the
modern astrophysical theory of an &quot;oscillating&quot;
universe, which holds that all of the galaxies comprising the
universe were once contained in a primordial atom of incredible
density. At some point in the past this atom exploded, sending
all the raw material of the universe flying out into
space&#151;the galaxies evolving with the passage of time. There
is considerable evidence that this so-called expansion of the
universe is still going on&#151;in fact there seems little doubt
of it&#151;but recent observations indicate that the outward
flight of the galaxies will one day slow to a stop, and the
universe will then contract again into a new primordial atom.
Indeed, the process may have occurred countless times already
since the dawn of creation. Or so we are told. The theory is
based, I believe, on the estimated force of the original impetus
and the estimated amount of stellar material. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; No doubt science has weighed and measured the
universe very accurately and thus can predict what it will do
some billions of years from now. But it might be easier to accept
the idea of oscillation as final if science were just a trifle
more accurate in predicting tomorrow's weather in Omaha. Will it
rain there or won't it? However that may be, we have already seen
the danger of marrying physics to metaphysics (in connection with
free will), and it is doubtful in any case that Eastern evolution
is anything like Western evolution. The Eastern future is not a
creative future, in the Western sense, but rather an eternal
repetition of the past. This does not mean the East is wrong and
the West is right, but it does mean there is an essential
difference in their assertions on this point. The Western future
is clearly denied both by Eastern metaphysics and by psychedelic
quietism. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Shall we rest on our oars? Are we already there? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Addressing himself to the buddhists among us,
Teilhard agreed that the concept of an ultimate withdrawal from
the phenomenal rat race &quot;fits in very well with the <i>final</i>
demands of a world of evolutionary structure.&quot; But he made
one proviso: &quot;that the world in question shall have reached
a stage of development so advanced that its 'soul' can be
detached without losing any of its completeness, as something
wholly formed.&quot; And to this he added: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>But have we any reason to suppose that human consciousness
    <i>today</i> has achieved so high a degree of richness and
    perfection that it can derive nothing more from the sap of
    the earth? Again we may turn to history for an answer. Let us
    suppose, for example, that the strivings and the progress of
    civilization had come to an end at the time of Buddha, or in
    the first centuries of the Christian era. Can we believe that
    nothing essential, of vision and action and love, would have
    been lost to the Spirit of Earth? Clearly we cannot. And this
    simple observation alone suffices to guide our decision. So
    long as a fruit continues to grow and ripen we refrain from
    picking it. In the same way, so long as the world around us
    continues, even in suffering and disorder, to yield a harvest
    of problems, ideas and new forces, it is a sign that we must
    continue to press forward in the conquest of matter. Any
    immediate withdrawal . . . would certainly be premature. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; He also said, elsewhere: &quot;God creates and
shapes us through the process of evolution.... God awaits us when
the evolutionary process is complete; to rise above the world,
therefore, does not mean to despise or reject it, but to pass
through it and sublime it.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Teilhard may or may not have demonstrated that
evolution has a goal or a purpose. It is possible, however, that
he did show evolution to have at least a direction, and that
alone would be no small gift in this age of uncertainty. Given a
sense of direction, if nothing else, there are many perhaps who
would be willing, in an act of faith, to accept the idea of an
unguessed future purpose. And after all, at this stage in our
development, who has the wisdom to deny that possibility? Is
anyone so all-knowing, when all of us together would seem to know
so little? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If we are estranged from one level of reality and
locked in a world of action, it may be that we are estranged for
a reason&#151;and a reason, moreover, which we cannot yet
foresee. If there is a Whole which is seeking to know itself, it
may be that the Whole aspires to a more perfect knowledge of its
parts as well as its Oneness&#151;that the Whole demands of us
that we first conquer the earth, moon, and stars before we turn
inward. If there is a deeper level of reality, revealed by
psychedelics, there could well be another level still deeper than
that. Anything and everything is possible, and nothing as yet is
impossible. This is not to say that the psychedelic insight is
not true; we are merely suggesting that it may not be the whole
truth. If a little learning is a dangerous thing, there is danger
indeed in any total commitment to a partial understanding, and
some of the drug cultists might at least be a little less
cavalier in their decision to reverse the apparent direction of
the universal tides. Perhaps some knowledge comes to us too soon,
before we know how to use it or what to make of it, as was
certainly true with the atom. But it is too late for regrets, in
the case of the atom or the case now at hand. A decision of some
sort must obviously be made, and it is essentially a very simple
decision&#151;though by no means an easy one. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Backward to OM? Or forward to Omega? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Shall we accept the myth of the Demiurge, which
suggests that our salvation lies in the simple acceptance of the
here-now present moment&#151;concealed by the intellect? Or shall
we accept the myth of Ulysses, which suggests that life is a
process of evolutionary growth toward some distant future goal we
cannot as yet perceive? These are the central questions posed at
this time by the mystical, peak, and LSD experiences. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Teilhard felt that mankind as a whole has reached
its decision and has chosen its path. If that choice in fact has
been made, as he supposed, then it is much easier to understand
society's angry and dogmatic reaction to those uncompromising
individuals who insist that the meta-experience points toward a
total withdrawal and nowhere else. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When Ulysses found his men feeding upon the flowery
food, in the land of the lotus eaters, he did not pause for
thought. He asked them no questions, and he offered them no
arguments. He laid hold of the men, and he led them, weeping and
sore against their will, back to the swift ships. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; He knew where he was going. He was going to Ithaca.
</p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="bradenp.htm">Postscript</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>