
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B027-363</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/demon1883.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095656 text/html 8962
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:43 GMT
Content-length: 8747
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Demon of the Orient - 1883</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">The Demon of the Orient </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Allen S. Williams New York: </font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;Published by the Author,&quot; 1883</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Chapter IV. An American's Palace Joint</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The fact of an American deliberately investing
his money in the business of propagating a body-killing,
soul-destroying vice like this one of opium smoking is sufficient
to evoke a feeling of disgust, and should call down the strongest
condemnation from principled individuals, as it will shortly do
in all probability from the courts of justice.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The pioneer in this business was Frederick D.
Hughes. He began joint keeping on a large scale in apartments
adjoining the Cremorne Garden on West Thirty-second street, he
being the principal of the firm who carried on the disreputable
business of the former resort. He is a devoted yachtsman, having
preference for catamarans, and of those craft he has owned and
sailed the swiftest of the swift. Among the fiends he is
considered a good fellow. To the entrance to his joint a short
flight of stone steps led; there was an inner-glazed door and a
long hall. The smoking-room was entered from the rear; it was an
extensive apartment, presenting a rich and gorgeous interior to
eyes accustomed to the gloomy dens of Chinatown. The walls were
covered with heavy gilt and brown paper, with tasteful dado and
frieze. At either end of the room were rich mural hangings
falling from the ceiling, and from the window cornices hung
handsome lambrequins and heavy curtains. Two brazen chandeliers
were provided with globes of colored glass, which softened the
dimly-burning lights, and rested the visual organs of the
smokers, while it enhanced the aesthetic beauty of their
surroundings. Costly imported carpets covered the oiled floor;
they gently sank beneath the feet but returned no sound.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">At the northern end of the room was a
fireplace, beneath a carven, colored mantel. In the long Winter
nights there glowed an anthracite coal fire, and the fuel slowly
consuming seemed a not inapt simile to the physical and mental
organizations of the smokers. They seemed to have no such
gruesome reflections, but contented lay and gazed into its fiery
recesses and imagined them to be unearthly grottoes, and conjured
up a host of jolly salamanders to people them.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Reaching the length of the room on either side,
and separated by a broad isle, were platforms about three feet in
height. These were strewn with soft, warm and yielding Smyrna
rugs. Circular inflated rubber pillows were used for the head
instead of the barbarous neck-stiffening stools of Chinese
origin.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In this place can, at the present writing, be
found from ten to thirty habitues of a night. There lie they
throughout the long dream-night of enervating intoxication. To
the neophyte the toned softness of the light, the graceful
abandon of the forms, negligent and lapped in lazy luxury upon
their Oriental couches, the silent footsteps of the attendants as
they move to and fro in the misty air, the dulcet and beautifully
modulated tones in which the fiends murmur, all creep upon the
mind like a vision from another world, and the imagination,
reeking with the seductive fumes, yields itself up helplessly to
the beatitude of the hour.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Apparently no vicious impulse, no harsh
thought, no remorseful recollection, disturbs the perfect harmony
of the surroundings; and the after memory of the Circean
enthrallment of Emotion and Reason appalls the senses at the
terrible fascination of the gulf upon whose brink the opium
smoker stands.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Occasionally throughout the night demands are
made for beverages either harmless or intoxicating. Seltzer
lemonade appears to be a favorite with the smokers at Cremorne,
but that does not preclude their indulgence in vinous spirituous
or malt liquors.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The smoking habit is claimed by its infatuated
serfs to nullify the &quot;curse o'rum.&quot; If they have no
desire for it they drink it just the same, perhaps through pure
&quot;cussedness.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The joint is kept open all night and a good
part of the day. Some of the most vicious fiends stay there from
the opening to the closing hour, and at the last feel indisposed
to leave. As is well-known, it is characteristic of the habit to
hate exertion of any kind.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">To one under the god Opien's influence time is
nil. So long as his money holds out, he will &quot;hang
out.&quot; This joint used to be kept open all the time, but its
proprietor now has the consideration to close up long enough
occasionally to sweep out and ventilate his palace.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">As the proprietor has truly said all classes
have patronized his place; when he first opened, he was,
according to his own statement, overrun with Wall street brokers,
who, he says, are always after a new sensation. He once said to
an inquiring visitor in whom he had confidence: </font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;You would be astonished if I should name
over some of the people of both sexes who patronize my place. I
have private rooms upstairs for the high toned ones, so that they
can come and go without seeing anyone but the cooks and the man
at the door.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It was the night of my debut in this palace,
out from which the Chinese were barred, and all there were
&quot;sovereigns in their own right&quot;--being
Americans--although their pretense of ruling themselves was a
shallow and pitiable mockery. I had not smoked enough to arrive
at that blissful state which cold Northern English cannot
express; which warm Southern Italian comes nearer to describing
with its dolce far niente, but which the kief of the Orientals
comprehensively and tersely tells. It is a perfect ease of body,
brain, and conscience, a carelessness for what may come. The
subject knows not fear, and wants nothing. I had not reached this
paradise, purchasable far from fifty cents to a dollar, however,
and lazily reclined gazing at the proprietor, who was an
entertaining and companionable host.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">He did not look half a bad fellow, and I
reflected that he must be a lover of nature, like all Corinthian
sailors; by an easily followed step of thought the host's
personality gave place to Henry D. Thoreau's. My pleasant
reflections upon the simple life of the hermit of Walden Pond,
who was among nature's most ardent lovers, were rudely
interrupted by the host's voice uttering with a laugh, the
following sentiment: &quot;Well, if I have got to send souls to
hell, I am going to send lots of them.&quot; And the fiends
laughed too. </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>