
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-45</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B047-235</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1h.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022736 text/html 90475
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:27:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:52 GMT
Content-length: 90257
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis
Users</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users </h1>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>Proving a causal relationship between the use of any substance
and an associated illness or condition is extremely difficult.
Ideally, prospective longitudinal studies on large populations of
both substance users and nonusers matched for socioeconomic and
psycho-cultural variables should be performed for many years in
order to detect subtle or cumulative effects. Unfortunately, the
enormous expenditures of research effort and finances that would
be required for a large scale investigation of this nature are
prohibitive. </p>

<p>Consequently, carefully designed and controlled, clinical and
epidemiological studies of very heavy, very long-term cannabis
users in foreign countries must be relied upon to provide
important data on possible effects because these populations are
not obtainable in the United States.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>GREECE<br>
</b></p>

<p>Preliminary results (Freedman and Fink 1971, Fink and Dornbush
1971, Fink 1971) from an intensive medical, neurological, and
psychiatric study of 31 male chronic hashish users in Greece,
performed under contract to the National Institute of Mental
Health, have revealed few abnormalities in these individuals.
Non-users matched for socioeconomic, and psycho-cultural factors
including life style, alcohol and tobacco consumption and
nutrition and general health have not been studied. </p>

<p>In collaboration with Professors Miras and Stefanis in Athens,
Fink and co-workers are studying a population of chronic hashish
users that Professor Miras has known for many years. The
population studied is composed of 31 male subjects ranging in age
from 26 to 69 years with a mean of 46 years. </p>

<p>The subjects report starting hashish use at 13 to 35 years of
age with a mean of 19. They have -used hashish from 10 to 49
years, with a median of 28 years. In the past they used an
average of eight grams of hashish daily with a range of 2 to 24:
grams daily. (The hashish it estimated to contain 4% THC on the
average. Therefore, average daily use was 320 mg. of THC). </p>

<p>In the past, 27 of the subjects were daily -users and four
used every other day. Frequently of hashish use per day was: once
per day-2 subjects, twice per day-6 subjects, three times per
day-14 subjects, four times per day-4 subjects, and five, or more
times per day-5 subjects. </p>

<p>The men reported a reduction in drug use with time ascribed to
increasing difficulty in obtaining adequate supplies due to
increased enforcement of the drug regulations. At present they
use an average of three grams of hashish daily (320 mg. of THC)
with a range of one to 10 grams daily. </p>

<p>Twelve now use hashish daily, eight use, every other day and
11 use less frequently. Frequency of daily hashish use is: once
per day-5 subjects, twice per day-12 subjects, three times per
day-10 subjects, four times per day-2 subjects, and gve(sic) or
more times per day-2 subjects. </p>

<p>The men are primarily hashish users. One has used opiates. Two
are heavy users of alcohol and six report occasional to frequent
use of alcohol at the present time. Tobacco is smoked by all
subjects averaging 40 cigarettes per day. </p>

<p>Twenty-three of the subjects report periods of abstinence from
hashish averaging ten months but up to three years. Hashish use
is primarily social by 20 subjects, and 15 subjects smoke in
solitude. </p>

<p>Pipes and cigarettes in which hashish is mixed with tobacco
are used interchangeably. The usual time of smoking is after work
(21 subjects) but 12 subjects smoke before work and five smoke
anytime. </p>

<p>In this population, the median education is three-and-a-half
years of school with a range of none to nine. Five of the men are
illiterate. Twenty-one of the men are married, one is cohabiting,
four are single and five are divorced or separated. </p>

<p>All of the married men are employed and support their
families. The subjects report changing their jobs frequently and
11 had periods of unemployment from three to 120 months. Ten were
classified as skilled workers and 21 as unskilled workers. Their
jobs include selling scrap metals, general labor, cartage,
messenger, maintenance assistants, etc. </p>

<p>Arrests are common and 19 report at least one non-hashish
related arrest. Eighteen have been in regular military service,
six were exempt because of hashish use and seven for other
reasons. </p>

<p>Interestingly, 10 of the 15 wives interviewed prefer the
behavior and attitudes of their husbands when they are using
hashish compared to when they are drug-free. </p>

<p>In regard to family and personal background 20 had refugee
parents, 13 had alcoholic or hashish using fathers, 26 had three
or more siblings, 19 had dominant mothers. Fifteen of 21 had
dominant wives. Seven reported broken homes under age 16. </p>

<p>Apparently, the subjects participation in society is
consistent with their lower socioeconomic background. No gross
behavioral deviation was detected I in this population. </p>

<p>Psychiatric status was evaluated by history and psychiatric
interview. Nine have had psychiatric hospitalization of which
three were in the military and related to hashish use. Two have,
had psychiatric outpatient treatment. Eight had histories of
neurotic traits during childhood. In their psychiatric
evaluation, three men are considered to have psychiatric
pathology. Two of these were considered sociopaths on the basis
of homosexuality and criminal behavior. The third was diagnosed
as a schizophrenic. No overt signs of any organic mental syndrome
were detected. None of the three men were believed to require
psychiatric intervention. The schizophrenic, although suspicious
and withdrawal, is a successful business man and lives with his
family on weekends. </p>

<p>Complete physical and neurological examination revealed three
prominent findings. All had very poor dentition which the men
ascribed to hashish smoking. Chronic bronchitis was detected in
14 of the men and emphysema in three others. This finding is not
surprising because all subjects were tobacco cigarette smokers
averaging 40 cigarettes per day, in addition to their very heavy
hashish consumption. Enlarged livers were also found in nine of
the 31 subjects. </p>

<p>Because no extensive psychological test battery has been
developed or standardized in Greece, American tests were used.
These tests are not culture-free, and it is possible that certain
items or subtests were inappropriate for the subjects because
they had not acquired the type of knowledge or skills required
due to their poor level of education. </p>

<p>The Wechsler-Bellevue I.Q. tests were translated into Greek
and administered. Because of these, factors, comparison of level
of performance between these subjects and white middle class
Americans is meaningless. </p>

<p>The mean I.Q. is 86 with a range of 69 to 109. The mean verbal
is 90.3 and the mean performance was 83.6. The group of subjects
performed lower than expected on digit symbol, digit span and
similarities but higher than expected on comprehension,
arithmetic, vocabulary and picture completion. The Ravens
Progression Matrices showed a similar pattern and mean I.Q. The
significance of these findings will depend on a comparison with a
matched nonuser population. </p>

<p>Resting electroencephalograms were obtained in 30 subjects and
evaluated independently by four experts. Twenty-five were within
normal limits. </p>

<p>Testing was incomplete in one record. One record in a subject
who had a head injury within the prior three months showed focal
slowing. </p>

<p>Two of the four experts judged the remaining three, records as
showing low degrees of average to low voltage theta activity
indicative of cerebral dysfunction. The remaining two experts
judged these records as within normal limits. </p>

<p>This medical and psychological data suggests some effects of
very long term, very heavy hashish use. Without a matched
comparison group, factors independent of hashish use, such as
age, socioeconomic conditions, or environmental conditions, may
account for the observed changes. </p>

<p>However, the researchers note that these men have survived
chronic hashish use in high doses without gross behavioral
deviation. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>JAMAICA<br>
</b></p>

<p>Another foreign investigation (Ruben et al., 1972) conducted
in Jamaica (under contract for the National Institute of Mental
Health) studied chronic cannabis users and matched nonuser
controls. Preliminary findings have shown little evidence of
significant differences between the two groups in the extensive
anthropological, medical, psychiatric and psychological
investigations. </p>

<p>Ganja use is widespread and endemic in the Jamaican lowest
socioeconomic strata, and in particular in a millenial-religious
sect known as the Rastafarians. More than 50% of all male
Jamaicans are estimated to use some form of cannabis, and
probably about 20% are regular heavy users of ganja. </p>

<p>The drug was brought to Jamaica from India over 130 years ago
by indentured East Indian laborers. However, presently the
heaviest ganja users are Afro-Jamaicans who comprise 90% of the
population. </p>

<p>The Rastafarian religious sect, founded by Marcus Garvey,
preach a &quot;Back to Africa&quot; destiny and claim Haile
Selassie to be God. The Rastafarians have always worn. long hair
and beards and dressed eccentrically. They believe that &quot;the
herb&quot; was given them by God to help them to understand his
wisdom exemplified in their greeting, &quot;Peace and Love.&quot;
</p>

<p>The Rastas reject the values of the dominant society and
regard the government as &quot;the powers of Babylon&quot;. They
have, chosen to opt out of conventional society and instead work
and live in a communal existence in poverty. They emphasize the
value of ganja in achieving a new level of meaning in this
existence. </p>

<p>The Rastafarians add ganja to their infant first bath and
start feeding the drug to their infants from the time of weaning
in an infusion known as ganja tea. They continue to smoke and
drink the drug throughout life. </p>

<p>They, like many other Jamaicans, believe in its medicinal
properties especially for asthma and indigestion and promotion of
healing; that it gives protection from evil spirits; that it
cleanses the skin and purifies the blood; that it promotes sexual
vigor; that it gives energy for work and relieves fatigue and
provides relaxation after work. </p>

<p>Extensive in-depth studies have been carried out by a team of
anthropologists from The Research Institute for the Study of Man
in conjunction with The Departments of Psychiatry, Pathology,
Physiology and Medicine, of the University of the West Indies.
Anthropology field workers lived for extensive periods of time in
five rural communities (including fishing, farming and cane
cutting areas) and two urban districts. </p>

<p>Over 2,000 people were observed and studied in these
communities. Overall life styles of the ganja users were not
notably different from nonusing individuals in the Jamaican
lowest socioeconomic strata. Users are working, maintaining
stable families and homes, and actively participating in their
society. No evidence was noted of crime or aggressive behavior or
drug use other than alcohol related to ganja use. No evidence of
physical dependence was demonstrated. Minimal psychological
dependence was observed but no drug craving was expressed. </p>

<p>Thirty long-term ganja smokers and 30 nonusers matched
demographically to control factors other than ganja use, were
chosen as representative of this functioning lower socioeconomic
population and selected for intensive hospital study in order to
determine, differences between the two groups. </p>

<p>The mean age of the subjects was 33 with a range of 23 to 51.
The primary occupation of one-third of the subjects was farming.
The next most common occupations were, fishing, skilled and
semiskilled laborers. Half practiced no formal religion, five
were Rastafarians and the remainder practiced a wide variety of
traditional religious. Almost three-fourths of the males had
stable &quot;marriages&quot; and the remaining single subjects
were predominantly the younger ones. </p>

<p>The subjects were divided into three groups. Twenty-three were
nonganja smokers, 28 were regular daily ganja smokers and 9 were
occasional ganja smokers using the drug several times a we or
less. Three types of regular ganja smokers were delineated: light
smokers using one to four spliffs daily moderate smokers using
four to seven spliffs daily; and heavy smokers using eight or
more spliffs per day. </p>

<p>Age of first use ranged from 8-36 years of age. Regular use of
ganja occurred at a median age of 16 years with a range of 9-25
years. All ganja smokers had used the drug at least 7 years and
some up to 37 years with a mean of 17.5 years. </p>

<p>The ganja users consumer on the average seven spliffs of ganja
daily with a range of one to 24 per day. The typical ganja
cigarette or cigar, termed a spliff is roughly a four-inch-long
paper cone and contains about two to three grams of ganja with a
delta 9 THC content of about 2.9% on the average (range of
0.7-10.3%) mixed with about half of a Tobacco cigarette. Also
many smoke ganja in a Chillum pipe using very deep inhalation to
fill their lungs with smoke. They consume 14 pipe fulls per week
on the average, with a range of 1-25 per week. </p>

<p>No significant differences in neurological abnormalities,
electroencephalographic abnormalities, hemochemical changes
including liver function, urinalysis, chest X-ray abnormalities
or chromosome damage in lymphocytes were found in the users or
controls. </p>

<p>One user had a long history of bronchial asthma and another
had a mild case of Jamaican neuropathy, but nothing suggests
these disabilities were in any way related to ganja use. Minor
electrocardiographic abnormalities were present in about
one-third of both users and controls. This may be related to a
syndrome of unknown etiology known as Jamaican cardiomiyopathy. </p>

<p>Thorough physical examination and hematological studies
revealed only minimal significant differences between ganja
smokers and non-ganja smoking controls. Comprehensive evaluation
of red blood cell indices revealed that the ganja smokers had
significantly higher hemoglobin levels and packed red cell
volumes (hematocrit) than the non-ganja smokers. </p>

<p>These hematologic findings are compatible with those reported
recently (Sangan and Balberzak, 1971) for heavy tobacco cigarette
smokers. The authors noted that cigarette smoking causes a
functional tissue hypoxia due to deficits in lung func tionwith
resultant arterial oxygen unsaturation. Thus, an increased demand
is placed on the bone marrow to provide more red blood cells to
increase the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. </p>

<p>In addition to the heavy smoking of ganja in spliffs and
pipes, 27 of the 30 ganja smokers were tobacco smokers, and
several have smoked tobacco cigarettes heavily. 19 of the 30
non-ganja smokers were tobacco cigarette smokers and tended to be
light tobacco cigarette smokers. </p>

<p>Thus, the data appears to suggest that a combination of
factors including number of years and quantity of cigarette
smoking, ganja spliff smoking and ganja chilum pipe smoking is
significantly correlated with the hematological changes
indicative of functional hypoxia. However, pulmonary function
studies did not demonstrate significant decrements correlated
with ganja or tobacco smoking. </p>

<p>No significant differences were found between groups by a
thorough psychiatric and psychological examination. All subjects
were judged to be in normal mental health. Subjects were
administered a battery of standardized reliable American
psychological tests known to be sensitive to impairment in brain
function. These tests were not culture free so that comparison of
performance, between Jamaicans and Americans is meaningless
Nineteen tests evaluating 47 variables were performed including
one personality test, three tests of intelligence and verbal
abilities, and 15 neuropsychological tests. </p>

<p>Two of 47 variables had statistically significant differences
between ganja smokers and non-smokers. The smokers scored higher
on the digit span subtest of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale and bad a more centralized personality organization on the
Lowenfeld Mosaic Test. </p>

<p>Non-smokers had the best performance on the number of edge
contacts with the non-dominant hand on the Holes Test. These few
significant differences were considered chance findings by the
investigators. </p>

<p>In general no consistent differences were found on these
psychological tests between ganja smokers and non-smokers. The
data clearly indicate that the long-term ganja use by these men
did not produce demonstrable intellectual or ability deficits
when they were without the drug for three days. No evidence in
these results suggest permanent brain damage. </p>

<p>The alleged role of ganja in producing personality change in
the direction of a loss of competitive striving and an
unwillingness to work, termed the amotivational syndrome was also
investigated. </p>

<p>Based on clinical impressions gained from careful sociological
and psychological techniques, the investigators noted that the
chronic ganja smoker differed little in work habits or record
from his matched control. No evidence of an amotivational
syndrome was found. In fact, the subjects believe ganja has a
functional value as a work adjunct. It provides energy for work
and helps them do arduous boring jobs. </p>

<p>In the Jamaican culture, ganja may produce a
&quot;motivational syndrome&quot;. In an objective videotape
evaluation of work energy output and ganja smoking, ganja use did
not lower productivity on simple repetitive tasks, such as
woodcutting which requires compulsive concentrated effort. </p>

<p>A study of cultivators points up the relationship of
population, land, and economic pressures to ganja use. In the
area studied land resources are scarce, farms small and
cultivation difficult on the hilly slopes. Market conditions
determine income from cash crops and restrictions on migration
maintain population pressures on limited resources. </p>

<p>For these farmers, the researchers suggest that ganja use,
decreases total cultivated acreage and consolidates production
while disruption of competition and social cohesiveness among the
farmers is avoided. </p>

<p>These data may indicate that heavy ganja use during
cultivation in farming situations with limited alternatives may
serve to maintain the status quo. However, it is possible that
the compulsive concentrated effort experienced by the cultivators
with heavy ganja use may be productive in areas with good soil
and climatic conditions where systematic weeding can increase
crop yields. </p>

<p>As a result of the extensive anthropological study, the
investigators believe that ganja use in Jamaica is a culturally
determined phenomenon. A &quot;ganja complex&quot; exists which
consists of closely related, learned patterns of behavior
manifested by the members of the society. </p>

<p>The ganja complex appears to be functional for the
working-class Jamaican. Various elements Of the complex including
economic, social and personal are interrelated in ways that
contribute to operation of the whole culture.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>AFGHANISTAN<br>
</b></p>

<p>Dr. Salamuddin Weiss (1971) studied 1011 chronic hashish users
in Kabul in order to obtain a general picture of the charas habit
in Afghanistan. </p>

<p>Cannabis is cultivated in this tropical country. A
concentrated product, charas, the resin obtained from the
flowering tops of the female plant, is the preparation generally
used. The most common method of smoking charas is in a clay water
pipe called a Chelum. Next most commonly used is a pipe or needle
and straw. Infrequently, charas is smoked in tobacco cigars or
cigarettes. Chewing the leaves or drinking a charas mixture as a
confection is quite rare. </p>

<p>Although charas smokers are found throughout society, they are
predominantly found in certain groups. The ages of the subjects
studied ranged from 13 to 70 years old. More than 75% were,
married. Almost all were males. </p>

<p>Socioeconomic status was as follows: 70%, lower, 28% middle
and 2% upper. 82% are illiterate, 27% had a primary school
education and less than 1% had any higher education. </p>

<p>Most smoking occurs in groups of two to 20 friends in quiet
out of the way places. Most users smoke several times a day. The
longer one has smoked charas, the shorter the duration of the
high and the more often the individual can smoke each day. </p>

<p>Weakness, sexual difficulties and physical impotence are
commonly reported by smokers. Most report they have a good
appetite and eat more than normal, but malnutrition is common. </p>

<p>One hundred chronic smokers were selected at random and
examined medically: 93 were malnourished; no evidence of illness
was found in 79 subjects; 13 showed signs of respiratory illness
(bronchitis) ; 7 showed sleep disturbances and one had pulmonary
tuberculosis. No deaths have been reported from charas overdose.
One subject out of the 1,011 was known to be chronically
psychotic. </p>

<p>A review of over 150,000 outpatient and inpatient psychiatric
visits per year over the past 10 years revealed 20 short-term
psychotic episodes yearly involving charas alone and 16,
short-term psychotic episodes yearly involving both charas and
other drugs. An absence of chronic mental illness related to
charas use was noteworthy. </p>

<p>Most charas smokers commence use during their teens, gradually
increasing their use about five or six times until they reach
their highest dose between the ages of 20 to 40 years. </p>

<p>At the extreme, smokers have raised their daily dosage up to
10 times their starting dose within the first two years. They
then gradually decrease their daily requirement by about 50% upon
reaching their 60's. Generally, most smokers cease charas use
after their 60's, but some. use extremely low doses for the rest
of their lives. </p>

<p>I These patterns of use are consistent with the development of
tolerance. Additionally, chronic smokers note they are able to
use larger doses than they did when they began use without any
significant signs of intoxication. Also after stopping charas use
for a few days or months, the users report they restart use at
smaller doses to achieve the desired effect. </p>

<p>No physical dependence was noted. Marked psychological
dependence was present which makes it difficult to stop their
habitual use. Discontinuation of charas use produced mild
psychologic abstinence signs. These signs, generally include
restlessness loss of appetite, sleeplessness, nervousness,
headache, and gastrointestinal upset. </p>

<p>Most smokers after discontinuation of use are quite able to
live with their families and perform their jobs without
discomfort. Most chronic smokers return to charas use within days
or months. Out of a group of 100 randomly selected ex-smokers who
had used for eight to 22 years, 42 have not returned to charas
use, 16 use occasionally and 42 have returned to daily use within
one to 13 months. </p>

<p>Most common explanation given by the subjects for restarting
use were to continue close relationships with charas using
friends and lack of a busy job. </p>

<p>A group of 100 opium addicts were selected at random from the
community; 51 of these started their drug use with charas and
later substituted opium for charas. </p>

<p>Generally, charas smokers report that they become faster in
their daily jobs, but observation reveals a slowness in these
activities. The ability to perform a non-complicated job is
comparable to non-charas smokers. They tend to be cooperative but
lazy persons. They tend to be more theoretical than practical and
avoid making decisions. They do not demonstrate creativity or
contribute significantly to the improvement of their community. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Summary<br>
</b></p>

<p>Marihuana has been used by man in countries around the world
for many centuries. Scientifically, more is known about
marihuana's effects than many other botanical substances consumed
by man. </p>

<p>Marihuana is one of several preparations from the plant,
cannabis sativa. The plant contains many different chemicals, but
tetrahydrocannabinol appears to be the major active
psychopharmacologic ingredient. The potency of the preparation is
determined by the THC content, which varies according to the
origin of the seed, the conditions of cultivation, and the extent
of manicuring. </p>

<p>Several important factors exert significant influences on the
psychopharmacological effect. These include dose, method of use,
set and setting, and pattern of use including frequency and
duration of use. </p>

<p>The acute subjective experience is dose-dependent. At low
doses commonly used in this country a mild intoxication occurs,
but at higher doses psychotomimetic experiences can occur. Few
consistent physiological effects are noted. No pathologic bodily
changes have been conclusively demon, strafed from acute use.
Subtle effects on recent memory, psychomotor function, and social
behavior have been demonstrated. </p>

<p>The margins of safety between the effective dose and the toxic
dose is quite large. No human fatalities have been noted in this
country caused by marihuana. The most common adverse reactions
are becoming too intoxicated, and the acute anxiety panic
reaction. Both of these are transient and related to dose
consumed as well as set and setting factors. </p>

<p>Acute psychotic, reactions are quite rare. They usually last a
few days to weeks and occur in predisposed persons either with
preexisting mental disorders or borderline personalities
especially under stressful conditions. Transient acute brain
syndrome or toxic psychosis is possible at extremely large doses.
</p>

<p>Evidence has accumulated which indicates that differential
tolerance does develop at least, in persons who smoke large
amounts of marihuana several times a day. Development of
tolerance to the depressant effects on behavior appears to
precede development of tolerance to the intoxicant effect. </p>

<p>Physical dependence has not been demonstrated. Little, if any,
psychological dependence is present in most intermittent
marihuana users. Moderate psychological dependence occurs in
moderate to heavy users and marked psychological dependence has
been described in very heavy chronic users. </p>

<p>Some detrimental effects have been conclusively linked to
short- and long-term marihuana use for very heavy users. The most
frequently reported change in the heavy, long-term smokers of
large quantities of potent preparations is chronic bronchitis
comparable to that developed by a heavy, long-term tobacco
cigarette smoker. A chronic cannabis psychosis probably occurs
rarely in heavy chronic, hashish smokers in Eastern countries.
Most psychotic episodes are the acute variety and clear in a few
days to weeks. No objective evidence has been demonstrated that
even very heavy, long-term hashish use causes organic brain
damage. </p>

<p>Objective studies of chronic, heavy smokers of potent
preparations have not causally linked this drug with the
amotivational syndrome which has been described by many
clinicians. Almost all chronic, heavy hashish smokers are
indistinguishable from their peers in the lower socioeconomic
strata of their respective societies in social behavior, work
performance, mental status and overall life style.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>REFERENCES<br>
</b></p>

<p>,Abel, E: &quot;Marihuana and Memory,&quot; Nature, 227 (5263)
1151-1152 (1970). </p>

<p>Abel, E. L.: &quot;Effects of Marihuana on the Solution of
Anagrams, Memory and Appetite,&quot; Nature, 231: 260-261 (1971).
</p>

<p>Abel, E. L. &quot;Marihuana and Memory: Acquisition or
Retrieval,&quot; Science, 173: 1038-1040 (1971). </p>

<p>Abel, E. L.: &quot;Retrieval of Information After Use of
Marihuana, &quot; Nature, 231 (5297) : 58 (1971). </p>

<p>Abelson, H. Cohen, R. and Sehrayer. D.: Public Attitudes
Toward Marihuana, Princeton: Response Analysis (1972). </p>

<p>Adams R.: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; Bulletin of the New York
Academy of Medicine, 18: 705-730 (1942). </p>

<p>Adams, R.: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; Harvey Lectures, Series 37:
16,8-197 (1941-1942). </p>

<p>Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, Cannabis (Wootton
Report), London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (1968). </p>

<p>Agurell, S. and Leander, K.: &quot;Stability, Transfer and
Absorption of Cannobinoid Constituents of Cannabis (Hashish)
During Smoking,&quot; Acta Pharmaceutica, Succica, 8: 685 (1971).
</p>

<p>Aldrich, C. K.: &quot;The Effect of a Synthetic Marihuana-Like
Compound on Musical Talent as Measured by the Seashore
Test,&quot; Public Health Reports, 59 (13) : 431-433 (1944). </p>

<p>Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: &quot;The Psychiatric Aspects
of Marihuana Intoxication,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry,
99: 248-251 (l942). </p>

<p>Ames, F.: &quot;A Clinical and Metabolic Study of Acute
Intoxication With Cannabis Sativa and Its Role in the Model
Psychoses,&quot; Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437): 972-999
(1958). </p>

<p>Asuni, T.: &quot;Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis in
Nigeria,&quot; United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 16 (2) 17-28
(1964). </p>

<p>Aubin, J.: &quot;Le Test Evolutif dans l'Intoxication
Chronique per le Kif,&quot; Algerie Med (1944). </p>

<p>Baker, A. A. and Lucas, E. G.: &quot;Some Hospital Admissions
Associated With Cannabis,&quot; Lancet, 1 (7580) : 148 (1969). </p>

<p>Baker-Bates, E. T.: &quot;A Case of Cannabis Indica
Intoxication,&quot; Lancet, I: 811 (1935). </p>

<p>Barry, H. and Kubena, R. K.: &quot;Repeated High Doses of
Delta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol Enhance Acquisition of Shock
Avoidance in Rats,&quot; Proceedings 79th Annual Convention of
the American Psychological Association, 749-750 (1971) </p>

<p>Bartolucci, G. Fryer, L., Perris, C. and Shagass, C.:
&quot;Marihuana Psychosis: A Case Report,&quot; Canadian
Psychiatric Association Journal, 14 (1) 77-79 (1969). </p>

<p>Baudelaire, C.:In: Ebin, D. (Ed.) The Drug Experience. First
Person Accounts of Addicts, Writers, Scientists and Others, New
York: The Allon Press (1961), pp. 1640. </p>

<p>Beaubrun, M. H.: &quot;The Pros and Cons of Cannabis Use in
Jamaica,&quot; Prepared by the Department of Psychiatry,
University of the West Indies as a Working Paper for Panel on
Youth and Drugs, Costa Rica (January 8, 1971). </p>

<p>Benabud A.: &quot;Psychopathological Aspects of the Cannabis
Situation in Morroco: Statistical Data for 1956,&quot; United
Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(4) : 1-16 (1957). </p>

<p>Ben-Zui, Z., Mechoulam, R. and Burstein, S.:
&quot;Identification Through Synthesis of an Active A' (6)
Tetrahydrocannabinol Metabolite,,&quot; Journal of American,
Chemical Society, 92 (11) : 3468-3469 (1970). </p>

<p>Bercht, C. A. L., Kuppers, F. J. E. M., Lousberg, R. J. J. Ch.
and Kalemink, C. A.: &quot;Constituents Volatiles du Cannabis
Sativa L.,&quot; United Nations ST/SOA/SER .5/29: 1-11 (July
22,1971). </p>

<p>Beringer, K., et al.: &quot;Zur Klinik des
Hashisclirausches,&quot; Der Nervenarzt, 5 (7) : 337-350 (1932). </p>

<p>Bernhardson, G.: &quot;Cannabis Psychosis,&quot; Svenska
Lakartidn, 66: 1230-1234 (1969). </p>

<p>Bey, D. R., and Zecchinelli, V. A.: &quot;Marihuana as a
Coping Device in Vietnam,&quot; Military Medicine, 136 (5) :
448-450 (1971). </p>

<p>Bialos, D.: &quot;Adverse Marihuana Reactions: A Critical
Examination of the Literature with Selected Case Material,&quot;
American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (6) : 119-123 (1970). </p>

<p>Bloomquist, E. R.: &quot;Marihuana: Social Benefit or Social
Detriment?&quot; California Medicine, 106: 346-353 (1967).
Blumenfield, M.: &quot;Flash-back Phenomena in Basic Trainees who
Enter the U.S. Air Force,&quot; Presented 17th Annual Conference
of Air Force Behavioral Scientists, School of Aerospace Medicine,
San Antonio (January 1970). </p>

<p>Roroffka, A.: &quot;Mental Illness and Indian Hemp in
Lagos,&quot; East African Medical Journal, 43 (9) : 377-384
(1966). Bouquet, J.: &quot;Cannabis,&quot; United Nations
Bulletin on Narcotics, 2 (4) : 14-30 (1950) ; 3 (1) : 22-45
(1951). Bouquet, J.: &quot;Marihuana Intoxication (letter),&quot;
Journal of the American Medical Association, 124: 1010-1011
(1944). </p>

<p>Bright, T. D., Kiplinger, G. F., Brown, D. Phillips, J. and
Forney, R. B.: &quot;Effects of Beta Adrenergic Blockade on
Induced Tachycardia,&quot; Committee on the Problem of Drug
Dependence, II: 1737-1744 (1971). </p>

<p>Brill, N. 0. Crumpton, E., Frank, 1. M., Hochman, J. S.,
Lomax, P., McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: &quot;The Marihuana
Problem,&quot; Annals of Internal Medicine, 73 (3) : 449-465
(1970). </p>

<p>Bromberg, W.: &quot;Marihuana, A Psychiatric Study,&quot;
Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12 (1939). </p>

<p>Bromberg, W.: &quot;Marihuana Intoxication, A Clinical Study
of Cannabis Sativa Intoxication,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry, XCI (2) : 303-330 (1934). </p>

<p>Burstein S. and Rosenfeld, J.: &quot;The Isolation and
Characterization of a Major Metabolite of Delta 9-THC,&quot; Acta
Pharmaceutica, Suecica, 8: 699-700 (1971). </p>

<p>Burstein, S. H., Alenezes, F., Williamson, E. and Mechoulam,
R.: &quot;Metabolism of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. An Active
Marihuana Constituent,&quot; Nature, 225: 87-88 (1970). </p>

<p>Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. P. and Merriam, P.
E.: &quot;Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana in
Man,&quot; Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 755759 (1969). </p>

<p>Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.
E.: &quot;Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana in
Man,&quot; Addendum, Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 922 (1969).
</p>

<p>Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.
E.: Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: Raven Press
(1970),pp.299-321. </p>

<p>Campbell, A. M. G., Evans, Al., Thomson, J. L. G. and
Williams, M. J.: &quot;Cerebral Atrophy in Young Cannabis
Smokers,&quot; Lancet, II: 1219-1226 (1971). </p>

<p>Carakushansky, G., Neu, R. F. and Gardner, L. I.:
&quot;Lysergide and Cannabis As Possible Teratogens in Man,&quot;
Lancet, 11: 150-151 (1969). </p>

<p>Carlini, E., Hanaoni, A., Bieniek, D. and Korte, F.:
&quot;Effects of (-)Delta 9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol and a
Synthetic Derivative on Image Performance of Rats,&quot;
Pharmacology, 4 (6) : 359-368 (1970). </p>

<p>Carlini, E. A.: &quot;Tolerance to Chronic Administration of
Cannabis Sativa (Marihuana) in Rats,&quot; Pharmacology 1:
135-142 (1968). </p>

<p>Charen, S. and Perelman, L.: &quot;Personality Studies of
Marihuana Addicts,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:
674-682 (1946). </p>

<p>Chopra, G. S.: &quot;Alan and Marihuana.&quot; International
Journal of the Addictions, 4 (2) : 215-247 (1969). </p>

<p>Chopra, G. S.: &quot;Marihuana and Adverse Psychotic
Reactions,&quot; U.N. Bulletin on Narcotics, 23 (3) :15-21
(1971). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: &quot;The Use of the
Cannabis Drugs in India,&quot; United Nations Bulletin on
Narcotics, 9 (1) : 4-29 (1957). </p>

<p>Chopra, R. N.: &quot;Drug Addiction in India and Its
Treatment,&quot; Indian Medical Gazette, 70 (3) : 121 (1935).
Chopra, R. N.: &quot;Use of Hemp Drugs in India,&quot; Indian
Medical Gazette, 75 (6) : 356-367 (1940). Chopra, R. N. and
Chopra, G. S.: &quot;The Present Position of Hemp-Drug Addiction
in India,&quot; Indian Medical Besearch Memoirs, (31) : 1-119
(1939). </p>

<p>Chopra, R. N., Chopra, G. S. and Chopra, 1. C.: &quot;Cannabis
Sativa. in Relation to Mental Diseases and Crime in India,&quot;
Indian Journal of Medical Research, 30 (1) 155-171 (1942). </p>

<p>Christensen, H. D., Freudenthal, R. I., Gidley, J. T.,
Rosenfeld, R., Boegli, G., Testino, L., Brine, D. R., Pitt, C. G.
and Wall, .M. E.: &quot;Activity of A' and Delta
9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Related Compounds in the Mouse,&quot;
Science, 172 (3979) : 165-l67 (1971.). </p>

<p>Christozov, C. : &quot;Morrocan Aspects of Cannabis
Intoxication in the Light of Studies on Chronic Mental
Patients,&quot; Maroc Medical, 44: 630-642, 866-889 (1965).
Clark, L. D., Hughes, R. and Nakashima, E. N.: &quot;Behavioral
Effects of Marihuana: Experimental Studies,&quot; Archives of
General Psychiatry, 23 (3) : 193-198 (1970). Clark, L. D. and
Nakashima, E. N.: &quot;Experimental Studies of Marihuana,&quot;
American Journal of Psychiatry, 125: 379-384 (1968). </p>

<p>Claussen, U. and Korte, P.: &quot;Haschisch XV,&quot; Liebigs
Annals of Chemistry, 713: 162-165 (1968). </p>

<p>Colbach, E. Al. and Crowe, R. R.: &quot;Marihuana Associated
Psychosis in Vietnam,&quot; Military Medicine, 135 (7) : 571573
(1970). </p>

<p>Cole, J. Al., Pieper, W. A. and Rumbaugh, D. M.: &quot;Effects
of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Spaced Responding in Great
Apes,&quot; Communications in Behavioral Biology, 6: 1-9 (1971). </p>

<p>Curtis, H. C. and Wolfe, J. R.: &quot;Psychosis Following the
Use of Marihuana with Report of Cases,&quot; Journal of the
Kansas Medical Society, 40: 515-517, 526-528 (1939). </p>

<p>Dally, P.: &quot;Undesirable Effects of Marijuana,&quot;
British Medical Journal, 367 (1967). </p>

<p>Deakin, S.: &quot;Death from Taking Indian Hemp,&quot; Indian
Medical Gazette, 71 (1880). </p>

<p>Defer, B. and Diehl, M. L.: &quot;Les Psychoses Cannabiques
Aigues: A Propose de 560 Observations,&quot; Annales Medico
Psychologiques, 126 (2) : 260-266 (1968). </p>

<p>Deliyannakis, E. C., Paragopoulos, C. and Huott, A. D.: </p>

<p>&quot;The Influence of Hashish on the Human EEG,&quot;
Clinical EEG, 1: 108-117 (1970). </p>

<p>Deneau, G. A. and Kaymakcalan, S.: &quot;Physiological and
Psychological Dependence to Synthetic Delta
9-Tetrahydroeannabinol (THC) in Rhesus Monkeys,&quot; The
Pharmacologist, 13 (2) :246 (1971). </p>

<p>Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: &quot;A Brief Resume of the Types of
Insanity Commonly Met With in India With a Full Description of
'Indian Hemp Insanity' Peculiar to the Country,&quot; Journal of
Mental Science, 76: 254-264 (1930). </p>

<p>Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: &quot;The Role of 'Indian Hemp' In
Causation of Insanity in India,&quot; Far Eastern Association of
Tropical Medicine, Transactions of 7th Session, I : 400407
(1928). </p>

<p>Dingell, J. W., Wilcox, H. G. and Klausner, H. A.:
&quot;Biochemical Interactions of Delta
9-Tetrahydrocannabiol,&quot; The Pharmacologist, 13: 296 (1971). </p>

<p>Domino, E. F.: &quot;Human Pharmacology of Marijuana
Smoking,&quot; Presented 71st Annual Meeting of American Society
for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics (1970). </p>

<p>Domino, E. F.: &quot;Neuropsychopharmacologic Studies of
marihuana : Some Synthetic and Natural THC Derivatives in Animals
in Man,&quot; Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:
166-191 (1971). </p>

<p>Domino, E. F., Hardman, H. F. and Seevers, Al. H.:
&quot;Central Nervous Systems Actions of Some Synthetic
Tetrahydrocannabinol Derivatives,&quot; Pharmacological Review
(in press 1972). </p>

<p>Doorenbos, N. J., Fetterman, 11. S., Quinby, M. W. and Turner,
C. E.: &quot;Cultivation, Extraction and Analysis of Cannabis
sativa L.,&quot; Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:
3-14 (1971). </p>

<p>Dornbush, R. L., Fink, M. and Freedman, A. M.:
&quot;Marijuana, Memory and Perception,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry, 128 (3) : 194-197 (1971). </p>

<p>Dorrance, J., Janiger, 0. and Teplitz, L.: &quot;.In Vivo
Effects of Illicit Hallucinogens on Human Lymphocyte
Chromosomes,&quot; Journal of the American Medical Association,
212 (9) : 1488-1491 (1970). </p>

<p>Dott, A. B.: &quot;Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance in
an Automotive Simulator,&quot; Prepared by the U.S. Public Health
Service, Injury Control Research Laboratory, Providence, Rhode
Island: Contract No. ICRL-RR-71-3 (June 1971). </p>

<p>Elsmore, T. P.: &quot;Some Behavioral Effects of
Delta-9Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot; Current Trends in Army Medical
Sciences Psychology, 12-19 (1970). </p>

<p>Ewens, G. P. W.: &quot;Insanity Following the Use of Indian
Hemp,&quot; Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-413 (1904). </p>

<p>Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.: &quot;The
Total Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Four of Its
Isomers,&quot; Journal of the American Chemical Society, 89:
5934-5941 (1967). </p>

<p>Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.:
&quot;Total Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and of
dl-Y.Tetrahydrocannabinol, Racemates of Active Constituents of
Marihuana,&quot; Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:
2079-2080 (1966). </p>

<p>Favazza, A. and Domino, E. F.: &quot;Recurrent LSD Experience
(Flashbacks) Triggered by Marihuana,&quot; University of Michigan
Medical Center Journal, 35: 214-216 (1969). </p>

<p>Fere, C.: &quot;Note sur l'Influence du Haschisch sur le
Travail,&quot; Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de la
Societe de Biologic, (Ileme serie), 3: 696-700 (1901). </p>

<p>Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, 1). AL and Lynch, W. C.:
&quot;Behavioral Effects of Small Doses of Marihuana Extract in
Chimpanzees,&quot; Prepared for the National Institute of Mental
Health, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). </p>

<p>Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.:
&quot;Comparison of Behavioral Effects of Synthetic Delta
9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract in
Chimpanzees,&quot; Prepared for the National Institute of Mental
Health, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). </p>

<p>Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.: &quot;Study of
Long-Term Effects of Marihuana in Chimpanzees,&quot; Prepared for
the National Institute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM
42-21-75, Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque (November 1971). </p>

<p>Fetterman, P. S., Keith, E. S., Waller, C. W., Guerrero, O.,
Doorenhos, N. J. and Quimby, M. W.: &quot;MississippiGrown
Cannabis Sativa 1: Preliminary Observation on Chemical Definition
'of Phenotype and Variation in Tetrahydrocannabinol Content
Versus Age, Sex, and Plant Part,&quot; Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 60 (8) :1240-1249 (1971). </p>

<p>Fink, M.: &quot;The Biology of Cannabis; The State of Our
Knowledge, 1970,&quot; Presented at American Public Health
Symposium on Cannabis, San Francisco (May 1970). </p>

<p>Fink, M.: &quot;Summary Report: Marihuana Study Program
278M7C,&quot; Prepared for the National Institute of Mental
Health, (November 1971). </p>

<p>Fink, M., Professor of Psychiatry and Dornbush, R. L.,
Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, Personal Communication, New
York Medical College, December 30, 1971. </p>

<p>Fink, M., Stefanis, C. and Staffs: &quot;Interim Report: Study
of Marihuana Users in Greece,&quot; Prepared for the National
Institute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM 42-70-98, Department
of Psychiatry, New York Medical College (October 1971). </p>

<p>Finley, T. N., Personal Communication, Director, Pulmonary
Laboratory, 'Mount Zion Hospital and Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, December 13, 1971. </p>

<p>Foltz, R. L., Fentinan, A. F., Leighty, E. G., Walter, J. L.,
Drewes, 11. R., Schwartz, W. E.. Page, T. P. and Truitt, E. B.:
&quot;Metabolite of Trans-Delta 8-Tetrahydrocannabinol:
Identification and Synthesis,&quot; Science, 168: 844-845 (1970).
</p>

<p>Foltz, R. L., Kinzer, G. W., Mitchell, R. I., and Truitt, E.
B.: &quot;The Fate of Cannabinoid Components of Marihuana During
Smoking,&quot; to be published (1972). </p>

<p>Forney, It. B.: &quot;Toxicology and Pharmacology of
Marihuana,&quot; Presented at New York Academy of Science, (May
1971). </p>

<p>Forrest, D. V.: &quot;Marihuana to Heroin . . . A Missing
Link?&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (5) : 164165
(1970). </p>

<p>Francois, G. R., Barrat E., Russel, G.. Barker, T. and White,
R. B.: &quot;The Marihuana Dilemma-A Clinical and Experimental
Approach,&quot; Presented at Annual Meeting of the American
Psychiatric Association, (May 1970). </p>

<p>Frank, 1. M., Hopler, R. S., Stier, S. and Rickles, W. H.:
&quot;Marihuana, Tobacco and Functions Affecting Driving,&quot;
Presented at Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric
Association, (May 1971). </p>

<p>Frank, 1. R., Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Hepler, R.
S., Assistant, Professor of Opthmalogy, Personal Communication of
Preliminary Data, University of California, School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, California, September 1971. </p>

<p>Frankenhein, J. M., McMillan, D. E. and Harris, L. S.:
&quot;Effects of I-Delta 9 and I-Delta 8
Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Scheduled Controlled Behavior of
Pigeon,&quot; Journal of Pharmacology Experimental Therapeutics,
178: 241-252 (1971). </p>

<p>Fraser, J. D.: &quot;Withdrawal Symptoms in Cannabis Indica
Addicts,&quot; Lancet, II: 747-748 (1949). </p>

<p>Freedman, A. M. and Fink, M.: &quot;Cannabis Psychosis,&quot;
Presented at Symposium on Biochemical and Pharmacological Aspects
of Dependence and Reports on Marihuana Research, Amsterdam
(October 1971). </p>

<p>Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. J.: &quot;Marihuana, a Factor
in Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment,&quot; Journal
of Clinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-782 (Part 1) ; 8: 221-236
(Part H) (1946). </p>

<p>Galanter, M., Wyatt, It. J., Weinberger, L., Weingartner, H.,
Vaughan, T. B. and Roth, W. T.:
&quot;Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol Administered by Smoking:
Studies of Blood Levels, Pulse and Subjective Effects,&quot;
Science, (in press 1972). </p>

<p>Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulani, R.: &quot;Isolation, Structure, and
Partial Synthesis of an Active Constituent of Hashish,&quot;
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86: 16461647 (1964). </p>

<p>Gary, N. E. and Keylon, V.: &quot;Intravenous Administration
-of Marihuana,&quot; Journal of the American Medical Association,
211 (3) : 501 (1970). </p>

<p>Gaskill, 11. S.: &quot;Marihuana, An Intoxicant,&quot;
American Journal of Psychiatry, 102: 202-204 (1945). </p>

<p>Geher, W. F.: &quot;Effects of Marihuana Extract on Petal
Hamsters and Rabbits,&quot; Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology,
14: 276-282 (1969). </p>

<p>Geber, W. F. and Schramm, L.: &quot;Teratogenicity of
Marihuana Extract as Influenced by Plant Origin and Seasonal
Variation,&quot; Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie et
de Therapie, 177 (1) : 224-239 (1969). </p>

<p>Gelehrter, 1. D.: &quot;Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) and
Estrophy of the Bladder,&quot; Journal of Pediatrics, 77:
1065-1066 (1970). </p>

<p>George, H. R.: &quot;Two Psychotic Episodes Associated With
Cannabis,&quot; British Journal of Addiction, 65: 119-121 (1970).
</p>

<p>Gill, E. IV.: &quot;Propyl Homologue of Tetrahydrocannabinol: </p>

<p>Its Isolation from Cannabis, Properties and Synthesis,&quot;
Journal of the Chemical Society Organic, (3) : 579-582 (1971). </p>

<p>Gill, E. W., Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.:
&quot;Preliminary Experiments on the Chemistry and Pharmacology
of Cannabis,&quot; Nature, 228: 134-136 (1970). </p>

<p>Gilmour, D. G., Bloom, A. D., Leli, K. P., Robbins, E. S. and
Maximilian, C.: &quot;Chromosomal Aberrations in Users of
Psychoactive Drugs,&quot; Archives of General Psychiatry, 24:
268-272 (1971). </p>

<p>Goode, E.: &quot;Drug Escalation: Marihuana Use as Related to
the Use of Dangerous Drugs,&quot; (October 1971). </p>

<p>Goode, E.: The Marihuana Smokers, New York: Basics Book, Inc.
(1970). </p>

<p>Grinspoon, L.: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; Scientific American,
221: 1725 (1969). </p>

<p>Grossman, W.: &quot;Adverse Reactions Associated With Cannabis
Products in India,&quot; Annals of Internal Medicine, 70 (3) :
529-533 (1969). </p>

<p>Haines, L. and Green, W.: &quot;Marihuana Use Patterns,&quot;
British Journal of Addiction 65 (4) : 347-362 (1970). Halikas, J.
A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.: &quot;Marihuana Effects: A
Survey of Regular Users,&quot; Journal of the American Medical
Association, 217: 692-694 (1971). </p>

<p>Halikas, J. A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.:
&quot;Marihuana Use and Psychiatric Illness,&quot; Department of
Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, (submitted for publication 1972). </p>

<p>Hamaker, S. T. A.: &quot;Case of Overdose of Cannabis
Indica,&quot; Therapeutic Gazette, 7: 808 (1891). </p>

<p>Harris, R. T., Personal Communication, Psychological Research,
Texas Research Institute of Mental Sciences, Houston, August,
1971. </p>

<p>Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and Henderson, G.:
&quot;Evaluation of Abuse Potential A' THC in Rhesus
Monkeys,&quot; (unpublished) 1972). </p>

<p>Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and McLendon, D.:
&quot;Behavioral Effects in Rhesus Monkeys of Repeated
Intravenous Doses of Marihuana Extract Distillate,&quot;
(unpublished 1972). </p>

<p>Hecht, F., Beals, R. K., Lees, M. H., Jolly, H. and Roberts,
P.: &quot;Lysergic-Acid-Diethylamide and Cannabis as Possible
Teratogens in Man,&quot; Lancet, II: 1087 (1968) </p>

<p>Heiman, E. M.: &quot;Marihuana Precipitated Psychosis in
Patient Evacuated to CONUS,&quot; USARU Medical Bulletin, 40 (9)
:75-77 (1968). </p>

<p>Henderson, A. H. and Pugsley, D. J.: &quot;Collapse After
Intravenous Injection of Hashish,&quot; British Medical Journal,
3: 229-230 (1968). </p>

<p>Hepler, R. S., Frank, I. A. and Ungerleider, J. T.: &quot;The
Effects of Marijuana Smoking on Pupillary Size,&quot;
(unpublished 1971). </p>

<p>Heyndrickx, A., Scheiris, C. and Schepens, P.:
&quot;Toxicological Study of a Fatal Intoxication in Man Due to
Cannabis Smoking,&quot; Journal de Pharmacie de Belgigue, 24:
371-376 (1969). </p>

<p>Hively, R. L., Mosher, W. A. and Hoffmann, F. W.:
&quot;Isolation of Trans-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol From
Marijuana,&quot; Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:
1832-1833 (1966). </p>

<p>Ho, B. T., Fritellie, G. E., Englert, L. F., McIsaac, W. M.
and Idanpaan-Heikkila, J. E.: &quot;Marihuana: Importance of the
Route of Administration,&quot; Journal of Pharmacy and
Pharmacology, 23: 309--310 (1971). </p>

<p>Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N.: &quot;Chronic Marihuana Usage
and Liver Function,&quot; Lancet, 11 (7728) : 818 (1971). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.: &quot;Human Pharmacological Studies on
Cannabis,&quot; Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 673 (1971). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.: &quot;Hunger and Appetite After Single Doses
of Marihuana, Ethanol and Dextroamphetainine,&quot; Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (1) : 44-49 (1971). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.: &quot;Marilhuana in Man: Three Years
Later,&quot; Science, 172: 21-29 (1971). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.: &quot;Status Report on Clinical Pharmacology
of Marihuana,&quot; Annals of the New York Academy of Science,
191: 132-141 (1971). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.: &quot;Steroids and Moods: Correlations in
Schizophrenics and Subjects Treated with Lysergic Acid
Diethylamide (LSD), Mescaline, Tetrahydrocannabinol, and
Synhexyl,&quot; Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 9: 24-29
(1969). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E. and Gillespie, H. K.: &quot;Marihuana,
Ethanol and Dextroamphetamine: Mood and Mental Function
Alterations,&quot; Archives of General Psychiatry, 23 (3) 199-203
(1970). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.. Moore, F., Kanter, S. and Noble E.: </p>

<p>&quot;Delta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol, Synhexyl and Marihuana
Extract Administered Orally in Man: Catecholamine Excretion,
Plasma Cortisone Levels and Platelet Serotonin Content,&quot;
Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 17 (4): 354-360 (1970). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E., Richards, R. K. and Gillespie, H. K.:
&quot;Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl in
Man,&quot; Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9 (6) 783-791
(1968). </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E., Sherwood, S. L. and Cavasino, A.:
&quot;Marihuana and the Human Electroencephalogram,&quot;
Pharmacological Research Communications, (in press 1971). </p>

<p>Hughes, J. E., Steahly, L. 11. and Bier, M. M.:
&quot;Marihuana and tile Diabetic Coma,&quot;Journal of the
American Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1113-1114 (1970). </p>

<p>IdinpiRin-Heikkila, J., Fritchie, G. E., Englert, L. F., Ho,
B. T., and McIsaac, IV. 'M.: &quot;Placental Transfer of
Tritiated (l)-NO-Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot; New England Journal
of Medicine, 281: 330 (lW9). </p>

<p>Iddanpaan-Heikkila, J. E., McIsaac, W. M. and Ho, B. T.: </p>

<p>&quot;,A' THC Distribution in Monkeys, Mice and
Hamsters,&quot; Presented at the International Symposium on the
Chemistry and Biological Activity of Cannabis, Stockholm (October
1971). </p>

<p>Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report 1893-1894, Silver Spring:
Thomas Jefferson Publishing Company (RAprinted 1969), 1). 3281. </p>

<p>Isbell, H., Gorodetzsky, C. W., Jasinski, D. R., Claussen, U.,
Von Spulek, F. and Korte, F.: &quot;Effects of (-)
-Delta9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot;
Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 11 184-188 (1967). </p>

<p>Isbell, H. and Jasinski, D. R.: &quot;A Comparison of LSD-25
With (-)-Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and Attempted
Cross Tolerance Between LSD and THC,&quot; Psychopharmacologia,
14: 115-123 (1969). </p>

<p>Isbell, H., Jasiuski, D. R., Gorodetsky, C. W., Korte, P.,
Claussen, U., Haage, M., Sieper, H. and Von Spulak, F.:
&quot;Studies on Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot; Bulletin, Problems
of Drug Dependence, National Academy of Science, Division of
Medical Science, 4832-4846 (1967). </p>

<p>Joachlinoglu, G.: Ciba. Foundation Study Group 21, 10, (1965).
</p>

<p>Johnson, B. D.: &quot;',social Determinants of the Use of
'Dangerous Drugs' by College Students,&quot; Columbia University,
Doctorial Thesis (.June, 1971). </p>

<p>Johnson, S. and Domino, E. F.: &quot;Some Cardiovascular
Effects of Marihuana Smoking oil Normal Volunteers,&quot;
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (5) : 762768 (1971). </p>

<p>Jones, R. and Stone, G.: &quot;Psychological Studies of
Marihuana and Alcohol in Man,&quot; Psychopharmacologia (Berlin),
18 (1) : 108-117 (1970). </p>

<p>Jones, R. T.: &quot;The Marihuana Induced 'High': Influence of
Expectation, Setting and Previous Drug Experience,&quot;
Presented at Annual Meeting of the Federations of American
Societies for Experimental Biology, Chicago (April 1971). </p>

<p>Jones, R. T.: &quot;Tetraliydrocannabinol and the Marihuana
Induced Social 'High' or The Effects of the Mind on
Marihuana,&quot; Annals of the New York Academy of Scienee, 191:
155-165 (1971). </p>

<p>Kalant, N., LeBlanc, A. E. and Gibbins, R. J.: &quot;Tolerance
To, and Dependence On Some Non-Opiate Psychoactive Drugs,
Pharmacological Reviews, 23 (3): 135-491 (1971). </p>

<p>Kaplan, H. S.: &quot;Psychosis Associated with
Marihuana,&quot; </p>

<p>New York State Journal of Medicine, 71 (4) : 433-435 (1971). </p>

<p>Katz, M. Al., Waskow, 1. E., Almon, J.: &quot;Characterizing
the Psyehological State Produced by LSD,&quot; Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 73: 1-14 (1968). </p>

<p>Keeler, 11. H.: &quot;Adverse Reaction to Marihuana,&quot;
American Journal of Psychiatry, 124: 674-677 (1967). </p>

<p>Keeler, M. H.: &quot;Alarihuana Induced Hallucinations,&quot; </p>

<p>Diseases of the Nervous System, 29: 314-315 (1968). Keeler, M.
H. and Reifler, C. B.: &quot;Grand Alai Convulsions Subsequent to
Marihuana Use: Case Report,&quot; Di8eam of the Nervous System,
28: 474-475 (1967). </p>

<p>Keeler, M. H., Reifler, C. B. and Liptzin, M. B.:
&quot;Spontaneous Recurrence of Marihuana Effect,&quot; American
Journal of Psychiatry, 125: 384-386 (1968). </p>

<p>Kennedy, J. S. and Waddell, W. J.: &quot;Whole Body
Autoradiography of the Pregnant Mouse After Administration of
C14-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. (Delta 9-THC),&quot; Federation
Proceedings, 30: 279 (1971). </p>

<p>Keup, W.: &quot;Psychotic Symptoms Due to Cannabis
Abuse,&quot; Diseases of the Nervous System, 31 (2) : 119-126
(1970). </p>

<p>Kew, Al. C., Bersohn, L. and Siew, S.: &quot;Possible
Hepatotoxicity of Cannabis,&quot; Lancet, 1: 578-579 (1969). </p>

<p>King, A. B. and Cowen, D. L.: &quot;Effect of Intravenous
Injection of Marihuana,&quot; Journal of the American Medical
Association, 210 (4) : 724-725 (1969). </p>

<p>King, A. B., Pechet, G. S. and Pechet, L.: &quot;Intravenous
Injection of Crude Marihuana,&quot; Journal of the American
Medical Association, 214: 30 (1970). </p>

<p>Kiplinger, G. F., Manno, J. E., Rodda, B. E. and Forney, R.
B.: &quot;Dose-Response Analysis of the Effects of
Tetrahydrocannabinol in Alan,&quot; Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 12 (4) : 650-657 (1971). </p>

<p>Klausner, H. A. and Dingell, J. V.: &quot;The Metabolism and
Excretion of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in the Rat,&quot; Life
Science, 10: 49-59 (1971). </p>

<p>Klein, F. K., Rapoport, H. and Elliott, H. W.: &quot;Cannabis
Alkaloids,&quot; Nature, 232: 258-259 (1971). </p>

<p>Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T.: &quot;Effects of Marihuana on
Adolescents and Young Adults,&quot; Journal of the American
Medical Association, 216 (3) : 486-492 (1971). </p>

<p>Kornhaber, A.: &quot;Marihuana in an Adolescent Psychiatric
Out Patient Population,&quot; Journal of the American Medical
Association, 215 (12) : 1988 (1971). </p>

<p>Kubena, R. K., Perlach, J. L. and Barry, H.:
&quot;Corticosterone Elevation Mediated Centrally by
Delta-1-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats,&quot; European Journal of
Pharmacology, 14: 89-92 (1971). </p>

<p>Lambo. T. A.: &quot;Medical and Social Problems of Drug
Addiction in West Africa, With Special Emphasis on Psychiatric
Aspects,&quot; United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1) :
3-13 (1965). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L.: &quot;The Metabolism of the
Tetrahydrocannabinols,&quot; Advances in Pharmacology and
Chemotherapy, 10: (in press 1972). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, I. J.: &quot;Clinical
Studies on the Disposition and Metabolism of A' THC and Their
Correlation With Its Pharmacological Effects.&quot; Acta
Pharmaceutical Suecica, 8: 692 (1971). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: &quot;Metabolism and
Disposition of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot;
Pharmacological Review, 23: 371-380 (1971). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Alexrod, J. and Kopin J.: &quot;The Metabolism
and Disposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot;
Federation Proceedings, 30: (1971). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: &quot;Metabolism and
Disposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Naive Subjects and
Chronic Marihuana Users,&quot; Annals of New York Academy of
Science, 191: 142-154 (1971). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Silberstein, S. D., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, 1.
J.: &quot;Marihuana studies on the Disposition and Metabolism of
Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot; Science, 170 (3964) :
1320-1322 (1970). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Tamarkin, N. R., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, L:
&quot;Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol: Metabolism and Disposition in
Long Term Marihuana Smokers,&quot; Science, 173 (3991) : 72-74
(1971). </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., Weiss, J. L., Watanake, A. Al., Galanter, 1.
M., Wyatt, R. J. and Cardon, P. V.:
&quot;Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol's Temporal Correlation of the
Psychological Effects and Blood Levels After Various Routes of
Administration,&quot; New England Journal of Medicine (March
1972). </p>

<p>Lerner, P.: &quot;The Precise Determinations of
Tetrahydrocannabinol Isomers in Marihuana and Hashish,&quot; U.N.
Bulletin on Narcotics, XXI(3) : 39-42 (1969). </p>

<p>Lewin, L.: Phantastica, Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs, New
York: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc. (1964), pp. 107122. </p>

<p>Lindemann, E.: &quot;The Neurophysiological Effects of
Intoxicating Drugs,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 90:
1007-1037 (1933-1934). </p>

<p>Lipp, M. R.: &quot;Marihuana Use By Medical Students,&quot;
American Journal of Psychiatry, 128: 208-212 (1971). Lipparini,
F., Decarolis, A. and Longo, U. A.: &quot;Neuropharmacological
Investigation of Some Tetrahyrocannabinol Derivatives,&quot;
Physiology and Behavior, 4 (4) 527-532 (1969). </p>

<p>Liskow, B., Liss, J. L. and Parker, C. W.: &quot;Allergy to
Marihuana,&quot; Annals of Internal Medicine, 75: 571-573 (1971).
</p>

<p>Loewe, S.: &quot;Studies on the Pharmacology and Acute
Toxicity of Compounds With Marihuana Activity,&quot; Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 88: 154-161 (1946). </p>

<p>Lomax, P.: &quot;Acute Tolerance to the Hypothermic Effect of
Marihuana in the Rat,&quot; Research Communications, Clinical
Pathology and Pharmacology, 2: 159-167 (1971). </p>

<p>Ludlow, F.: The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from the Life
of a Pythagorean, New York: Harper and Brothers (1857). </p>

<p>Lundberg, G. D., Adelson, J. and Prosnutz, E. H.:
&quot;Marihuana Induced Hospitalization,&quot; Journal of
American Medical Association, 215 (1) : 121 (1971). </p>

<p>Magus, R. D. and Harris, L. S.: &quot;Carcinogenic Potential
of Marihuana Smoke Condensate,&quot; Federation Proceedings, 30
(2) : 277 (1971). </p>

<p>Mann, P. E. G., Cohen, A. B., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:
&quot;Alveolar Macrophages. Structural and Functional Differences
Between Non-Smokers and Smokers of Marihuana and Tobacco,&quot;
Laboratory Investigation, 25 (2): 111-120 (1971). </p>

<p>Mann, P. E. G., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:
&quot;Marihuana Smoking: A Study of Its Effects on Alveolar
Lining Material and Pulmonary Macrophages Recovered by
Bronchopulmonary Lavage,&quot; Journal of Clinical
Investigations, 49 (6) : 60a-61a (1970). </p>

<p>Manno, B. R., Manno, J. E., Kilsheimer, G. S. and Forney, R.
B.: &quot;Response of the Isolated Perfused Rat Heart to
Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),&quot; Toxicology and Applied
Pharmacology, 10: 98 (1970). </p>

<p>Manno, J. E.: &quot;Clinical Investigations With Marihuana and
Alcohol,&quot; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana
University, Doctoral Thesis (1970). </p>

<p>Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Bennett, 1. F., Haine, S. E. </p>

<p>and Forney, It. B. : &quot;Comparative Effects of Smoking
Marihuana On Motor and Mental Performance lit Humans,&quot;
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 11 (6) : 808--815 (1970).
</p>

<p>Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Scholz, N. E., Forney, R. B., and
Haine, S. E, : &quot;The Influence of Alcohol and Marihuana on
Motor and Mental Performance,&quot; Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 12: 202-211 (1970). </p>

<p>Marcovitz, E. and Myers, H. J.: &quot;The Marihuana Addict in
the Army,&quot; War Medicine, 6: 382-391 (1944). </p>

<p>Marten, G. W.: &quot;Case Report: Adverse Reaction to the Use
of Marihuana,&quot; Journal of the Tennessee Medical Association,
62 (7) : 627-630 (1969). </p>

<p>Martin, P. A.: &quot;Cannabis and Chromosomes,&quot; Lancet,
I: 370 (1969). </p>

<p>Masur, J. and Khazan, N.: &quot;Induction by Cannabis Sativa
(Marihuana) of Rhythmic Spike Discharges Overriding REM Sleep
Cortigram in Rats,&quot; Life Sciences, 9 (1) 1275-1280 (1970). </p>

<p>Mayer-Gross, W., et al.: Clinical Psychiatry, London: Cassell
(1960). </p>

<p>Mayor's Committee on -Marihuana: The Marihuana Problem in the
City of New York: Sociological, Medical, Psychological and
Pharmacological Studies, Lancaster: Cattell Press (1944). </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H.: &quot;Marihuana: An Analysis of Use,
Distribution and Control,&quot; Prepared for the Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C. (June 1971). </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H.: &quot;Use and Effects of Cannabis,&quot;
Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,
Washington, D.C. Department of Psychology, University of
California, Los Angeles (January 1972). </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H., and Arnold, D. O.: &quot;LSD Revisited: A
Ten-Year Follow-Up of Medical LSD Use,&quot; Archives of General
Psychiatry, 24: 35-49 (1971). </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H., Arnold, D. O., and Rowan, P. K.:
&quot;Marihuana Use Among Adults,&quot; Psychiatry, 33: 433443
(1970). </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: &quot;The Marihuana
Problem: An Overview,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 125:
126-134 (1968). </p>

<p>McIsaac, W., Personal Communication, Director, Texas Research
Institute, Houston, Texas, October 28, 1971. </p>

<p>McIsaac, W., Harris, R. T. and Ho, B. T.: &quot;Behavioral
Correlates of Brain Distribution of Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot;
Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 703 (1971). </p>

<p>McMillan, D. E., Dewey, W. L. and Harris, L. S.:
&quot;Characteristics of Tetrahydrocannabinol Tolerance,&quot;
Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191: 83-99 (1971). </p>

<p>McMillan, D. E., Harris, L. S., Frankenbeim, J. M., and
Kennedy, J. S.: &quot;(I)-Delta 9 Trans-TetrahydrocannabinoI in
Pigeons: Tolerance to the Behavioral Effects,&quot; Science, 169:
501-503 (1970). </p>

<p>Mechoulam, R.: &quot;Marihuana Chemistry,&quot; Science, 168
(3936): 1159-1166 (1970). </p>

<p>Mechoulam, R., Personal Communication, Professor, School of
Pharmacy, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, October 28, 1971. </p>

<p>Mechoulam, R.: &quot;Recent Advances in Cannabinoid
Chemistry,&quot; Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 675-676 (1971).
Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y.: &quot;The Absolute Configuration of
Delt 1-Tetrahydrocannabinol, The Major Active Constituent of
Hashish,&quot; Tetrahedron Letters, 12: 1109-1111 (1967). </p>

<p>Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H. and Grunfeld, Y.:
&quot;Chemical Basis of Hashish Activity,&quot; Science 169:
611-612 (1970). </p>

<p>Medical Staff, Pretoria Mental Hospital: &quot;Mental Symptoms
Associated With the Smoking of Dagga,&quot; South African Medical
Journal, 12: 85 (1938). </p>

<p>Melges F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. and
Gillespie, H. K.: &quot;Marihuana and Temporal
Disintegration,&quot; Science, 168 (3935) :1118-1120 (1970). </p>

<p>Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. and
Gillespie, H. K.: &quot;Marihuana and the Temporal Span of
Awareness,&quot; Archives of General Psychiatry, 24: 464-567
(1971). </p>

<p>Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. and
Gillespie, H. K.: &quot;Temporal Disintegration and
Depersonalization During Marihuana Intoxication,&quot; Archives
of General Psychiatry, 23: 204--210 (1970). </p>

<p>Mendelson, J. H., Meyer, R. E., Rossi, A. M., Bernstein, J.,
Patch, V. D., Babor, T., O'Brien, J., Sagotsky, G., Reid, H.,
Salzman, C., Koehansky, G. E., Porrino, L., Becker, D., DeRubis,
E., Cambria, T. J., Gallimore, P. B., Klinkert, C. E., Pope, S.,
Savitsky, J. B., Thompson, J.: &quot;Behavioral and Biological
Concomitants of Chronic Marihuana Smoking by Heavy and Casual
Users,&quot; Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana
and Drug Abuse, Department of Psychiatry, Boston City Hospital
(January 1972). </p>

<p>Merkus, F. W. H. M.: &quot;Cannabivarin and
Tetrahydrocannabivarin, Two New Constituents of Hashish,&quot;
Nature, 232: 579 (1971). </p>

<p>Meyer, R. E., Pillard, R. C., Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L.S.:
&quot;Administration of Marihuana to Heavy and Casual
Users,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 128 (3) : 198204
(1971). </p>

<p>Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: &quot;Effects of Marihuana
on Auditory and Visual Sensation,&quot; Research Bulletin, 20-22
(1969). </p>

<p>Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: &quot;Effects of Marihuana
on Auditory and Visual Sensation, A Preliminary Report,&quot; The
New Physician, 18: 212-215 (1969). </p>

<p>Mikes, P. and Waser, P. G.: &quot;Marihuana Components:
Effects of Smoking of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and
Cannabinol,&quot; Science, 172: 1158-1159 (1971). </p>

<p>Milman, D. H.: &quot;Adverse Effects of Cannabis,&quot; New
York State Journal of Medicine, 71 (13) : 1675 (1971). </p>

<p>Miras, C. J.: &quot;Some Aspects of Cannabis Action&quot; In:
Hashish: Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Ciba Foundation Group
No. 21, London: J. &amp; A. Churchill (1965). </p>

<p>Miras, C. J.: Drugs and Youth, Springfield: C. C. Thomas
(1969), pp. 191-198. </p>

<p>Miras, C. J.: Hashish, Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Co. (1965), pp. 37-52. </p>

<p>Miras, C. J.: &quot;Marihuana and Hashish,&quot; UCLA lecture,
(September 11, 1967). </p>

<p>Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: &quot;The Distribution of
Tetrahydrocannabinol in Humans,&quot; Report No. 24, United
Nations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/SER. S/24 (November 1970).
</p>

<p>Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: &quot;The Presence of
Cannabinoids in the Urine of Hashish Smokers,&quot; Report No.
25, United Nations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/ SER. S/25
(November 1970). </p>

<p>Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L. M., Meyer, R. E., Pillar, R. C.,
Fisher, S.: &quot;Casual Versus Heavy Use of Marihuana, A
Redefinition of the Marihuana Problem,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry, 127: 11.134-1140 (1971). </p>

<p>Moreau, J.: &quot;Du Hachisch eit de I'Alientation,
Mental,&quot; Etudes Psychologiques, 34: Libraire de Fortin,
Masson, Paris (1845). </p>

<p>Nahas, G. C.: &quot;Lethal Cannabis Intoxication,&quot; New
England Journal of Medicine, 284: 792 (1971). </p>

<p>Nakazawa, K. and Costa, E: &quot;Induction by Mothyloholan.
threne of Delta 9 Tetrahydrocannabinol (A-THC) Metabolism in Rat
Lung,11 Pharmacologist, 13: 297 (1971). </p>

<p>Neu, R. L., Powers, H. O., King, S. and Gardner, L. I.:
&quot;Cannabis and Chromosomes,&quot; Lancet, I-675 (1969). </p>

<p>New York Police Department, Annual Reports 1969 and 1970, City
of New York (1969, 1970). </p>

<p>Nilsson, L. M., Agurell, S., Leander, K., Nilsson, J. L. G.
and Widman, M.: &quot;Cannabidiol: Structure of Three Metabolites
Formed in Rat Liver,&quot; Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 701
(1971). </p>

<p>Nisbet, C. T. and Vakil, F.: &quot;Some Social and Economic
Characteristics of UCLA Marihuana Users,&quot; Social Science
Quarterly (in press 1971). </p>

<p>Ohlsson, A., Abou-Chaar, C. I., Agurell, S., Nilsson, 1. M.,
Olofsson, K. and Sandberg, F.: &quot;Cannabinoid Constituents of
Male and Female Cannabis Sativa,&quot; Bulletin on Narcotics, 23
(1) : 29-32 (1971). </p>

<p>Osinger, 0. and Fulginiti, S.: &quot;Effects of Cannabis
Sativa On Learning in Rats,&quot; Pharmacology, 3: 337-344
(1970). Pace, H. B., Davis, '.%I. W., Borgen, L. A.:
&quot;Teratogenesis and Mariliuana,&quot; Annals of the New York
Academy of Science, 191: 123-131 (1971). </p>

<p>Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.: &quot;The General
Pharmacology of Cannabis,&quot; Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8:
691 (1971). </p>

<p>Peebles, A. S. M. and Mann, H. W.: &quot;Ganja as a Cause of
Insanity and Crime in Bengal,&quot; Indian Medical Gazette, 49:
395-396 (1914). </p>

<p>Perez-Reyes, M. and Lipton, M. A.: &quot;The Rate of
Absorption and Excretion of Orally Administered Delta 9
Tetrahydrocannabinol to Man,&quot; Prepared for the National
Institute of Mental Health, Contract #HSM 4269-62, Department of
Psychiatry, University of North Carolina (July 1971). </p>

<p>Perez-Reyes, M., Lipton, M. A. and Wall, M. E.: &quot;The
Metabolism of Delta-9-Tetrahydroeannabinol in Human
Subjects,&quot; Paper presented at the 5th World Congress of
Psychiatry, Mexico City (December 1971). </p>

<p>Perna, D.: &quot;Psychotogenic Effect of Marihuana,&quot;
Journal of American Medical Association, 209: (7) 1085-1086
(1969). </p>

<p>Persaud, I. and Ellington, A.: &quot;A Teratogenic Activity of
Cannabis Resin,&quot; Lancet, 11 (7564) : 406-407 (1968).
Persaud, 1. and Ellington, A.: &quot;Cannabis in Early
Pregnancy,&quot; Lancet, II: 1306 (1968). </p>

<p>Personal Communication To The Food and Drug Administration,
Rockville, .Md., of Preliminary Experimental data-names withheld
by request of the investigators, unpublished (1970). </p>

<p>Persyko, T.: &quot;Marihuana Psychosis,&quot; Journal of the
American Medical Assocation, 212 (9) : 1527 (1970). </p>

<p>Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: &quot;Uber Inlialtsstoffe des
Hashish II,&quot; Helvitia Clinica Acta, 50: 1410-1419 (1967). </p>

<p>Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: &quot;Uber Inlialsstoffe des
Hashish III,&quot; Helvitia Chinica Acta, 50: 2111-2113 (1967). </p>

<p>Phillips, R. N., Turk, R. F. and Forney, R. B.: &quot;Acute
Toxicity of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats and Mice,&quot;
Proceedings of Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine,
136(l) :260-263 (1971). </p>

<p>Phillips, R., Turk, R., Manno, J., Jain, N. and Forney R.:
&quot;Seasonal Variations in Cannabinolic Content of Indiana
Marihuana,&quot; Journal of Forensic Sciences, 15(2) 191-200
(1970). </p>

<p>Phillips, R. N., Brown, D. J., Martz, R. C., Hubbard, J. D.
and Forney, R. B.: &quot;Subacute Toxicity of WaterSuspended
(-)Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats, Toxicology and Applied
Pharmacology, 19(2) : 414 (1971). </p>

<p>Pillard, R. C.: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; New England Journal of
Medicine, 283(6) : 294-303 (1970). </p>

<p>Pirch, J. H., Colin. R. A., Barnes, P. R. and Barrett, E. S.:
&quot;Tolerance to EEG and Behavioral Effects of Marihuana in
Rats,&quot; The Pharmacologist, 13(2) : 246 (1971). </p>

<p>Pivik, T., Zareone, V. Hollister, L. E. &amp; Dement, W.:
&quot;The Effects of Hallucinogenic Agents on Sleep,&quot;
Paychophysiology, 6(2) : 261 (1969). </p>

<p>Podolsky, S., Pattavina, C., and Amaral. M.: Effects of
Marihuana on Glucose Tolerance Test (G.T.T.),&quot; Annals of the
New York Academy of Science, 191: 54-6 (1971). </p>

<p>Porot, A: &quot;Le Cannabisme,&quot; Annales
Medico-Psychologique8z 1(1) : 1-24 (1942). </p>

<p>Powelson, H. D., Personal Communication, Chief Psychiatrist,
University of California, Berkeley, &quot;Clinical Notes on the
Use of Marihuana,&quot; (1970). </p>

<p>Prince, R., Greenfield, R. and Marriott: &quot;Ganja: The
Benevolent Alternative? Observations on Use of Cannabis and
Alcohol in Jamaica,&quot; Mental Health Institute, Montreal,
unpublished manuscript 1970). </p>

<p>Reales-Orozeo, et al.: &quot;Aspectos Generales de la
Intoxicacion Por Marihuana y Sus Manifestaciones Psiquiatricas en
Barranquilla,&quot; Revista de Medicina Legal de Colombia, 13:
142-148 (1953). </p>

<p>Renault, P. P., Schuster, C. R., Heinrich, R. and Freedman, D.
X.:&quot;Marihuana: Standardized Smoke Administration and Dose
Effect Curves on Heart Rate in Humans,&quot; Science, 174 (4009)
: 589-591 (1971). </p>

<p>Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.: &quot;Effects of
Marihuana on Evoked Heart Rate and Skin Conductance
Responses,&quot; Presented at Society for Psychophysiological
Research Meeting, New Orleans (November 22, 1970). </p>

<p>Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.:
&quot;Psychophysiology of Marihuana,&quot; Presented to Langley
Porter Nueropsychiatrie Institute, San Francisco (May 1970). </p>

<p>Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. E.: &quot;Drug Use in a Normal
Population of Young Negro Men,&quot; American Journal of Public
Health, 57 (9) :1580-1596 (1967). </p>

<p>Rodin, E. and Domino, E. F.: &quot;Effects of Acute Marihuana
Smoking in the Electroencephalograms,&quot;
Electroencephalography and Clinical Ncurophysiology, 29: 321
(1970). </p>

<p>Rodin, E., Domino, E. P., and Porzak, J. P.: &quot;The
Marihuana-Induced 'Social High'-Neurological and
Electroencephalographic Concomitants,&quot; Journal of the
American Medical Association, 213 (8) : 1300-1302 (1970). </p>

<p>Roth, W. T., Galanter, M., Weingartner, H., Vaughan, T. B.,
and Wyatt, R. J.: &quot;The Effect of Marihuana and Synthetic
delta-9-THC on Auditory Evoked Response and Background EEG in
Humans,&quot; Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, National
Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland (unpublished
1972). </p>

<p>Rubin, V. and Comitas, L.: &quot;A Study of the Effects of
Chronic Ganja Smoking in Jamaica,&quot; Research Institute for
the Study of 'Man, New York, in preparation for tration and Dose
Effect Curves on Heart Rate in Huthe National Institute of Mental
Health, Contract No. 11811 42-70-77 (1972). </p>

<p>Sagone, L., Laurence, T. and Balcerzak, S. P.: &quot;SmokingA
Cause of 'Spurious' Polyeythemia,&quot; Blood: The Journal of
Hematology, XXXVIII (6) : 118 (1971). </p>

<p>Scher, J. M.: &quot;The Marihuana Habit,&quot; Journal of the
American Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1120 (1970). Schuster, C.
R. and Renault, P. F.: Personal Communication, Department of
Psychiatry, School of Medicine University of Chicago, January
1972. </p>

<p>Schwartz, C. J.: &quot;Toward a Medical Understanding of
Marihuana,&quot; Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal 14:
591400 (1969). </p>

<p>Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: &quot;Marihuana
and Health,&quot; A Report to the Congress (January 1971). </p>

<p>Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: &quot;Marihuana
and Health,&quot; A Report to the Congress (February 1972). </p>

<p>Shean, G. D. and Fetchtman. P.: &quot;Purpose in Life Scores
of Student Marihuana Users,&quot; Journal of Clinical Psychology,
27 (1) :112-113 (1971). </p>

<p>Sigg, B. W.: &quot;Le Cannabisme Chronique. Fruit (le Sons
Development et du Capitalisnie: Etude Socio-Econo que et
psycho-pathologique,&quot; Algiers (1963). </p>

<p>Siler, J. P., Sheep, W. L., Bates, L. B., Clark, G. F., Cook,
G. W. and Smith, W. A.: &quot;Marihuana Smoking in Panama,&quot;
The Military Surgeon, 73 (5) : 269-280 (1933). </p>

<p>Silva, M. T. A., Carlini, E. A., Claussen, U. and Korte, F.:
&quot;Lack of Cross-Tolerance in Rate Among (-) Delta
9-TransTetrahydrocannabinol (Delta 9-THC), Cannabis Extract,
Mescaline and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25),&quot;
Psychopharmacologia, 13: 332-340 (1968). </p>

<p>Sim, V. M. and Tucker, L. A.: &quot;Summary Report on EA 1476
and EA 2233,&quot; U.S. Army Chemical Research and Development
Laboratories, Special Publication 1-44 (1963). </p>

<p>Simmons, J. L. and Winograd, B.: It's Happening: A Portrait of
the Youth Scene Today, Santa Barbara: MarcLaird Publications
(1966). </p>

<p>Smith, D. E.: &quot;Acute and Chronic Toxicity of
Marihuana,&quot; Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 2: 37-41 (1968). </p>

<p>Smith, D. E. and Mehl, C.: The New Social Drug, Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc. (1970), pp. 63-77. </p>

<p>Sonnenreich, C., and Goes, J. P.: &quot;Marihuana and Mental
Disturbances,&quot; Neurobiologia, 25: 69-91 (1962). </p>

<p>Soueif, M. I.: &quot;Hashish Consumption in Egypt with Special
Reference to Psychological Aspects,&quot; UN Bulletin on
Narcotics, 19 (2) : 1-12 (1967). </p>

<p>Spencer, J. D.: &quot;Cannabis Induced Psychosis,&quot;
British Journal of Addiction, 651: 369-372 (1970). </p>

<p>Sterne, J. and Ducastaing, C.: &quot;Les Arterites du Cannabis
Indica,&quot; Archives des Maladies du Coeur et des Vais8eaux,
53: 143-147 (1960). </p>

<p>Stringaris, M. G.: &quot;Zur Klink der Hashchischpsychosen
(Nach Studien in Griechenland),&quot; Archiv fur Psychiatric and
Nervenkranhheiten, 100 (4) : 522-532 (1933). Suchman, E. A.:
&quot;The 'hang-Loose' Ethic and the Spirit of Drug Use,&quot;
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 9: 146-155 (1968). </p>

<p>Talbott, J. A. - &quot;Pot Reactions,&quot; USARMY Medical
Bulletin, 40-41 (1968). </p>

<p>Talbot, J. A., and Teague, J. W.: &quot;Marihuana, Psychosis:
Acute Toxic Psychosis Associated With the Use of Cannabis
Derivatives,&quot; Journal of the American Medical Association,
210 (2) :299--302 (1969). </p>

<p>Tart, C. T.: &quot;Marihuana Intoxication, Common
Experiences,&quot; Nature, 226 (5247) : 701-704 (1970). Tart, C.
T.: &quot;Marihuana Intoxication: Reported Effects On Sleep and
Dreams,&quot; Presented Association for Psychophysiological Study
of Sleep, Santa Fe (1970). Tart, C. T.: On Being Stoned, Palo
Alto: Science and Behavioral Books (1971). </p>

<p>Tennant, F. S., Preble, It., Prendergast, T. J. and Ventry,
P.: &quot;Medical Manifestations Associated With Hashish,&quot;
Journal of the American Medical Association, 216 (12) 1965-1969
(1971). </p>

<p>Thompson, G. R., Rosencrantz, 11. and Brande, M. C.:
&quot;Neurotoxicity of the Cannabinoids in Chronically Treated
Rats and Monkeys,&quot; The Pharmacologist, 13 (2) : 296 (1971). </p>

<p>Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. T., Rosencrantz, H. and Brande,
Al. C.: &quot;Acute Oral Toxicity of Cannabinoids in Various
Species,&quot; Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 19 (2) : 413
(1971). </p>

<p>Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. IT., Rosencrantz, H. N.,
Hagopian, M, Mason, M. M., Fleishman, R. W., and Hamniann, C. G.:
&quot;Determine, Toxicity of delta 8 and delta 9
Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract,&quot; Mason Research
Institute, Worcester, Mass., Reports IXIX to the National
Institute of Mental Health Contract #HSM 42-70-95 (June 1970-June
1971), #HSM 42-71-79 (June 1971-Jan. 1972). </p>

<p>Tinklenberg, J. R., Melges, F. T., Hollister, L. E., and
Gillespie, H. K.: &quot;Marihuana and Immediate Memory,&quot; </p>

<p>Nature, 226 (5251) : 1171 1172 (June 1970). </p>

<p>Truitt, E. B.: &quot;Biologic Disposition of
Tetrahydrocannabinols,&quot; Pharmacological Review, 23 (4) :
273-278 (1971). </p>

<p>Truitt, E., Mitchell, R., Foltz, R., Fentiman, A., Kinzer, G.,
Grotta, II., and Leighty, E.: &quot;Bioanalytical 'Studies of
Cannabis Smoking,&quot; Report to the National Institute of
Mental Health, Contract Number P11-43-68-1338, Battelle Memorial
Institute, Columbus, Ohio (1970). </p>

<p>Ungerleider, J. T.: &quot;Letter to the Editor,&quot; American
Journal of Psychiatry, 125: 1448 (1969). </p>

<p>Ungerleider, J. T., Fischer, D. D., Goldsmith, R. S., Fuller,
M., and Forgy, E.: &quot;A Statistical Survey of Adverse
Reactions to LSD in Los Angeles County,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry, 125 (3) : 352-357 (1968). </p>

<p>United Nations Economic and Social Council: &quot;A Programme
of Studies of the Plan and Its Products, Survey of the Cannabis
Situation in India,&quot; U.N. Document No. E/CN.7/286, Addendum
12 (March 1957). </p>

<p>Volavka, J., Dornbush, R., Feldstein, S., Clare, G., Zaks, A.,
Fink, M., and Freedman, A. M.: &quot;Marihuana, EEG and
Behavior,&quot; Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:
206-215 (1971). </p>

<p>Vree, T. B., Breinier, 1). D., Van Ginneken, C. A. M. and Van
Rossum, J. M.: &quot;Identification of the Methyl and Propyl
Homologues of CBD, THC, CBN in Hashish by a New Method of
Combined Gas Chromatography-mass Spectrometry,&quot; Acta
Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 683684 (1971). </p>

<p>Waldman, M. M.: &quot;Marihuana Bronchitis,&quot; Journal of
the American Medical Association, 211: 501 (1970). </p>

<p>Wall, M. E.: &quot;The InVitro and InVivo Metabolism of
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),&quot; Annals of the New York Academy
of Science, 191: 23-39 (1971). </p>

<p>Wall, M. E., -Brine, -1). R., J-1rine, G. A. Pitt, C. G.,
Emudenthal, R. 1. and Christensen, H. D.: &quot;Isolation,
Structure, and Biological Activity of Several Metabolites of A'
Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot; Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 92 (11) : 3466-3468 (1970). </p>

<p>Wall, Al. E., Brine, D., Perez-Reyes, Al. and Lipton, M.:
&quot;Studies on the InVitro and InVivo Metabolism of A'
Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot; Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 702
(1971). </p>

<p>Waller, C. W.: &quot;The Chemistry of Marihuana,&quot;
Proceedings of the Western Pharmacology Society, 14: 1-3 (1971). </p>

<p>Walters, P. A., Goethals, G. W. and Pope, H. G.: &quot;Drug
Use and Life Style Among 500 College Undergraduates&quot;
Archives of General Psychiatry, 26: 92-96 (1972). </p>

<p>Walton, R. P.: Marihuana, America's New Drug Problem,
Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co. (1938). </p>

<p>Warnock, J.: &quot;Insanity from Hasheesh,&quot; Journal of
Mental Sciences, 49: 96-110 (1903). </p>

<p>Waskow, 1. E., Olsson, J. E., Salzman, C. and Katz, Al. M.:
&quot;Psychological Effects of Tetraliydrocannabinol,&quot;
Archives of General Psychiatry, 22 (2): 97-107 (1970). </p>

<p>Watt, J. M.: &quot;Dagga in South Africa,&quot; UN Bulletin on
Narcotics, 13 (3) : 9-14 (1961). </p>

<p>Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. B.: The Forensic and
Sociological Aspects of the Dagga Problem in South Africa,&quot;
South African Medical Journal, 10: 573-579 (1936). </p>

<p>Weil, A. T.: &quot;Adverse Reactions to Marihuana.
Classification and Suggested Treatment,&quot; New England Journal
of Medicine, 282 (18) : 997-1000 (1970). </p>

<p>Weil, A. T.: Testimony before National Commission on Marihuana
and Drug Abuse, Washington, D.C. (May 1971). </p>

<p>Weil, A. T., and Zinberg, N. E.: &quot;Acute Effects of
Marihuana on Speech,&quot; Nature, 222: 434-437 (1969). Weil, A.
T., Zinberg, N. E. and Nelsen, J. ',M.: &quot;Clinical and
Psychological Effects of marihuana in Alan,&quot; Science, 162:
1234-1242 (1968). </p>

<p>Weiss, J. L.: Personal Communication, Staff Fellow, National
Institute of Mental Health, Laboratory of Clinical Science,
Bethesda, Maryland, August 1, 1971. Weiss, S.: &quot;A General
Picture of Charas Habit in Afghanistan,&quot; Report from Kabul
University Medical School (July 1971). </p>

<p>White, R. B., Goolishian, H., and Barratt, E. S.:
&quot;Dilemmas Encountered by the Marihuana Researcher,&quot;
Presented 46th Annual Conference of the Central Neuropsychiatric
Association, Galveston (October 1970). </p>

<p>Wikler, A.: &quot;Clinical and Social Aspects of Marihuana
Intoxication,&quot; Archives of General Psychiatry, 23: 320-325
(1970). </p>

<p>Wikler, A., and Lloyd, B. J.: &quot;Effect of Smoking
Marihuana Cigarettes on Cortical Electrical Activity,&quot;
Federation Proceedings, 4: 141-142 (1945). </p>

<p>William,,;, E. G., Himmelsbach, C. K., Wikler, A., Ruble, D.
C., and Lloyd, B.N.: &quot;Studies on Marihuana and Pyrahexyl
Compound,&quot; Public Health Reports, 61 (29) 1059-1083 (1946). </p>

<p>Winick, C.: &quot;Use of Drugs by Jazz Musicians,&quot; Social
Problems, 7: 240-253 (1960). </p>

<p>Wurmser, L., Levin, L., and Lewis, A.: &quot;Chronic Paranoid
Symptoms and Thought Disorders in Users of Marihuana and LSD as
Observed in Psychotherapy,&quot; Bulletin, Problems on Drug
Dependence, 31: 6154-6177 (1969).<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>