
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-75</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B019-221</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135039 text/html 52266
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:50:25 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:58 GMT
Content-length: 52048
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Drugs and Their Effects</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h2>CHAPTER TWO : THE DRUGS AND THEIR EFFECTS </h2>

<p>INTRODUCTION </p>

<p>20. The primary purpose of this chapter is to review in
preliminary fashion the current scientific knowledge of certain
psychotropic drugs used non-medically in Canada. In addition,
this section will introduce a few basic concepts which may be
helpful to the understanding of some of the potentials and
limitations of the scientific method as applied to the study of
human behaviour and drugs.* Psychopharmacology, the branch of
science specifically concerned with these issues, can be defined
as the study of the interaction of drugs with ongoing
psychological and behavioural activity. </p>

<p>A certain amount of the current controversy and lack of
communication regarding the 'drug problem' has been attributed to
the multitude of meanings that the term 'drug' has to different
people, and to the often arbitrary way in which our society
defines, and endeavours to solve, the problems arising from man's
persistent use of chemical substances to alter his existence. To
some people the word 'drug' means a medicine used in the
prevention, diagnosis, of treatment of an abnormal or
pathological condition. In other situations, it is often used to
refer only to illegal or socially disapproved substances. Some
individuals employ the word in a manner suggesting dependence or
addiction, regardless of whether it refers to some chemical
substance or to other preoccupations such as television, music,
books, or sports and games. Some consider alcohol, tea and coffee
as drugs, while to others these are simply normal beverages not
to be confused with the more foreign and unfamiliar substances
viewed as drugs. Furthermore, the terms 'drug' and 'narcotic' are
given special meanings in legal areas. </p>

<p>* A glossary of technical terms, as used in this report, is
presented at the end of this volume. </p>

<p>Even scientists frequently disagree as to the precise
definition of the term 'drug'. </p>

<p>Modell164 has suggested a comprehensive pharmacological
definition of drugs which the Commission has adopted. As noted in
Chapter One, a <i>drug </i>is considered to be any <i>substance
that by its chemical nature alters structure or function in the
living organism. </i>Modell observed that: </p>

<p>Drug action is therefore a general biological phenomenon ...
pharmacologic effects are exerted by foods, vitamins, hormones,
microbial metabolites, plants, snake venoms, stings, products of
decay, air pollutants, pesticides, minerals, synthetic chemicals,
virtually all foreign materials (very few are completely inert)
and many materials normally in the body. </p>

<p>While this interpretation may be too broad for certain
practical purposes, it provides some perspective into the
ubiquitous nature of our internal and external chemical
environment, and the complexity of the question of human drug
use. The Commission's primary concern is focused on the use and
effects of drugs taken for their <i>psychotropic or psychoactive </i>properties
as defined by their capacity to <i>alter sensation, mood,
consciousness or other psychological or behavioural functions.</i>
</p>

<p>21. The use of psychoactive drugs seems to be an almost
universal phenomenon and has apparently occurred throughout
recorded history, in almost all societies. Some scholars have
suggested that this use of drugs may have been among the earliest
behavioural characteristics distinguishing man from the other
animals. Blum, in the United States <i>Task Force Report </i>(1967),
has stated:27 </p>

<p>Mind-altering drug use is common to mankind. Such drugs have
been employed for millennia in almost all cultures. In our work
we have been able to identify only a few societies in the world
today where no mind-altering drugs are used; these are small and
isolated cultures. Our own society puts great stress on
mind-altering drugs as desirable products which are used in many
acceptable ways (under medical supervision, as part of the family
home remedies, in self-medication, in social use [alcohol, tea
parties, coffee klatches, etc.] and in private use [cigarettes,
etc.] ). In terms of drug use, 'the rarest or most abnormal form
of behaviour is not to take any mind-altering drugs at all.... If
one is to use the term 'drug user', it applies to nearly all of
us. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">The
Role of Science </h3>

<p>22. It has been suggested that the potential role of science
in the solution of the 'drug problem' is to provide information
to better enable individuals and society to make informed and
discriminating decisions regarding the availability and use of
particular drugs. Unfortunately, considerable disparity often
exists between the need for such information and the capacity of
science to acquire and communicate it. </p>

<p>Helen Nowlis has noted: 172 </p>

<p>There are many reasons why the 'facts' invoked in
non-scientific discussions of drugs are often not facts at all.
They may be second or third-hand quotations of statements
attributed to scientists. There is a readiness on the part of
many to accept as 'scientific fact' any statement made by, or
attributed to, someone labelled as scientist, whether it is a
statement based on research, on uncontrolled observation, or
merely on personal opinion. </p>

<p>While science may be able to serve as a useful guideline and
source of information, science itself is not a policy-making
process, but merely a practical system designed to explore and
test notions of a certain abstract nature. Even though the aim of
science is to maximize objectivity, the interpretation and
application of scientific data is usually a subjective venture
regardless of the controls maintained in the formal analyses. The
practical use of such information in the social sphere often
entails economic, legal, philosophical and moral issues which are
not amenable to scientific analysis as we know it today. </p>

<p>Even though considerable progress has been made in advancing
our knowledge of biology, science has provided only a minimal
understanding of the essential nature of psychological and
behavioural functions and their relationship to underlying
physiological processes. Consequently, psychopharmacology today
must be content with exploring the interaction of chemicals
(often with certain identified physical characteristics) with a
largely unknown largely unknown human psychobiological system of
enormous complexity. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">The
Classification of Drugs </h3>

<p>23. Drug classifications, based on a variety of different
considerations have been developed and there appears to be little
general agreement as to the optimal scheme for ordering the
universe of biologically active substances. For example, drugs
might be organized according to chemical structure,
clinical-therapeutic use, potential health hazards, liability to
non-medical use, public availability and legality, effects on
specific neural or other physiological systems, or influence on
certain psychological and behavioural processes. The
classification systems developed from these different approaches
may show considerable overlap, although there are often striking
incongruities. For example, some drugs which appear very similar
in chemical structure may be quite different in pharmacological
activity and vice-versa. The most useful organization depends on
the intended use of the classifications. </p>

<p>Since our major concern here is with the effects of
psychologically active substances, our interim drug
classification system is based primarily on general psychological
and pharmacological considerations. In Table I eight major
classes are presented along with some examples of drugs from each
group. While the categories are not considered to be exhaustive,
the general system is applicable to the majority of drugs used
for their psychological effects. Since the effects of drugs
depend on a vast number of psychological and physiological
components, many of which seem unpredictable, these categories
are to some extent based on a typical reaction by an average
subject to a common dose. Large variations in any of various
factors can greatly alter the effects and may reduce the
reliability of the descriptions. </p>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom"> </p>

<h3>CLASSIFICATION OF MAJOR PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS </h3>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom"> </p>

<p><b>I</b><b><i> - Sedatives and Hypnotics</i></b><i> </i>(a) </p>

<p>Barbiturates - e.g., </p>

<p>Verpnal* (barbital) </p>

<p>Seconal* (secobarbital) </p>

<p>Nembutal* (pentobarbital) </p>

<p>Minor tranquilizers - e.g., </p>

<p>Librium* (chlordiazepoxide) </p>

<p>Valium* (diazepam) </p>

<p>Doriden* (glutethimide) </p>

<p>Mittown* (meprobamate) </p>

<p>Others - e.g., </p>

<p>bromides, alcohol (ethanol), paraldehyde, chloral hydrate,
antihistamines (e.g., Gravol*), </p>

<p>anticholinergics (e.g., datura stramonium, atropine,
scopolamine [Sominex* and Compoz*]) </p>

<p><b>II - </b><b><i>Stimulants</i></b> (a) </p>

<p>Amphetamines - e.g., </p>

<p>Benzedrine* (amphetamine) </p>

<p>Dexedrine* (dextroamphetamine) </p>

<p>Methedrine* (methamphetamine) </p>

<p>Others - e.g., </p>

<p>Ritalin* (methylphenidate), Meratran* (pipradol), Preludin*
(phenmetrazine), cocaine, ephedrine, caffeine (coffee, tea and
cola drinks), nicotine (tobacco), khat </p>

<p><b>III </b><b><i>- Psychedelics and Hallucinogens</i></b> (b) </p>

<p>LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide-25, lysergide) </p>

<p>Cannabis (marijuana, hashish) </p>

<p>THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) </p>

<p>Mescaline (peyote) </p>

<p>Psilocybin </p>

<p>DMT (dimethyltryptamine) </p>

<p>DET (diethyltryptamine) </p>

<p>DOM (STP, dimethoxymethamphetamine), </p>

<p>MDA (methylenedioxyamphetamine ) </p>

<p>MMDA (methoxymethylenedioxyamphetamine ) </p>

<p>LBJ (methylipiperidylbenzilate) </p>

<p>PCP (Sernyl*, phencyclidine) </p>

<p><b>IV - </b><b><i>Opiate Narcotics </i></b>(a) </p>

<p>Opium (e.g. Paregoric*, Pantopon*) </p>

<p>Heroin (diacetylmorphine) </p>

<p>Morphine </p>

<p>Codeine (methoxymorphine) </p>

<p>Synthetics -e.g., </p>

<p>Deremol* (pethidine) </p>

<p>Alvodine* (piminodine) </p>

<p>Dolophine* (methadone) </p>

<p><b>V </b><b><i>- Volatile Solvents </i></b>(b) </p>

<p><i>Sources: </i>Glue, gasoline, paint thinner, nail polish,
nail polish remover, lighter and cleaning fluid, spray cans, etc.
</p>

<p><i>Active agents</i>: Toluene, acetone, benzene, naphtha,
trichloroethylene, ether, chloroform, amyl nitrate, nitrous
oxide, freon, etc. </p>

<p><b>VI </b><b><i>- Non-Narcotic Analgesics</i></b><i> </i>(a) </p>

<p>Aspirin* (acetylsacylic acid) </p>

<p>Phenacetin* (acetophenetidin) </p>

<p><b>VII </b><b><i>- Clinical Anti-Depressants</i></b><i> </i>(c)
</p>

<p>Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors - e.g., </p>

<p>Nardil* (Phenezine) </p>

<p>Tricyclics - e.g., </p>

<p>Trofanil* (Imipramine) </p>

<p><b>VIII </b><b><i>- Major Tranquillizers</i></b> (c) </p>

<p>Phenothiazines - e.g., </p>

<p>Largactil * (chlopromazine) </p>

<p>Rauwolfia alkaloids, (snake root) - e.g., </p>

<p>Serpasil* (reserpine) </p>

<p>Butyrophenones - e.g., </p>

<p>Haldol* (haloperidol) </p>

<p>Thioxanthenes - e.g., </p>

<p>Taractan* (chlorprothixene) </p>

<p>(a) Used medically and non-medically. </p>

<p>(b) Little or no medical use. </p>

<p>(c) Wide medical use, and little or no non-medical use </p>

<p>* Registered Trade Name </p>

<p>24. The <i>sedatives</i> and <i>hypnotics</i> (e.g., alcohol,
barbiturates, 'sleeping pills' and minor tranquillizers)
generally decrease central nervous system (CNS) arousal (although
some psychological stimulation may result at low doses). Most of
these drugs are used medically to reduce anxiety and tension, to
produce general sedation and, at higher doses, sleep. The
anticholinergic substances (e.g., belladonna alkaloids) are often
used as sedatives at low doses although larger amounts may
produce excitation and delirium. </p>

<p>25. The <i>stimulants </i>(e.g., amphetamines or 'speed',
'diet' and 'pep pills', caffeine, and cocaine) generally suppress
appetite, increase activity, alertness, tension and general CNS
arousal, and, at higher doses, block sleep. Tobacco (nicotine and
coal tars) is usually considered a physiological stimulant
although a variety of other effects are not uncommon. </p>

<p>26. The third group includes drugs described as <i>psychedelic
</i>(mind-manifesting), <i>hallucinogenic </i>(hallucination-producing),
<i>psychotomimetic </i>(psychosis-imitating), <i>illusinogenic </i>(illusion-producing),
and <i>psychodysleptic </i>(mind-disrupting). While these terms
refer to somewhat overlapping effects alleged to occur with the
drugs in this class, the various labels emphasize different
characteristics which are neither synonymous nor necessarily
mutually exclusive. Probably none are entirely adequate as
descriptive terms. These drugs may produce profound alteration in
sensation, mood and consciousness at doses which result in
comparatively light physiological activity . LSD and marijuana
are examples from this group. The medical value of these drugs is
the subject of considerable current controversy. </p>

<p>27. The drugs in the fourth category have, traditionally been
referred to as narcotics or opiates, and are derivatives of, or
pharmacologically related to, products of the opium plant. The
best known examples are heroin, morphine and codeine. The word
'narcotic' has been used inconsistently in scientific as well as
lay language and has been the subject of considerable
disagreement in legal matters (for example, marijuana, cocaine,
and other non-opiates are frequently controlled under laws
regulating narcotics, in spite of the fact that they are
pharmacologically different from this group). The use of the term
'opiates' is generally more specific, although its application
has not always been limited to these drugs. Consequently, the
specific term <i>opiate narcotics </i>is suggested to reduce
ambiguity. These drugs are used medically mainly for their
pain-relieving effects. </p>

<p>28. The fifth group is an aggregate of chemically diverse
substances perhaps best described on a physical basis as <i>volatile
solvents. </i>They are usually inhaled and include the vapour of
such common materials as glue, gasoline and lacquer thinner. Some
of these drugs have been called <i>deliriants </i>although
delirium is only one of many potential effects and is clearly not
restricted to these substances. Many are quite similar in effect
to the sedative group and might be considered in a sub-class of
that category. Others may have slight psychedelic or
hallucinogenic effects. Most of these substances have no known
medical use although several have been employed as clinical
anaesthetics. </p>

<p>29. The <i>non-narcotic analgesics </i>(e.g., Aspirin* and
Phenacetin*) are primarily used to reduce aching pain and to
lower fever. In some instances they may also serve as mild
sedatives. </p>

<p>30. The <i>clinical anti-depressants </i>(e.g., Tofranil* and
Nardil*) are used medically to improve mood in severely depressed
patients. These drugs are rarely used for non-medical purposes
since they have little effect on normal mood states. </p>

<p>31. The final group, the <i>major tranquillizers, </i>are
primarily used to reduce the symptoms of severe psychosis (e.g.,
schizophrenia). Largactil* and reserpine are examples. While
these have initiated a widespread revolution in chemo-therapy in
psychiatry, they are rarely involved in non-medical use. </p>

<p>* Throughout this chapter an asterisk indicates a registered
drug trade name. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Psychological
Considerations </h3>

<p>32. The general effect of most drugs is greatly influenced by
a variety of psychological and environmental factors. Unique
qualities of an individual's personality, his past history of
drug experience, his attitudes towards the drug, his expectations
of its effects and his motivation for taking it are extremely
important and in some instances may completely obscure the
typical pharmacological response to a drug. These factors are
often referred to collectively as the person's mental 'set'. 'The
'setting' or total environment in which the drug is taken may
also be a factor of major significance. </p>

<p>A few drinks of alcohol may produce drowsiness and fatigue in
some situations, while the same individual under different
circumstances may be psychologically stimulated and aroused by
the same dose. It appears that the set and setting may be of
greater significance with the psychedelic-hallucinogenic
substances than with the other drugs, and it has been suggested
that psychological factors may often be the primary components in
determining the quality or character of the psychedelic drug
experience. </p>

<p>The so-called <i>placebo effect </i>is a striking example of
the importance of set and setting in determining the drug
response. A placebo, in this context, refers to a
pharmacologically inactive substance which elicits a significant
reaction, entirely because of what the individual expects or
desires to happen. In certain individuals in some settings a
placebo substance may have surprisingly powerful consequences.
The placebo effect is specific to the individual and the setting,
and not to any chemical properties of the substance involved.
Therefore, in spite of an apparent 'drug effect', the placebo is
not considered a drug since it does not alter function 'by its
chemical nature'. </p>

<p>Placebos have been reported in therapeutic situations to
significantly relieve such symptoms as headache and a variety of
other pains, hay fever, colds, seasickness, neuroses, and a
number of gastrointestinal complaints.97 Some scientists have
suggested that the bulk of medical history may actually have been
a history of the placebo, since many 'effective cures' of the
past have been shown to be without relevant direct
pharmacological action, and are today of no value as therapeutic
agents. </p>

<p>To control for the influence of such psychological factors in
drug research, testing is usually done under at least two
conditions: an assessment is made using the actual drug of
interest, and a separate measurement is taken after a placebo is
given under identical circumstances. By comparing these two
conditions some of the effects of set and setting can often be
controlled and the actual drug effect uncovered. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Pharmacological
Considerations </h3>

<p>33. In studying how drugs affect the body, pharmacologists
generally divide the analysis into several processes: </p>

<p>1. <i>Administration: </i>how does the drug enter the body? </p>

<p>2. <i>Absorption: </i>how does the drug get from the site of
administration into the physiological system of the body? </p>

<p>3. <i>Distribution: </i>how is the drug distributed to various
areas in the body? </p>

<p>4. <i>Action: </i>how and where does the drug produce what
effects? </p>

<p><i>5.</i> <i>Physiological Fate: </i>how is the drug
inactivated, metabolized, and/or eliminated from the body? </p>

<p>Different routes or modes of administration can have
considerable influence on the latency, duration, intensity and
the general nature of the drug effect. Many drugs are well
absorbed from the stomach and intestines after ingestion while
others are poorly taken up or may be destroyed by the gastric
juices. Certain drugs may be injected, with a hypodermic syringe
for example, just under the skin (subcutaneous or S.C,), into the
muscle (intramuscular or I.M.), or into a blood vein (intravenous
or I.V.). The effects are generally most rapid and intense after
intravenous injection and, consequently, this mode of
administration can be quite dangerous in inexperienced hands. In
addition, certain volatile substances can be rapidly and
efficiently absorbed from the lungs by inhalation. </p>

<p>34. The action of a drug is in many cases terminated by
chemical changes which it undergoes in the body, Certain organs
(often the liver) metabolize or 'break down' the original
substance into other chemicals which are usually (but not always)
less active and more easily eliminated from the body. Some drugs
may be excreted unchanged in the urine, faeces, or breath. Action
is not always terminated by excretion, however, and the effects
of some drugs greatly outlast the actual presence of the chemical
in the body. Numerous physiological factors alter absorption,
distribution, action and fate, and must therefore be taken into
consideration in the study of drug effects. </p>

<p>The details of cellular physiology are largely unknown and
with rare exceptions there is little information as to the
mechanism by which any particular drug changes the activity of
the nervous system. At the simplest level, it appears that a drug
alters the functioning of the living cell by entering into some
sort of chemical combination with substances already present.
Even if this molecular process were well understood, it would not
provide a straightforward basis for predicting the overall
effects of the drug on a group of interacting cells, or, at
higher level, on the total nervous system (comprising billions of
cells) and associated psychological and behavioural processes. </p>

<p><i>35. The importance of dose. </i>One of the basic principles
of pharmacology is that specific statements about drug effects
can not be made without consideration of the quantity or dose of
the drug involved. With all drugs, the response differs both in
the intensity and the character of the reaction, according to the
amount of the drug administered. The relation between the dose
and the intensity of an effect is often referred to by scientists
as the <i>dose-response or dose-effect relationship.</i> </p>

<p>Although the magnitude of the effects of some drugs may
increase in a rather uniform (monotonic) fashion as dose is
increased, other drugs, particularly the sedatives, may show a <i>bi-phasic
response </i>and actually produce behaviourally opposite effects
at some doses compared to others. Low doses of alcohol may, in
certain instances, be somewhat stimulating, while higher doses
generally have a strong sedating effect. Scopolamine (a
belladonna alkaloid) may produce sedation at low doses, and
excitation, delirium and hallucinations with larger quantities.
Very toxic doses of this drug can again produce sedation, coma
and even death. </p>

<p>For every drug there is a dose low enough so as to produce<b> </b>no
noticeable reaction, and at the opposite extreme, some degree of
toxicity or poisoning can be produced by any substance if enough
is taken. The concept of a poison, in fact, really refers to the
quantity of a drug which exceeds the body's capacity to cope with
it without damage. No drug can be designated either safe,
beneficial, or harmful without consideration of the dose likely
to be consumed. Chlorine, for example, which is present in most
urban drinking water in concentration so low as to have little or
no pharmacological effect on humans, is intended to poison
harmful bacteria. The same substance, highly concentrated in
gaseous form, was developed during World War I as an extremely
potent respiratory poison. Even the concept of a psychotropic
drug implies some notion of the range of doses likely to be
consumed, since almost any drug can, in high quantities, affect
psychological function. In many instances, however, considerable
physical toxicity or poisoning develops before significant
psychological effects occur. </p>

<p>It is usually essential to study a drug's effect over a range
of doses in order to obtain an adequate understanding of the
nature of the response. It is also important to consider doses
which have some relevance to existing or potential patterns of
use if social implications are to be inferred from experimental
findings. </p>

<p><i>36. The importance of time. </i>Another important
pharmacological concept is the <i>time-response relationship </i>or
the relation between the time which has elapsed since
administration and the effect produced. Such a temporal analysis
may be restricted to immediate or short-term (acute) effects of a
single dose, or on the other extreme, may involve the long-term
effects of persistently repeated (chronic) use of a drug. </p>

<p>The intensity and often the character or quality of the
overall drug effect may change substantially within a short
period of time. For example, the main intoxicating effects of a
large dose of alcohol generally reach a peak in less than an
hour, then gradually taper off. An initially stimulating effect
may later change to one of sedation. With some drugs, an initial
state of tension or anxiety may later turn into one of relaxation
and sense of well-being, or vice-versa, as a function of time. </p>

<p>It may also be important with some drugs to consider the
long-term consequences of chronic use. Usually such effects can
not be readily predicted from what is known of the immediate
response. For instance, while there is little doubt that the
smoking of a few tobacco cigarettes has no lasting detrimental
effect on lung or cardiac function, there is increasing
scientific evidence that long-term heavy use of this substance
has serious consequences. As another example, the clinical
picture of the chronic alcoholic involves psychological and
physiological disturbances which do not develop with moderate
drinking. In simple terms, it is essential to ask: 'How much?';
'How often?'; and 'For how long?' (as well as 'By whom?') when
discussing the long-term reaction to repeated drug use. </p>

<p>37. <i>Main effects and side effects. </i>It is highly
unlikely that any drug has only a single action on a particular
behavioural or physiological function. Most drugs can produce an
almost unlimited number of effects on the body, each with a
somewhat unique dose-response and time-response relationship. The
relative strength of the different responses to a drug generally
varies with the amount taken, and a particular effect which is
prominent at one dosage level may be quite secondary at another. </p>

<p>In a therapeutic or clinical setting, one is usually
interested in a single or perhaps a small number of the many
possible effects. Those which are desired are generally
considered 'main effects' whilst the other unwanted but
concurrent drug responses are labelled 'side effects'. This
distinction between main and side effects is a relative one and
depends on the purpose or the anticipated use of the drug. A
response which is considered unnecessary or undesirable in one
application may, in fact, be the main or desired effect in
another. For example, in the clinical treatment of severe pain,
the analgesic (pain-reducing) properties of morphine are
considered the main effect, and the psychological euphoria and
the intestinal constipation also produced are undesirable side
effects. To the 'street addict', however, the euphoric properties
are the main effects, and the analgesic and constipating effects
may be irrelevant or undesired. Certain opiate compounds such as
paregoric are used in treatment of diarrhoea and, in this
instance, the constipating effect of the drug is desired and the
other responses are considered side effects. It is universal that
drugs have undesirable and toxic side effects if the dose is
sufficiently increased. </p>

<p><i>38. Drug interaction. </i>Even in cases where the
individual effects of different drugs are well known and
reliable, if several substances are taken at the same time, tile
interaction may produce a response which is quite unpredictable
on the basis of the knowledge of the individual drugs alone. Less
commonly, a particular interaction effect may be anticipated. If
the drugs normally have similar properties, they may often have
an additive effect if taken together, resulting in a general
increase in responses similar to that produced by a larger single
dose of either one. There are also instances in which one drug
may potentiate the action of another, and the two together
produce a greater effect than would be expected by merely adding
the individual reactions. Furthermore, some drugs have
antagonistic effects, and one may counteract or inhibit certain
normal responses to the other. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Tolerance
and Dependence </h3>

<p>38a<i>. Tolerance is said to develop when the response to the
same dose of a drug decreases with repeated use. </i>With most
tolerance-producing drugs, effects of original intensity can be
retained. to a certain extent, if the dose is increased. The
extent of tolerance, and the rate at which it is acquired, depend
on the drug, the individual using it, and the magnitude and
frequency of administration. The body does not lose sensitivity
to all aspects of the reaction to a particular drug with equal
rapidity, or to the same degree. Some of the effects of a drug
may 'drop out' sooner than others with repeated use. Tolerance to
the effects which are reinforcing or rewarding drug use (i.e.,
'main effects') is usually reflected by a tendency for users to
increase dose. Most aspects of tolerance dissipate with
abstinence from the drug. </p>

<p>A moderate degree of tolerance to most effects of alcohol and
barbiturates develops and a heavy drinker may be able to consume
two to three times the alcohol tolerated by a novice. Little
tolerance develops to the lethal toxicity of these drugs,
however, and a heavy user of sedatives is just as susceptible to
death by overdose as is a non-tolerant individual. Opiate
narcotics, such as morphine, are capable of producing profound
tolerance, and heavy users have been known to take up to ten
times the amount which would normally produce death. By contrast,
no noticeable tolerance develops to cocaine (a short-acting
stimulant). </p>

<p>The exact mechanisms by which the body adapts, or becomes
tolerant, to different drug effects are not completely
understood, although several processes have been suggested.
Certain drugs (e.g., barbiturates) stimulate the body's
production of the metabolic enzymes which inactivate them. In
addition, there is evidence that a considerable degree of central
nervous system (CNS) tolerance may develop to certain drugs
independent of changes in the rate of absorption, metabolism or
excretion. An individual tolerant to alcohol, for example, can be
relatively unaffected by a large dose even though the resulting
high level of alcohol in his blood may accurately reflect the
magnitude of his intake. It is uncertain as to whether this
represents some general molecular adaptation to the drug at the
level of the individual nerve cell, or perhaps a specific
response by the central nervous system to counteract the sedating
effects and maintain normal function. Learning factors often
appear to play an important role in changing the individual's
response to a drug after experience with it. Effects which
initially may be strange or frightening may later be accepted
without reaction or concern, or perhaps, even be desired. There
is evidence that people may learn to control some drug effects,
or otherwise come to function normally in the presence of certain
responses which might originally have been distracting, or
otherwise disrupting of behaviour. </p>

<p>A phenomenon often referred to as 'reverse tolerance' has been
noted with some drugs (notably the psychedelics) in which the
desired effects may be achieved with smaller doses after
experience with the drug. Both learning and pharmacological
mechanisms have been suggested to underly this process. </p>

<p>In many instances, after an individual becomes tolerant to the
effects of one drug, he will also show tolerance to others with
similar action. This is called <i>cross-tolerance. </i>For
example, a heavy drinker will normally show a reduced response to
barbiturates, tranquillizers and anaesthetics, as well as to
alcohol. </p>

<p>39.<i> Physical dependence is a physiological state of
adaptation to a</i><b> </b><i>drug, normally following the
development of tolerance, which results in a characteristic set
of withdrawal symptoms (often called the 'abstinence syndrome'),
when administration of the drug is stopped. </i>These symptoms
may be of an intense nature after persistent heavy use, and with
some sedatives and opiate narcotics, may include tremors,
vomiting, delirium, cramps and, in severe cases with some drugs,
convulsions and death. There are generally no overt signs of
physical dependence if the drug level is kept high enough to
avoid the withdrawal syndrome. In a sense, the body comes to
depend on the drug for 'normal' functioning after adapting to its
presence, and when the drug is absent, considerable disruption of
essential physiological processes occurs until readjustment
develops. The withdrawal syndrome may also he elicited without
abstinence, by the administration of a substance which
specifically antagonizes or blocks certain effects of the
original drug. </p>

<p>Withdrawal symptoms can be prevented or promptly relieved by
the administration of a sufficient quantity of the original drug
or one with similar pharmacological activity. The latter case, in
which different drugs can be used interchangeably in preventing
withdrawal symptoms, is called <i>cross-dependence. </i>As an
example, barbiturates and tranquillizers can be used in treating
the abstinence syndrome associated with chronic alcoholism. </p>

<p>Often the recovery phase associated with different drugs is<i>
</i>characterized by a rebound phenomenon dominated by activity
opposite to that produced by the drug. For instance, withdrawal
from the sedatives generally results in symptoms of acute and
toxic hyperactivation and physiological arousal, while the
pattern following intense stimulant (e.g. 'speed') use usually
involves sedation, depression and sleep. </p>

<p>Although physical dependence can develop with such common
drugs as alcohol and barbiturates, it is not a factor in the
drug-taking behaviour of the vast majority of regular users. In
the few individuals who become physically dependent on these
particular drugs, serious social, personal and physiological
consequences of drug use usually precede the physical dependence.
Therefore, although physical dependence is a serious medical
problem in a minority of sedative users, the abstinence syndrome
itself is not the cause of major public health problems. The
potent opiate narcotics, by contrast, tend to produce very
pronounced tolerance and physical dependence early in the history
of regular use. These features then soon become an integral part
of the particular drug problem presented by the opiate narcotics.
However, with these and other drugs, psychological factors in the
dependence are often more significant in the long run. </p>

<p><i>40. Psychological dependence </i>(also often called
behavioural, psychic or emotional dependence, and habituation) is
a much more elusive concept and is difficult to define in a
satisfactory manner. A World Health Organization paper69 defines
psychic dependence thus: 'In this situation there is a feeling of
satisfaction and a psychic drive that require periodic or
continuous administration of the drug to produce a desired effect
or to avoid discomfort.' A major problem with this definition is
the difficulty in operationally defining and objectively
identifying the characteristics of the dependence in a practical
situation. </p>

<p>By contrast, some scientists224 have identified behavioural
dependence as repeated self-administration of a drug. This
approach seems far too broad for most purposes since it only
indicates that the drug is in some way reinforcing or rewarding
to the user, and merely restates the observation that he takes
the drug. </p>

<p>Extreme instances of psychological dependence are easier to
identify and may be characterized by an intense craving for, or
compulsion to continue the use of, a drug with obvious
behavioural manifestations. In many instances, psychological
aspects may be considerably more important than physical
dependence in maintaining chronic drug use. The major problem
with opiate dependence is not the physical aspects, since
withdrawal can be successfully achieved in a few weeks, but the
great likelihood that the individual will later return to chronic
use due to psychological dependence. </p>

<p>In most instances of even regular non-medical use of drugs,
such intense psychological dependence probably does not occur.
However, more subtle psychological and social factors usually
have persisting effects in maintaining the behaviour of drug
consumption. </p>

<p>In talking about dependency in any context, whether dealing
with drugs or not, it would seem useful to specify what it is
that is being depended upon and for what reasons, and to identify
the consequences of its presence or its absence. The significance
of dependency changes considerably if the entity is relied upon,
for example, for the maintenance of life (e.g., insulin for the
diabetic) or for the escape from an unpleasant or intolerable
situation (e.g., privacy), or perhaps for a feeling of well-being
or satisfaction with life. In one sense psychological dependence
may be said to exist with respect to anything which is part of
one's preferred way of life. In our society, this kind of
dependency occurs regularly with respect to such things as
television, music, books, religion, sex, money, favourite foods,
certain drugs, hobbies, sports or games and, often, other
persons. Some degree of psychological dependence is, in this
sense, a general and normal psychological condition. </p>

<p>A statement in the preliminary brief of the Addiction Research
Foundation of Ontario reflects the complexity of interpreting the
question of dependency:4 </p>

<p>It should be recognized, however, that dependence is not
necessarily bad in itself, either for the individual or for
society. The question to he evaluated, therefore, is not whether
dependence can occur, but whether dependence in a given case
results in physical, psychological or social harm. </p>

<p><i>41. The concept of addiction. </i>The term 'addiction' has
had a variety of meanings, and a consensus as to the proper
definition seems unlikely, even in scientific circles. Often it
has been used interchangeably with dependence (psychological
and/or physiological), while at other times it appears to be
synonymous with the term 'drug abuse'. The classical model of the
addiction- producing drug was based on the opiate narcotics, and
has traditionally required the presence of tolerance, and
physical and psychological dependence. However, this approach has
not been generally satisfactory since only a few commonly used
drugs (e.g., alcohol and other sedatives), in addition to the
opiates, seem to fit the model at all. It is clearly
inappropriate for many other drugs which can cause serious
dependency problems. For example, amphetamines can produce
considerable tolerance and strong psychological dependence with
little or no physical dependence, and cocaine can produce
psychological dependence without tolerance or physical
dependence. Furthermore, in certain medical applications,
morphine has been reported to produce tolerance and physical
dependence without a significant psychological component. </p>

<p>Recognizing the problems with the concept of addiction, the
World Health Organization (WHO) proposed the following:69 </p>

<p>It has become impossible in practice, and is scientifically
unsound, to maintain a single definition for all forms of drug
addiction and/or habituation. A feature common to these
conditions as well as to drug abuse in general is dependence,
psychic or physical or both, of the individual on a chemical
agent. Therefore, better understanding should be attained by
substitution of the term drug dependence of this or that type,
according to the agent or class of agents involved.... It must be
emphasized that drug dependence is a general term that has been
selected for its applicability to all types of drug abuse and
thus carries no connotation of the degree of risk to public
health or need for any or a particular type of drug control. </p>

<p>The WHO committee presented short descriptions of various
different types of drug dependence which may occur<b> </b>in some
individuals and situations. The list identifies drug dependence
of the morphine type, the barbiturate - alcohol type, the cocaine
type, the cannabis (marijuana) type, the amphetamine type, the
khat type, and the hallucinogen (LSD) type. Details of<b> </b>these
various kinds of drug dependence are discussed separately later
in this chapter. </p>

<p>For reasons analogous to those presented above, it is further
suggested here that the term dependent rather than the ambiguous
description 'addict' be used to refer to aft individual who has
developed drug dependence of either the physical or psychological
forms. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Scientific
Methods </h3>

<p>42<i>. The role of statistics. </i>Statistics can be helpful
in collecting and handling numerical or quantified information,
interpreting data, and making inferences or generalizations from
it. The simplest use of statistics is to describe or summarize
certain abstract characteristics of a group or sample. For
example, the average height of players on a basketball team
provides a shorthand description of the group. The numerical mean
is a common index of the average. Considerably more information
could be communicated if some idea of the variability of heights
within the team were known. The range of measures, for example,
is a crude index of the variance of 'spread' in the distribution
within a group. </p>

<p>A second function of statistics is to provide a system for
inference about some population on the basis of a smaller group
or sample selected from that population. For example, the mean
I.Q. of a group of 50 students randomly selected from a school
with 500 individuals might provide a reasonable estimate of the
average intelligence of the entire student population of that
school. The success of such generalization or extrapolation
depends on the relative size of the sample and the accuracy or
fidelity with which the group studied represents the overall
population of interest. Any bias in sampling which reduces the
similarity between the selected group and the population to which
the results are to be generalized reduces the validity of such
extrapolation. </p>

<p>Statistics may also assist in distinguishing between the
differences in measurements resulting from random variation and
the variance due to the factor which is being studied. By
obtaining an estimate of the natural variability in a population,
it may be possible to distinguish, with some confidence, between
a 'real effect' associated with a particular condition or
treatment, and the difference which might be expected by chance
alone. The phrase 'statistically significant' is used to indicate
an effect considered significantly greater than that likely due
to chance. </p>

<p>However, statistical techniques alone can only indicate an
association between different variables and can not actually
identify cause and effect. Such causal inferences must be based
on an overall consideration of the research design. In many
laboratory experiments, the stimulus and its response may be
readily identified, but in less tightly controlled social studies
(e.g., surveys) and clinical observations, it is often very
difficult or impossible to positively identify the causal
variable in a complex pattern of associations among different
characteristics of the sample. For example, the demonstration
that persons who are heavy users of tranquillizers also tend to
be regular alcohol drinkers does not necessarily indicate that
one causes the other. It may well be that a third factor (e.g.,
the desire to avoid or<i> </i>escape anxiety and tension) may be
responsible for both behaviours. Interpretation of the data
generally requires considerations beyond that involved in the
statistical analysis. </p>

<p>43. <i>Experimental methods. </i>Details of research design
would not be appropriate here, although some simple notions as to
elementary requirements for adequate experimental techniques in
psychopharmacology may be worthwhile. A major goal of scientific
research is to eliminate or control all factors, other than those
to be studied, which can influence or bias measurement. </p>

<p>As discussed above, the subjects of the study must be
sufficiently similar to the general population of ultimate
interest to allow generalization from the data. Extrapolation
from one animal species to another, from one human society to
another, or from one social group<b> </b>to another is often
quite tenuous and must be viewed with extreme caution. Variables
such as age, sex, and social class often exert considerable
influence on psychological measures, and must be taken into
careful consideration. </p>

<p>Unless there is some reason why a particular dose level is of <i>singular
</i>significance, more than one dose should be studied. If the
purpose of the experiment is to allow inferences of a general
social nature, then the dose, mode of administration and the
general circumstances of the study must be relevant to the
pattern of use in the general population. </p>

<p>In order to determine the effect of a particular treatment, it
is necessary to have a reference or control condition for
comparison, which has been treated identically to the
experimental condition except for the factor under analysis.
These data may be obtained from a separate group of control
subjects, which is sufficiently similar to the experimental
group, or from the same subjects studied at a different time. Due
to the great variation between individuals in response to drugs,
the latter approach is often most efficient, although it is
sometimes inappropriate or impractical. Using subjects as their
own controls requires special statistical techniques for handling
the data, since repeated experience in the situation will affect
the subject's subsequent performance through such mechanisms as
general adaptation, practice and other learning variables, and
often fatigue. </p>

<p>Care must be taken to control or eliminate the possible
effects of the subject's and researcher's expectations and
biases. Since set and setting play an important role in
determining drug effects, an inactive placebo substance should be
tested in a control situation under conditions which are
identical to those present when the drug is studied. Sometimes,
however, if the subject has had previous experience with the
experimental drug, he may soon realize whether he was given the
active drug or an inactive substance despite his initial lack of
information, and consequently the placebo control may not be
complete. An experimental design in which the subject is not
informed as to which treatment is being investigated is called a <i>single-blind
</i>study. </p>

<p>Since the scientist's bias and expectations can also influence
the subject's performance and the interpretation of his behaviour
(as well as the later data analysis), the validity of the
measurements can often be further increased it the researcher is
also unaware of which treatment condition is in effect at the
time of the experiment. A study in which neither the subject nor
the researcher knows which of the experimental treatment
variables are operating is called a <i>double-blind </i>design.
There are certain circumstances where a double-blind is
inappropriate or impossible, although it is often the most
efficient way to acquire specific information about drug effects
in an experimental situation. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">A
Review of Selected Drugs </h3>

<p>44. The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a short
critical review of the scientific literature pertaining to the
effects of certain psychoactive drugs. Barbiturates, alcohol,
minor tranquillizers, amphetamines, LSD, cannabis, opiate
narcotics, and volatile solvents are discussed. In these interim
reviews an attempt has been made to concentrate on human
psychopharmacological studies rather than on animal experiments
or general social reports. Although original scientific sources
were sought and used as<b> </b>often as possible, it was
frequently necessary at this interim stage to rely on reviews
prepared by others. </p>

<p>There has been no attempt to be exhaustive in the references
presented in the text. These citations often indicate a typical
example chosen from among numerous sources which would have been
appropriate. The bibliography at the end of this chapter contains
a broader representation of some of the materials used in
preparing the summaries. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>