
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-61</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B036-294</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/jcbody.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064724 text/html 54348
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:47:13 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:21:00 GMT
Content-length: 54129
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Joyous Cosmology</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h2>The Joyous Cosmology</h2>

<hr>

<p> T0 BEGIN WITH, this world has a different kind of time. It is
the time of biological rhythm, not of the clock and all that goes
with the clock. There is no hurry. Our sense of time is
notoriously subjective and thus dependent upon the quality of our
attention, whether of interest or boredom, and upon the alignment
of our behavior in terms of routines, goals, and deadlines. Here
the present is self-sufficient, but it is not a static present.
It is a dancing present---the unfolding of a pattern which has no
specific destination in the future but is simply its own point.
It leaves and arrives simultaneously, and the seed is as much the
goal as the flower. There is therefore time to perceive every
detail of the movement with infinitely greater richness of
articulation. Normally we do not so much look at things as
overlook them. The eye sees types and classes---flower, leaf,
rock, bird, fire---mental pictures of things rather than things,
rough outlines filled with flat color, always a little dusty and
dim. </p>

<p> But here the depth of light and structure in a bursting bud
go on forever. There is time to see them, time for the whole
intricacy of veins and capillaries to develop in consciousness,
time to see down and down into the shape of greenness, which is
not green at all, but a whole spectrum generalizing itself as
green---purple, gold, the sunlit turquoise of the ocean, the
intense luminescence of the emerald. I cannot decide where shape
ends and color begins. The bud has opened and the fresh leaves
fan out and curve back with a gesture which is unmistakably
communicative but does not say anything except, &quot;Thus!&quot;
And somehow that is quite satisfactory, even startlingly clear.
The meaning is transparent in the same way that the color and the
texture are transparent, with light which does not seem to fall
upon surfaces from above but to be right inside the structure and
color. Which is of course where it is, for light is an
inseparable trinity of sun, object, and eye, and the chemistry of
the leaf is its color, its light. </p>

<p> But at the same time color and light are the gift of the eye
to the leaf and the sun. Transparency is the property of the
eyeball, projected outward as luminous space, interpreting quanta
of energy in terms of the gelatinous fibers in the head. I begin
to feel that the world is at once inside my head and outside it,
and the two, inside and outside, begin to include or
&quot;cap&quot; one another like an infinite series of concentric
spheres. I am unusually aware that everything I am sensing is
also my body---that light, color, shape, sound, and texture are
terms and properties of the brain conferred upon the outside
world. I am not looking at the world, not confronting it; I am
knowing it by a continuous process of transforming it into
myself, so that everything around me, the whole globe of space,
no longer feels away from me but in the middle. </p>

<p> This is at first confusing. I am not quite sure of the
direction from which sounds come. The visual space seems to
reverberate with them as if it were a drum. The surrounding hills
rumble with the sound of a truck, and the rumble and the
color-shape of the hills become one and the same gesture. I use
that word deliberately and shall use it again. The hills are
moving into their stillness. They mean something because they are
being transformed into my brain, and my brain is an organ of
meaning. The forests of redwood trees upon them look like green
fire, and the copper gold of the sun-dried grass heaves immensely
into the sky. Time is so slow as to be a kind of eternity, and
the flavor of eternity transfers itself to the hills---burnished
mountains which I seem to remember from an immeasurably distant
past, at once so unfamiliar as to be exotic and yet as familiar
as my own hand. Thus transformed into consciousness, into the
electric, interior luminosity of the nerves, the world seems
vaguely insubstantial--- developed upon a color film, resounding
upon the skin of a drum, pressing, not with weight, but with
vibrations interpreted as weight. Solidity is a neurological
invention, and, I wonder, can the nerves be solid to themselves?
Where do we begin? Does the order of the brain create the order
of the world, or the order of the world the brain? The two seem
like egg and hen, or like back and front. </p>

<p> The physical world is vibration, quanta, but vibrations of
what? To the eye, form and color; to the ear, sound; to the nose,
scent; to the fingers, touch. But these are all different
languages for the same thing, different qualities of sensitivity,
different dimensions of consciousness. The question, &quot;Of
what are they differing forms?&quot; seems to have no meaning.
What is light to the eye is sound to the ear. I have the image of
the senses being terms, forms, or dimensions not of one thing
common to all, but of each other, locked in a circle of
mutuality. Closely examined, shape becomes color, which becomes
vibration, which becomes sound, which becomes smell, which
becomes taste, and then touch, and then again shape. (One can
see, for example, that the shape of a leaf is its color. There is
no outline around the leaf; the outline is the limit where one
colored surface becomes another.) I see all these sensory
dimensions as a round dance, gesticulations of one pattern being
transformed into gesticulations of another. And these
gesticulations are flowing through a space that has still other
dimensions, which I want to describe as tones of emotional color,
of light or sound being joyous or fearful, gold elated or lead
depressed. These, too, form a circle of reciprocity, a round
spectrum so polarized that we can only describe each in terms of
the others. </p>

<p> Sometimes the image of the physical world is not so much a
dance of gestures as a woven texture. Light, sound, touch, taste,
and smell become a continuous warp, with the feeling that the
whole dimension of sensation is a single continuum or field.
Crossing the warp is a woof representing the dimension of
meaning---moral and aesthetic values, personal or individual
uniqueness, logical significance, and expressive form---and the
two dimensions interpenetrate so as to make distinguishable
shapes seem like ripples in the water of sensation. The warp and
the woof stream together, for the weaving is neither flat nor
static but a many-directioned cross-flow of impulses filling the
whole volume of space. I feel that the world is on something in
somewhat the same way that a color photograph is on a film,
underlying and connecting the patches of color, though the film
here is a dense rain of energy. I see that what it is on is my
brain---&quot;that enchanted loom,&quot; as Sherrington called
it. Brain and world, warp of sense and woof of meaning, seem to
interpenetrate inseparably. They hold their boundaries or limits
in common in such a way as to define one another and to be
impossible without each other.</p>

<hr>

<p> I am listening to the music of an organ. As leaves seemed to
gesture, the organ seems quite literally to speak. There is no
use of the <i>vox humana</i> stop, but every sound seems to issue
from a vast human throat, moist with saliva. As, with the base
pedals, the player moves slowly down the scale, the sounds seem
to blow forth in immense, gooey spludges. As I listen more
carefully, the spludges acquire texture---expanding circles of
vibration finely and evenly toothed like combs, no longer moist
and liquidinous like the living throat, but mechanically
discontinuous. The sound disintegrates into the innumerable
individual <i>drrrits</i> of vibration. Listening on, the gaps
close, or perhaps each individual <i>drrrit</i> becomes in its
turn a spludge. The liquid and the hard, the continuous and the
discontinuous, the gooey and the prickly, seem to be
transformations of each other, or to be different levels of
magnification upon the same thing. </p>

<p> This theme recurs in a hundred different ways---the
inseparable polarity of opposites, or the mutuality and
reciprocity of all the possible contents of consciousness. It is
easy to see theoretically that all perception is of
contrasts---figure and ground, light and shadow, clear and vague,
firm and weak. But normal attention seems to have difficulty in
taking in both at once. Both sensuously and conceptually we seem
to move serially from one to the other; we do not seem to be able
to attend to the figure without relative unconsciousness of the
ground. But in this new world the mutuality of things is quite
clear at every level. The human face, for example, becomes clear
in all its aspects---the total form together with each single
hair and wrinkle. Faces become all ages at once, for
characteristics that suggest age also suggest youth by
implication; the bony structure suggesting the skull evokes
instantly the newborn infant. The associative couplings of the
brain seem to fire simultaneously instead of one at a time,
projecting a view of life which may be terrifying in its
ambiguity or joyous in its integrity. </p>

<p> Decision can be completely paralyzed by the sudden
realization that there is no way of having good without evil, or
that it is impossible to act upon reliable authority without
choosing, from your own inexperience, to do so. If sanity implies
madness and faith doubt, am I basically a psychotic pretending to
be sane, a blithering terrified idiot who manages, temporarily,
to put on an act of being self-possessed? I begin to see my whole
life as a masterpiece of duplicity---the confused, helpless,
hungry, and hideously sensitive little embryo at the root of me
having learned, step by step, to comply, placate, bully, wheedle,
flatter, bluff, and cheat my way into being taken for a person of
competence and reliability. For when it really comes down to it,
what do any of us know?</p>

<hr>

<p> I am listening to a priest chanting the Mass and a choir of
nuns responding. His mature, cultivated voice rings with the
serene authority of the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, of the Faith once and for all delivered to the saints,
and the nuns respond, naively it seems, with childlike, utterly
innocent devotion. But, listening again, I can hear the priest
&quot;putting on&quot; his voice, hear the inflated, pompous
balloon, the studiedly unctuous tones of a master deceptionist
who has the poor little nuns, kneeling in their stalls,
completely cowed. Listen deeper. The nuns are not cowed at all.
They are playing possum. With just a little stiffening, the limp
gesture of bowing turns into the gesture of the closing claw.
With too few men to go around, the nuns know what is good for
them: how to bend and survive. </p>

<p> But this profoundly cynical view of things is only an
intermediate stage. I begin to congratulate the priest on his
gamesmanship, on the sheer courage of being able to put up such a
performance of authority when he knows precisely nothing. Perhaps
there is no other knowing than the mere competence of the act.
If, at the heart of one's being, there is no real self to which
one ought to be true, sincerity is simply nerve; it lies in the
unabashed vigor of the pretense. </p>

<p> But pretense is only pretense when it is assumed that the act
is not true to the agent. Find the agent. In the priest's voice I
hear down at the root the primordial howl of the beast in the
jungle, but it has been inflected, complicated, refined, and
textured with centuries of culture. Every new twist, every
additional subtlety, was a fresh gambit in the game of making the
original howl more effective. At first, crude and unconcealed,
the cry for food or mate, or just noise for the fun of it, making
the rocks echo. Then rhythm to enchant. then changes of tone to
plead or threaten. Then words to specify the need, to promise and
bargain. And then, much later, the gambits of indirection. The
feminine stratagem of stooping to conquer, the claim to superior
worth in renouncing the world for the spirit, the cunning of
weakness proving stronger than the might of muscle---and the meek
inheriting the earth. </p>

<p> As I listen, then, I can hear in that one voice the
simultaneous presence of all the levels of man's history, as of
all the stages of life before man. Every step in the game becomes
as clear as the rings in a severed tree. But this is an ascending
hierarchy of maneuvers, of stratagems capping stratagems, all
symbolized in the overlays of refinement beneath which the
original howl is still sounding. Sometimes the howl shifts from
the mating call of the adult animal to the helpless crying of the
baby, and I feel all man's music---its pomp and circumstance, its
gaiety, its awe, its confident solemnity---as just so much
complication and concealment of baby wailing for mother. And as I
want to cry with pity, I know I am sorry for myself. I, as an
adult, am also back there alone in the dark, just as the
primordial howl is still present beneath the sublime modulations
of the chant. </p>

<p> You poor baby! And yet---you selfish little bastard! As I try
to find the agent behind the act, the motivating force at the
bottom of the whole thing, I seem to see only an endless
ambivalence. Behind the mask of love I find my innate
selfishness. What a predicament I am in if someone asks, &quot;Do
you really love me?&quot; I can't say yes without saying no, for
the only answer that will really satisfy is, &quot;Yes, I love
you so much I could eat you! My love for you is identical with my
love for myself. I love you with the purest selfishness.&quot; No
one wants to be loved out of a sense of duty. </p>

<p> So I will be very frank. &quot;Yes, I am pure, selfish desire
and I love you because you make me feel wonderful---at any rate
for the time being.&quot; But then I begin to wonder whether
there isn't something a bit cunning in this frankness. It is big
of me to be so sincere, to make a play for her by not pretending
to be more than I am---unlike the other guys who say they love
her for herself. I see that there is always something insincere
about trying to be sincere, as if I were to say openly, &quot;The
statement that I am now making is a lie.&quot; There seems to be
something phony about every attempt to define myself, to be
totally honest. The trouble is that I can't see the back, much
less the inside, of my head. I can't be honest because I don't
fully know what I am. Consciousness peers out from a center which
it cannot see---and <i>that</i> is the root of the matter. </p>

<p> Life seems to resolve itself down to a tiny germ or nipple of
sensitivity. I call it the Eenie-Weenie---a squiggling little
nucleus that is trying to make love to itself and can never quite
get there. The whole fabulous complexity of vegetable and animal
life, as of human civilization, is just a colossal elaboration of
the Eenie-Weenie trying to make the Eenie-Weenie. I am in love
with myself, but cannot seek myself without hiding myself. As I
pursue my own tail, it runs away from me. Does the amoeba split
itself in two in an attempt to solve this problem? </p>

<p> I try to go deeper, sinking thought and feeling down and down
to their ultimate beginnings. What do I mean by loving myself? In
what form do I know myself? Always, it seems, in the form of
something other, something strange. The landscape I am watching
is also a state of myself, of the neurons in my head. I feel the
rock in my hand in terms of my own fingers. And nothing is
stranger than my own body---the sensation of the pulse, the eye
seen through a magnifying glass in the mirror, the shock of
realizing that oneself is something in the external world. At
root, there is simply no way of separating self from other,
self-love from other-love. All knowledge of self is knowledge of
other, and all knowledge of other knowledge of self. I begin to
see that self and other, the familiar and the strange, the
internal and the external, the predictable and the unpredictable <i>imply</i>
each other. One is seek and the other is hide, and the more I
become aware of their implying each other, the more I feel them
to be one with each other. I become curiously affectionate and
intimate with all that seemed alien. In the features of
everything foreign, threatening, terrifying, incomprehensible,
and remote I begin to recognize myself. Yet this is a
&quot;myself&quot; which I seem to be remembering from long, long
ago---not at all my empirical ego of yesterday, not my specious
personality. </p>

<p> The &quot;myself&quot; which I am beginning to recognize,
which I had forgotten but actually know better than anything
else, goes far back beyond my childhood, beyond the time when
adults confused me and tried to tell me that I was someone else;
when, because they were bigger and stronger, they could terrify
me with their imaginary fears and bewilder and outface me in the
complicated game that I had not yet learned. (The sadism of the
teacher explaining the game and yet having to prove his
superiority in it.) Long before all that, long before I was an
embryo in my mother's womb, there looms the ever-so-familiar
stranger, the everything not me, which I recognize, with a joy
immeasurably more intense than a meeting of lovers separated by
centuries, to be my original self. The good old sonofabitch who
got me involved in this whole game. </p>

<p> At the same time everyone and everything around me takes on
the feeling of having been there always, and then forgotten, and
then remembered again. We are sitting in a garden surrounded in
every direction by uncultivated hills, a garden of fuchsias and
hummingbirds in a valley that leads down to the westernmost
ocean, and where the gulls take refuge in storms. At some time in
the middle of the twentieth century, upon an afternoon in the
summer, we are sitting around a table on the terrace, eating dark
homemade bread and drinking white wine. And yet we seem to have
been there forever, for the people with me are no longer the
humdrum and harassed little personalities with names, addresses,
and social security numbers, the specifically dated mortals we
are all pretending to be. They appear rather as immortal
archetypes of themselves without, however, losing their humanity.
It is just that their differing characters seem, like the
priest's voice, to contain all history; they are at once unique
and eternal, men and women but also gods and goddesses. For now
that we have time to look at each other we become timeless. The
human form becomes immeasurably precious and, as if to symbolize
this, the eyes become intelligent jewels, the hair spun gold, and
the flesh translucent ivory. Between those who enter this world
together there is also a love which is distinctly eucharistic, an
acceptance of each other's natures from the heights to the
depths. </p>

<p> Ella, who planted the garden, is a beneficent
Circe---sorceress, daughter of the moon, familiar of cats and
snakes, herbalist and healer---with the youngest old face one has
ever seen, exquisitely wrinkled, silver-black hair rippled like
flames. Robert is a manifestation of Pan, but a Pan of bulls
instead of the Pan of goats, with frizzled short hair tufted into
blunt horns ---a man all sweating muscle and body, incarnation of
exuberant glee. Beryl, his wife, is a nymph who has stepped out
of the forest, a mermaid of the land with swinging hair and a
dancing body that seems to be naked even when clothed. It is her
bread that we are eating, and it tastes like the Original Bread
of which mother's own bread was a bungled imitation. And then
there is Mary, beloved in the usual, dusty world, but in this
world an embodiment of light and gold, daughter of the sun, with
eyes formed from the evening sky---a creature of all ages, baby,
moppet, maid, matron, crone, and corpse, evoking love of all
ages. </p>

<p> I try to find words that will suggest the numinous,
mythological quality of these people. Yet at the same time they
are as familiar as if I had known them for centuries, or rather,
as if I were recognizing them again as lost friends whom I knew
at the beginning of time, from a country begotten before all
worlds. This is of course bound up with the recognition of my own
most ancient identity, older by far than the blind squiggling of
the Eenie-Weenie, as if the highest form that consciousness could
take had somehow been present at the very beginning of things.
All of us look at each other knowingly, for the feeling that we
knew each other in that most distant past conceals something
else---tacit, awesome, almost unmentionable ---the realization
that at the deep center of a time perpendicular to ordinary time
we are, and always have been, one. We acknowledge the marvelously
hidden plot, the master illusion, whereby we appear to be
different. </p>

<p> The shock of recognition. In the form of everything most
other, alien, and remote---the ever-receding galaxies, the
mystery of death, the terrors of disease and madness, the
foreign- feeling, gooseflesh world of sea monsters and spiders,
the queasy labyrinth of my own insides---in all these forms I
have crept up on myself and yelled &quot;Boo!&quot; I scare
myself out of my wits, and, while out of my wits, cannot remember
just how it happened. Ordinarily I am lost in a maze. I don't
know how I got here, for I have lost the thread and forgotten the
intricately convoluted system of passages through which the game
of hide-and-seek was pursued. (Was it the path I followed in
growing the circuits of my brain?) But now the principle of the
maze is clear. It is the device of something turning back upon
itself so as to seem to be other, and the turns have been so many
and so dizzyingly complex that I am quite bewildered. The
principle is that all dualities and opposites are not disjoined
but polar; they do not encounter and confront one another from
afar; they exfoliate from a common center. Ordinary thinking
conceals polarity and relativity because it employs <i>terms</i>,
the terminals or ends, the poles, neglecting what lies between
them. The difference of front and back, to be and not to be,
hides their unity and mutuality. </p>

<p> Now consciousness, sense perception, is always a sensation of
contrasts. It is a specialization in differences, in noticing,
and nothing is definable, classifiable, or noticeable except by
contrast with something else. But man does not live by
consciousness alone, for the linear, step-by-step,
contrast-by-contrast procedure of attention is quite inadequate
for organizing anything so complex as a living body. The body
itself has an &quot;omniscience&quot; which is unconscious, or
superconscious, just because it deals with relation instead of
contrast, with harmonies rather than discords. It
&quot;thinks&quot; or organizes as a plant grows, not as a
botanist describes its growth. This is why Shiva has ten arms,
for he represents the dance of life, the omnipotence of being
able to do innumerably many things at once. </p>

<p> In the type of experience I am describing, it seems that the
superconscious method of thinking becomes conscious. We see the
world as the whole body sees it, and for this very reason there
is the greatest difficulty in attempting to translate this mode
of vision into a form of language that is based on contrast and
classification. To the extent, then, that man has become a being
centered in consciousness, he has become centered in clash,
conflict, and discord. He ignores, as beneath notice, the
astounding perfection of his organism as a whole, and this is
why, in most people, there is such a deplorable disparity between
the intelligent and marvelous order of their bodies and the
trivial preoccupations of their consciousness. But in this other
world the situation is reversed. Ordinary people look like gods
because the values of the organism are uppermost, and the
concerns of consciousness fall back into the subordinate position
which they should properly hold. Love, unity, harmony, and
relationship therefore take precedence over war and division. </p>

<p> For what consciousness overlooks is the fact that all
boundaries and divisions are held in common by their opposite
sides and areas, so that when a boundary changes its shape both
sides move together. It is like the <i>yang-yin</i> symbol of the
Chinese---the black and white fishes divided by an S-curve
inscribed within a circle. The bulging head of one is the
narrowing tail of the other. But how much more difficult it is to
see that my skin and its movements belong both to me and to the
external world, or that the spheres of influence of different
human beings have common walls like so many rooms in a house, so
that the movement of my wall is also the movement of yours. You
can do what you like in your room just so long as I can do what I
like in mine. But each man's room is himself in his fullest
extension, so that my expansion is your contraction and vice
versa.</p>

<hr>

<p> I am looking at what I would ordinarily call a confusion of
bushes---a tangle of plants and weeds with branches and leaves
going every which way. But now that the organizing, relational
mind is uppermost I see that what is confusing is not the bushes
but my clumsy method of thinking. Every twig is in its proper
place, and the tangle has become an arabesque more delicately
ordered than the fabulous doodles in the margins of Celtic
manuscripts. In this same state of consciousness I have seen a
woodland at fall, with the whole multitude of almost bare
branches and twigs in silhouette against the sky, not as a
confusion, but as the lacework or tracery of an enchanted
jeweler. A rotten log bearing rows of fungus and patches of moss
became as precious as any work of Cellini---an inwardly luminous
construct of jet, amber, jade, and ivory, all the porous and
spongy disintegrations of the wood seeming to have been carved
out with infinite patience and skill. I do not know whether this
mode of vision organizes the world in the same way that it
organizes the body, or whether it is just that the natural world
is organized in that way. </p>

<p> A journey into this new mode of consciousness gives one a
marvelously enhanced appreciation of patterning in nature, a
fascination deeper than ever with the structure of ferns, the
formation of crystals, the markings upon sea shells, the
incredible jewelry of such unicellular creatures of the ocean as
the radiolaria, the fairy architecture of seeds and pods, the
engineering of bones and skeletons, the aerodynamics of feathers,
and the astonishing profusion of eye-forms upon the wings of
butterflies and birds. All this involved delicacy of organization
may, from one point of view, be strictly functional for the
purposes of reproduction and survival. But when you come down to
it, the survival of these creatures is the same as their very
existence---and what is that for? </p>

<p> More and more it seems that the ordering of nature is an art
akin to music---fugues in shell and cartilage, counterpoint in
fibers and capillaries, throbbing rhythm in waves of sound,
light, and nerve. And oneself is connected with it quite
inextricably---a node, a ganglion, an electronic interweaving of
paths, circuits, and impulses that stretch and hum through the
whole of time and space. The entire pattern swirls in its
complexity like smoke in sunbeams or the rippling networks of
sunlight in shallow water. Transforming itself endlessly into
itself, the pattern alone remains. The crosspoints, nodes, nets,
and curlicues vanish perpetually into each other. &quot;The
baseless fabric of this vision.&quot; It is its own base. When
the ground dissolves beneath me I float. </p>

<p> Closed-eye fantasies in this world seem sometimes to be
revelations of the secret workings of the brain, of the
associative and patterning processes, the ordering systems which
carry out all our sensing and thinking. Unlike the one I have
just described, they are for the most part ever more complex
variations upon a theme---ferns sprouting ferns sprouting ferns
in multidimensional spaces, vast kaleidoscopic domes of stained
glass or mosaic, or patterns like the models of highly intricate
molecules---systems of colored balls, each one of which turns out
to be a multitude of smaller balls, forever and ever. Is this,
perhaps, an inner view of the organizing process which, when the
eyes are open, makes sense of the world even at points where it
appears to be supremely messy? </p>

<p> Later that same afternoon, Robert takes us over to his barn
from which he has been cleaning out junk and piling it into a big
and battered Buick convertible, with all the stuffing coming out
of the upholstery. The sight of trash poses two of the great
questions of human life, &quot;Where are we going to put
it?&quot; and &quot;Who's going to clean up?&quot; From one point
of view living creatures are simply tubes, putting things in at
one end and pushing them out at the other---until the tube wears
out. The problem is always where to put what is pushed out at the
other end, especially when it begins to pile so high that the
tubes are in danger of being crowded off the earth by their own
refuse. And the questions have metaphysical overtones.
&quot;Where are we going to put it?&quot; asks for the foundation
upon which things ultimately rest ---the First Cause, the Divine
Ground, the bases of morality, the origin of action. &quot;Who's
going to clean up?&quot; is asking where responsibility
ultimately lies, or how to solve our ever-multiplying problems
other than by passing the buck to the next generation. </p>

<p> I contemplate the mystery of trash in its immediate
manifestation: Robert's car piled high, with only the driver's
seat left unoccupied by broken door-frames, rusty stoves, tangles
of chicken-wire, squashed cans, insides of ancient harmoniums,
nameless enormities of cracked plastic, headless dolls, bicycles
without wheels, torn cushions vomiting kapok, non-returnable
bottles, busted dressmakers' dummies, rhomboid picture-frames,
shattered bird-cages, and inconceivable messes of string,
electric wiring, orange peels, eggshells, potato skins, and light
bulbs---all garnished with some ghastly-white chemical powder
that we call &quot;angel shit.&quot; Tomorrow we shall escort
this in a joyous convoy to the local dump. And then what? Can any
melting and burning imaginable get rid of these ever-rising
mountains of ruin---especially when the things we make and build
are beginning to look more and more like rubbish even before they
are thrown away? The only answer seems to be that of the present
group. The sight of Robert's car has everyone helpless with
hysterics. </p>

<p> The Divine Comedy. All things dissolve in laughter. And for
Robert this huge heap of marvelously incongruous uselessness is a
veritable creation, a masterpiece of nonsense. He slams it
together and ropes it securely to the bulbous, low-slung wreck of
the supposedly chic convertible, and then stands back to admire
it as if it were a float for a carnival. Theme: the American way
of life. But our laughter is without malice, for in this state of
consciousness everything is the doing of gods. The culmination of
civilization in monumental heaps of junk is seen, not as
thoughtless ugliness, but as self-caricature---as the creation of
phenomenally absurd collages and abstract sculptures in
deliberate but kindly mockery of our own pretensions. For in this
world nothing is wrong, nothing is even stupid. The sense of
wrong is simply failure to see where something fits into a
pattern, to be confused as to the hierarchical level upon which
an event belongs---a play which seems quite improper at level 28
may be exactly right at level 96. I am speaking of levels or
stages in the labyrinth of twists and turns, gambits and
counter-gambits, in which life is involving and evolving itself
---the cosmological one-upmanship which the <i>yang</i> and the <i>yin</i>,
the light and the dark principles, are forever playing, the game
which at some early level in its development <i>seems</i> to be
the serious battle between good and evil. If the square may be
defined as one who takes the game seriously, one must admire him
for the very depth of his involvement, for the courage to be so
far-out that he doesn't know where he started. </p>

<p> The more prosaic, the more dreadfully ordinary anyone or
anything seems to be, the more I am moved to marvel at the
ingenuity with which divinity hides in order to seek itself, at
the lengths to which this cosmic <i>joie de vivre</i> will go in
elaborating its dance. I think of a corner gas station on a hot
afternoon. Dust and exhaust fumes, the regular Standard guy all
baseball and sports cars, the billboards halfheartedly gaudy, the
flatness so reassuring---nothing around here but just us folks! I
can see people just pretending not to see that they are avatars
of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, that the cells of their bodies
aren't millions of gods, that the dust isn't a haze of jewels.
How solemnly they would go through the act of not understanding
me if I were to step up and say, &quot;Well, who do you think
you're kidding? Come off it, Shiva, you old rascal! It's a great
act, but it doesn't fool me.&quot; But the conscious ego doesn't
know that it is something which that divine organ, the body, is
only pretending to be.<a href="#footnote">*</a> When people go<a
name="back"></a> to a <i>guru</i>, a master of wisdom, seeking a
way out of darkness, all he really does is to humor them in their
pretense until they are outfaced into dropping it. He tells
nothing, but the twinkle in his eye speaks to the
unconscious---&quot;You know....<i>You</i> know!&quot; </p>

<p> In the contrast world of ordinary consciousness man feels
himself, as will, to be something in nature but not of it. He
likes it or dislikes it. He accepts it or resists it. He moves it
or it moves him. But in the basic superconsciousness of the whole
organism this division does not exist. The organism and its
surrounding world are a single, integrated pattern of action in
which there is neither subject nor object, doer nor done to. At
this level there is not one thing called pain and another thing
called myself, which dislikes pain. Pain and the
&quot;response&quot; to pain are the same thing. When this
becomes conscious it feels as if everything that happens is my
own will. But this is a preliminary and clumsy way of feeling
that what happens outside the body is one process with what
happens inside it. This is that &quot;original identity&quot;
which ordinary language and our conventional definitions of man
so completely conceal. </p>

<p> The active and the passive are two phases of the same act. A
seed, floating in its white sunburst of down, drifts across the
sky, sighing with the sound of a jet plane invisible above. I
catch it by one hair between thumb and index finger, and am
astonished to watch this little creature actually wiggling and
pulling as if it were struggling to get away. Common sense tells
me that this tugging is the action of the wind, not of the
thistledown. But then I recognize that it is the
&quot;intelligence&quot; of the seed to have just such delicate
antennae of silk that, in an environment of wind, it can move.
Having such extensions, it moves itself with the wind. When it
comes to it, is there any basic difference between putting up a
sail and pulling an oar? If anything, the former is a more
intelligent use of effort than the latter. True, the seed does
not intend to move itself with the wind, but neither did I intend
to have arms and legs. </p>

<p> It is this vivid realization of the reciprocity of will and
world, active and passive, inside and outside, self and not-self,
which evokes the aspect of these experiences that is most
puzzling from the standpoint of ordinary consciousness: the
strange and seemingly unholy conviction that &quot;I&quot; am
God. In Western culture this sensation is seen as the very
signature of insanity But in India it is simply a matter of
course that the deepest center of man, <i>atman</i>, is the
deepest center of the universe, <i>Brahman</i>. Why not? Surely a
continuous view of the world is more whole, more holy, more
healthy, than one in which there is a yawning emptiness between
the Cause and its effects. Obviously, the &quot;I&quot; which is
God is not the ego, the consciousness of self which is
simultaneously an unconsciousness of the fact that its outer
limits are held in common with the inner limits of the rest of
the world. But in this wider, less ignore-ant consciousness I am
forced to see that everything I claim to will and intend has a
common boundary with all I pretend to disown. The limits of what
I will, the form and shape of all those actions which I claim as
mine, are identical and coterminous with the limits of all those
events which I have been taught to define as alien and external. </p>

<p> The feeling of self is no longer confined to the inside of
the skin. Instead, my individual being seems to grow out from the
rest of the universe like a hair from a head or a limb from a
body, so that my center is also the center of the whole. I find
that in ordinary consciousness I am habitually trying to ring
myself off from this totality, that I am perpetually on the
defensive. But what am I trying to protect? Only very
occasionally are my defensive attitudes directly concerned with
warding off physical damage or deprivation. For the most part I
am defending my defenses: rings around rings around rings around
nothing. Guards inside a fortress inside entrenchments inside a
radar curtain. The military war is the outward parody of the war
of ego versus world: only the guards are safe. In the next war
only the air force will outlive the women and children. </p>

<p> I trace myself back through the labyrinth of my brain,
through the innumerable turns by which I have ringed myself off
and, by perpetual circling, obliterated the original trail
whereby I entered this forest. Back through the tunnels---through
the devious status-and-survival strategy of adult life, through
the interminable passages which we remember in dreams ---all the
streets we have ever traveled, the corridors of schools, the
winding pathways between the legs of tables and chairs where one
crawled as a child, the tight and bloody exit from the womb, the
fountainous surge through the channel of the penis, the timeless
wanderings through ducts and spongy caverns. Down and back
through ever-narrowing tubes to the point where the passage
itself is the traveler---a thin string of molecules going through
the trial and error of getting itself into the right order to be
a unit of organic life. Relentlessly back and back through
endless and whirling dances in the astronomically proportioned
spaces which surround the original nuclei of the world, the
centers of centers, as remotely distant on the inside as the
nebulae beyond our galaxy on the outside. </p>

<p> Down and at last out---out of the cosmic maze to recognize in
and as myself, the bewildered traveler, the forgotten yet
familiar sensation of the original impulse of all things, supreme
identity, inmost light, ultimate center, self more me than
myself. Standing in the midst of Ella's garden I feel, with a
peace so deep that it sings to be shared with all the world, that
at last I belong, that I have returned to the home behind home,
that I have come into the inheritance unknowingly bequeathed from
all my ancestors since the beginning. Plucked like the strings of
a harp, the warp and woof of the world reverberate with memories
of triumphant hymns. The sure foundation upon which I had sought
to stand has turned out to be the center from which I seek. The
elusive substance beneath all the forms of the universe is
discovered as the immediate gesture of my hand. But how did I
ever get lost? And why have I traveled so far through these
intertwined tunnels that I seem to be the quaking vortex of
defended defensiveness which is my conventional self?</p>

<hr>

<p> Going indoors I find that all the household furniture is
alive. Everything gestures. Tables are tabling, pots are potting,
walls are walling, fixtures are fixturing---a world of events
instead of things. Robert turns on the phonograph, without
telling me what is being played. Looking intently at the pictures
picturing, I only gradually become conscious of the music, and at
first cannot decide whether I am hearing an instrument or a human
voice simply falling. A single stream of sound, curving,
rippling, and jiggling with a soft snarl that at last reveals it
to be a reed instrument---some sort of oboe. Later, human voices
join it. But they are not singing words, nothing but a kind of
&quot;<i>buoh---buah---bueeh</i>&quot; which seems to be
exploring all the liquidinous inflections of which the voice is
capable. What has Robert got here? I imagine it must be some of
his far-out friends in a great session of nonsense-chanting. The
singing intensifies into the most refined, exuberant, and
delightful warbling, burbling. honking. hooting. and
howling---which quite obviously means nothing whatsoever. and is
being done out of pure glee. There is a pause. A voice says. <i>&quot;Dit!&quot;</i>
Another seems to reply, <i>&quot;Da!&quot;</i> Then, <i>&quot;Dit-da!
Di-dittty-da!&quot;</i> And getting gradually faster. <i>&quot;Da-di-ditty-di-ditty-da!
Di-da-di-ditty-ditty-da-di-da-di-ditty-da-da!&quot;</i> And so
on, until the players are quite out of their minds. The record
cover which Robert now shows me, says &quot;Classical Music of
India,&quot; and informs me that this is a series edited by Alain
Danielou, who happens to be the most serious, esoteric, and
learned scholar of Hindu music, and an exponent. in the line of
Rene Guenon and Ananda Coomaraswamy, of the most formal,
traditional, and difficult interpretation of Yoga and Vedanta.
Somehow I cannot quite reconcile Danielou, the pandit of pandits,
with this delirious outpouring of human bird-song. I feel my leg
is being pulled. Or perhaps Danielou's leg. </p>

<p> But then, maybe not. Oh, indeed not ! For quite suddenly I
feel my understanding dawning into a colossal clarity, as if
everything were opening up down to the roots of my being and of
time and space themselves. The sense of the world becomes totally
obvious. I am struck with amazement that I or anyone could have
thought life a problem or being a mystery. I call to everyone to
gather round. </p>

<p> &quot;Listen, there's something I <i>must</i> tell. I've
never, never seen it so clearly. But it doesn't matter a bit if
you don't understand, because each one of you is quite perfect as
you are, even if you don't know it. Life is basically a gesture,
but no one, no thing, is <i>making</i> it. There is no necessity
for it to happen, and none for it to go on happening. For it
isn't being driven by anything; it just happens freely of itself.
It's a gesture of motion, of sound, of color, and just as no one
is making it, it isn't <i>happening</i> to anyone. There is
simply no problem of life; it is completely purposeless
play---exuberance which is its own end. Basically there is the
gesture. Time, space, and multiplicity are complications of it.
There is no reason whatever to explain it, for explanations are
just another form of complexity, a new manifestation of life on
top of life, of gestures gesturing. Pain and suffering are simply
extreme forms of play, and there isn't anything in the whole
universe to be afraid of because it doesn't happen to anyone!
There isn't any substantial ego at all. The ego is a kind of
flip, a knowing of knowing, a fearing of fearing. It's a
curlicue, an extra jazz to experience, a sort of double-take or
reverberation, a dithering of consciousness which is the same as
anxiety.&quot; </p>

<p> Of course, to say that life is <i>just</i> a gesture, an
action without agent, recipient, or purpose, sounds much more
empty and futile than joyous. But to me it seems that an ego, a
substantial entity to which experience happens, is more of a
minus than a plus. It is an estrangement from experience, a lack
of participation. And in this moment I feel absolutely <i>with</i>
the world, free of that chronic resistance to experience which
blocks the free flowing of life and makes us move like
muscle-bound dancers. But I don't have to overcome resistance. I
see that resistance, ego, is just an extra vortex in the stream--
part of it---and that in fact there is no actual resistance at
all. There is no point from which to confront life, or stand
against it.</p>

<hr>

<p> I go into the garden again. The hummingbirds are soaring up
and falling in their mating dance, as if there were someone
behind the bushes playing ball with them. Fruit and more wine
have been put out on the table. Oranges ---transformations of the
sun into its own image, as if the tree were acknowledging
gratitude for warmth. Leaves, green with the pale, yellow-fresh
green that I remember from the springtimes of my childhood in
Kentish spinneys, where breaking buds were spotted all over the
hazel branches in a floating mist. Within them, trunks, boughs,
and twigs moist black behind the sunlit green. Fuchsia bushes,
tangled traceries of stalks, intermingled with thousands of
magenta ballerinas with purple petticoats. And, behind all,
towering into the near-twilight sky, the grove of giant
eucalyptus trees with their waving clusters of distinctly
individual, bamboo-like leaves. Everything here is the visual
form of the lilting nonsense and abandoned vocal dexterity of
those Hindu musicians. </p>

<p> I recall the words of an ancient Tantric scripture: &quot;As
waves come with water and flames with fire, so the universal
waves with us.&quot; Gestures of the gesture, waves of the
wave---leaves flowing into caterpillars, grass into cows, milk
into babies, bodies into worms, earth into flowers, seeds into
birds, quanta of energy into the iridescent or reverberating
labyrinths of the brain. Within and swept up into this endless,
exulting, cosmological dance are the base and grinding undertones
of the pain which transformation involves: chewed nerve endings,
sudden electric-striking snakes in the meadow grass, swoop of the
lazily circling hawks, sore muscles piling logs, sleepless nights
trying to keep track of the unrelenting bookkeeping which
civilized survival demands. </p>

<p> How unfamiliarly natural it is to see pain as no longer a
problem. For problematic pain arises with the tendency of
self-consciousness to short-circuit the brain and fill its
passages with dithering echoes---revulsions to revulsions, fears
of fear, cringing from cringing, guilt about guilt---twisting
thought to trap itself in endless oscillations. In his ordinary
consciousness man lives like someone trying to speak in an
excessively sensitive echo-chamber; he can proceed only by
doggedly ignoring the interminably gibbering reflections of his
voice. For in the brain there are echoes and reflected images in
every dimension of sense, thought, and feeling, chattering on and
on in the tunnels of memory. The difficulty is that we confuse
this storing of information with an intelligent commentary on
what we are doing at the moment, mistaking for intelligence the
raw materials of the data with which it works. Like too much
alcohol, self-consciousness makes us see ourselves double, and we
mistake the double image for two selves---mental and material,
controlling and controlled, reflective and spontaneous. Thus
instead of suffering we suffer about suffering, and suffer about
suffering about suffering. </p>

<p> As has always been said, clarity comes with the giving up of
self. But what this means is that we cease to attribute selfhood
to these echoes and mirror images. Otherwise we stand in a hall
of mirrors, dancing hesitantly and irresolutely because we are
making the images take the lead. We move in circles because we
are following what we have already done. We have lost touch with
our original identity, which is not the system of images but the
great self-moving gesture of this as yet unremembered moment. The
gift of remembering and binding time creates the illusion that
the past stands to the present as agent to act, mover to moved.
Living thus from the past, with echoes taking the lead, we are
not truly here, and are always a little late for the feast. Yet
could anything be more obvious than that the past follows from
the present like the wake of a ship, and that if we are to be
alive at all, <i>here</i> is the place to be? </p>

<p> Evening at last closes a day that seemed to have been going
on since the world began. At the high end of the garden, above a
clearing, there stands against the mountain wall a semicircle of
trees, immensely tall and dense with foliage, suggesting the
entrance grove to some ancient temple. It is from here that the
deep blue-green transparency of twilight comes down, silencing
the birds and hushing our own conversation. We have been watching
the sunset, sitting in a row upon the ridgepole of the great barn
whose roof of redwood tiles, warped and cracked, sweeps clear to
the ground. Below, to the west, lies an open sward where two
white goats are munching the grass, and beyond this is Robert's
house where lights in the kitchen show that Beryl is preparing
dinner. Time to go in, and leave the garden to the awakening
stars. </p>

<p> Again music---harpsichords and a string orchestra, and Bach
in his most exultant mood. I lie down to listen, and close my
eyes. All day, in wave after wave and from all directions of the
mind's compass, there has repeatedly come upon me the sense of my
original identity as one with the very fountain of the universe.
I have seen, too, that the fountain is its own source and motive,
and that its spirit is an unbounded playfulness which is the
many-dimensioned dance of life. There is no problem left, but who
will believe it? Will I believe it myself when I return to normal
consciousness? Yet I can see at the moment that this does not
matter. The play is hide- and-seek or lost-and-found, and it is
all part of the play that one can get very lost indeed. How far,
then, can one go in getting found? </p>

<p> As if in answer to my question there appears before my closed
eyes a vision in symbolic form of what Eliot has called &quot;the
still point of the turning world.&quot; I find myself looking
down at the floor of a vast courtyard, as if from a window high
upon the wall, and the floor and the walls are entirely surfaced
with ceramic tiles displaying densely involved arabesques in
gold, purple, and blue. The scene might be the inner court of
some Persian palace, were it not of such immense proportions and
its colors of such preternatural transparency. In the center of
the floor there is a great sunken arena, shaped like a
combination of star and rose, and bordered with a strip of tiles
that suggest the finest inlay work in vermilion, gold, and
obsidian. </p>

<p> Within this arena some kind of ritual is being performed in
time with the music. At first its mood is stately and royal, as
if there were officers and courtiers in rich armor and many-
colored cloaks dancing before their king. As I watch, the mood
changes. The courtiers become angels with wings of golden fire,
and in the center of the arena there appears a pool of dazzling
flame. Looking into the pool I see, just for a moment, a face
which reminds me of the Christos Pantocrator of Byzantine
mosaics, and I feel that the angels are drawing back with wings
over their faces in a motion of reverent dread. But the face
dissolves. The pool of flame grows brighter and brighter, and I
notice that the winged beings are drawing back with a gesture,
not of dread, but of tenderness---for the flame knows no anger.
Its warmth and radiance---&quot;tongues of flame
infolded&quot;---are an efflorescence of love so endearing that I
feel I have seen the heart of all hearts.</p>

<hr>

<p> <a name="footnote"></a>* &quot;Self-conscious man thinks he
thinks. This has long been recognized to be an error, for the
conscious subject who thinks he thinks is not the same as the
organ which does the thinking. The conscious person is one
component only, a series of transitory aspects, of the thinking
person.&quot; L. L. Whyte, <i>The Unconscious Before Freud</i>
(Basic Books, New York, 1960), p. 59. <a href="#back">(back)</a></p>

<hr>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/jcepilog.htm">Epilogue</a>
</p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/jccontnt.htm">Joyous
Cosmology Table of Contents</a> </p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm">LSD
and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>