
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-77</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B007-29</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/friedm1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035608 text/html 33918
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:56:02 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:52 GMT
Content-length: 33700
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Interview with Milton Friedman on the Drug War</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<p>Interview with Milton Friedman on the Drug War </p>

<p>The following is an excerpt from &quot;Friedman &amp; Szasz On
Liberty and Drugs.&quot; It is from a 1991 interview on
&quot;America's Drug Forum,&quot; a national public affairs talk
show that appears on public television stations. Randy Paige is
an Emmy Award-winning drug reporter from Baltimore, Maryland;
Professor Milton Friedman has been a Senior Research Fellow at
the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace at Stanford
since 1977, and is considered the leader of the Chicago School of
monetary economics. Professor Friedman won the Nobel Memorial
Prize in Economic Science in 1976, and is also the recipient of
the National Medal of Science and the Presidential Medal of
Freedom by the U.S. government in 1988. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Let us deal first with the issue of legalization
of drugs. How do you see America changing for the better under
that system? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I see America with half the number of
prisons, half the number of prisoners, ten thousand fewer
homicides a year, inner cities in which there's a chance for
these poor people to live without being afraid for their lives,
citizens who might be respectable who are now addicts not being
subject to becoming criminals in order to get their drug, being
able to get drugs for which they're sure of the quality. You
know, the same thing happened under prohibition of alcohol as is
happening now. </p>

<p>Under prohibition of alcohol, deaths from alcohol poisoning,
from poisoning by things that were mixed in with the bootleg
alcohol, went up sharply. Similarly, under drug prohibition,
deaths from overdose, from adulterations, from adulterated
substances have gone up. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> How would legalization adversely affect America,
in your view? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> The one adverse effect that legalization
might have is that there very likely would be more people taking
drugs. That's not by any means clear. But, if you legalized, you
destroy the black market, the price of drugs would go down
drastically. And as an economist, lower prices tend to generate
more demand. However, there are some very strong qualifications
to be made to that. </p>

<p>The effect of criminalization, of making drugs criminal, is to
drive people from mild drugs to strong drugs. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> In what way? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Marijuana is a very heavy, bulky substance
and, therefore, it's relatively easy to interdict. The warriors
on drugs have been more successful interdicting marijuana than,
let's say, cocaine. So, marijuana prices have gone up, they've
become harder to get. There's been an incentive to grow more
potent marijuana and people have been driven from marijuana to
heroin, or cocaine, or crack. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Let us consider another drug then, and that is
the drug crack. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Crack would never have existed, in my
opinion, if you had not had drug prohibition. Why was crack
created? The preferred method of taking cocaine, which I
understand was by sniffing it, snorting it, became very expensive
and they were desperate to find a way of packaging cocaine... </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> The entrepreneurs? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Of course, they're entrepreneurs. The people
who are running the drug traffic are no different from the rest
of us, except that they have more entrepreneurial ability and
less concern about not hurting other people. They're more
irresponsible in that way. But they're in business and they're
trying to make as much as they can. And they discovered a good
way to make money was to dilute this crack with baking soda or
whatever else--I mean, cocaine, whatever else they do--I don't
know the procedure--so that they could bring it out in five
dollar and ten dollar doses. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Let's talk about that more in a minute. But with
regard to crack, considering the fact that it's very addictive
and considering the fact that... </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> That's very dubious. It is addictive, but I
understand from all the medical evidence that it's no more
addictive than other drugs. In fact, the most addictive drug
everybody acknowledges is tobacco. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Well, let me rephrase that then. All of the
information I've seen on it suggests that it is a drug which is
very pleasurable. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Absolutely, no doubt. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> And the effect of it is also very short. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> And it is very expensive because multiple doses
cost a lot of money. My question is: If drugs were legalized and
if crack cocaine were available at a low cost, could it not be
devastating in that it is so pleasurable, I am told, that more
people could get it and stay on it for longer periods of time? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Well, maybe. Nobody can say with certainty
what will happen along those lines. But I think it's very
dubious, because all of the exper- ience with legal drugs is that
there's a tendency for people to go from the stronger to the
weaker and not the other way around, just as you go from regular
beer to light beer. That's the tendency that there is: from
cigar- ettes without filters to low-tar, filtered cigarettes, and
so on. But I can't rule out that what you're saying might happen,
but, and this is a very important but, the harm that would result
from that would be much less than it is now, for several reasons.
The really main thing that bothers me about the crack is not what
you're talking about, it's the crack babies, because that's the
real tragedy. They are innocent victims. They didn't choose to be
crack babies any more than the people who are born with the fetal
alcohol syndrome. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> As you now, we are already experiencing epidemic
proportions of that. One out of every four babies going into one
hospital, I can tell you, in Maryland is addicted. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> But I'll tell you, it isn't that crack babies
are necessarily addicted, but they tend to come in at low birth
weight, they tend to come in mentally impaired, and so on. But
you know that the number who do that from alcohol is much
greater. So, the same problem arises there. That's what bothers
me. </p>

<p>Now suppose you legalized. Under current circumstances, a
mother who is a crack addict and is carrying a baby is afraid to
go the prenatal treatment because she turned herself into a
criminal, she's subject to being thrown in jail. Under legalized
drugs, that inhibition would be off. And, you know, even crack
addicts, mothers, have a feeling of responsi- bility to their
children. </p>

<p>And I have no doubt that under those circumstances, it would
be possible to have a much more effective system of prenatal
care, a much more effective system of trying to persuade people
who are on drugs not to have children or to go off drugs while
they have children. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Let us turn to the early genesis of your belief
that the drug laws may not be working the way the nation would
hope them to. Tell me about the elements that you saw early on
that changed your mind or changed your way of thinking. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Well, I'm not saying &quot;changed.&quot; I
would rather say &quot;formed&quot; my way of thinking, because I
do not recall at any time that I was ever in favor of prohibition
of either alcohol or drugs. I grew up--I'm old enough to have
lived through some part of the Prohibition era. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> And you remember it? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I remember the occasion when a fellow
graduate student at Columbia from Sweden wanted to take me
downtown to a restaurant for a Swedish meal and introduced me to
the Swedish drink aquavit. This was a restaurant at which this
Swedish fellow had been getting aquavit all during Prohibition;
they had been selling it to him. And this was just after the
repeal of Prohibition. We went there and he asked them for some
aquavit. They said, &quot;Oh, no, we haven't gotten our licence
yet.&quot; And finally, he talked to them in Swedish and
persuaded them to take us into the back where they gave us a
glass of aquavit apiece. Now that shows the absurdity of it. </p>

<p>Prohibition was repealed in 1933 when I was 21 years old, so
was a teenager during most of Prohibition. Alcohol was readily
available. Bootlegging was common. Any idea that alcohol
prohibition was keeping people from drinking was absurd. There
were speakeasies all over the place. But more than that. We had
this spectacle of Al Capone, of the hijackings, of the gang
wars... </p>

<p>Anybody with two eyes could see that this was a bad deal, that
you were doing more harm than good. In addition, I became an
economist. And as an economist, I came to recognize the
importance of markets and of free choice and of consumer
sovereignty and came to discover the harm that was done when you
interfered with them. The laws against drugs were passed in 1914,
but there was no very great enforcement of it. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> That was the Harrison Act? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> The Harrison Act. There was no very great
enforcement of it until after World War II, by which time I had
been able to see the harmful effects of price control, of rent
control, of other attempts for government to interfere with
market things. So, it never occurred to me to be in favor of it. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Was there any single event, anything you
happened to witness that made an impression upon you or was it...
</p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> No, there was no single event. It was a
cumulative effect. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Of course, you know that there are those who say
that when Prohibition was over with, consumption dramatically
increased and that it would be a... </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I beg your pardon, that's simply not true.
That's not a fact. What is true... </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> It has been argued. That has been argued. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> You have statistically reported figures in
the books on the amount of alcohol consumed. That went up sharply
right after Prohibition, but that was &quot;illegal&quot; alcohol
consumption. If you take, as I have done, the chart of alcohol
consumption before and after Prohibition, alcohol consumption
after Prohibition came back roughly to where it was before, and,
over the course of the period since then, if anything, alcohol
con- sumption has been going down not in absolute terms, but
relative to the population and relative to the growth of income. </p>

<p>For a time, it went up rather slowly, along with income, with
one except- ion. During WW II, it shot way up. But that's what
happened during WW I. Of course, you never would have gotten
Prohibition if you hadn't had all the young men away in France
when the vote was taken, so that the women had an extraordinary
influence on it. But the same thing happened during WW II. And
then after WW II, it settled down again. And more recently, the
con- sumption of alcohol has been going down on a per capita
basis. So, it simply is not true that there was a tremendous
increase. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> So far as drugs itself is concerned, some
years ago, Alaska legalized marijuana. Consumption of marijuana
among high school students in Alaska went DOWN. The Dutch, in
Holland, do not prosecute soft drugs, like marijuana, and they
would prefer not to prosecute hard drugs, but they feel impelled
by the international obligations they've entered into, and
consumption of marijuana by young people has gone down. And,
equally more interesting, the average age of the users of hard
drugs has gone up, which means they're not getting any more new
recruits. </p>

<p>So, the evidence is very mixed. But I have to admit that the
one negative feature of legalizing drugs is that there might be
some additional drug habbits. However, I want to qualify that in
still another way. </p>

<p>The Child who's shot in a slum in a pass-by-shooting, in a
random shooting, is an innocent victim in every respect of the
term. The person who decides to take drugs for himself is not an
innocent victim. He has chosen himself to be a victim. And I must
say I have very much less sympathy for him. I do not think it is
moral to impose such heavy costs on other people to protect
people from their own choices. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> For us to understand the real root of those
beliefs, how about if we just talk a minute about free market
economic perspective, and how you see the proper role of
government in its dealings with the individual. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> The proper role of government is exactly what
John Stuart Mill Said in the middle of the 19th century in
&quot;On Liberty.&quot; The proper role of government is to
prevent other people from harming an individual. Govern- ment, he
said, never has any right to interfere with an individual for
that individual's own good. </p>

<p>The case for prohibiting drugs is exactly as strong and as
weak as the case for prohibiting people from overeating. We all
know that overeating causes more deaths than drugs do. If it's in
principle OK for the government to say you must not consume drugs
because they'll do you harm, why isn't it all right to say you
must not eat too much because you'll do harm? Why isn't it all
right to say you must not try to go in for skydiving because
you're likely to die? Why isn't it all right to say, &quot;Oh,
skiing, that's no good, that's a very dangerous sport, you'll
hurt yourself&quot;? Where do you draw the line? </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Well, I would bet that former drug czar William
Bennet, some other folks along those lines, would probably
suggest that the present sale and distribution of illegal drugs
is, in fact, an enterprise which harms another person and the
government has to step in... </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> [Simultaneously] It does harm a great many...
</p>

<p><b>Paige:</b>...to protect the vulnerable. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> It does harm a great many other people, but
primarily because it's prohibited. There are an enormous number
of innocent victims now. You've got the people whose purses are
stolen, who are bashed over the head by people trying to get
enough money for their next fix. You've got the people killed in
the random drug wars. You've got the corruption of the legal
establishment. You've got the innocent victims who are taxpayers
who have to pay for more and more prisons, and more and more
prisoners, and more and more police. You've got the rest of us
who don't get decent law enforcement because all the law
enforcement officials are busy trying to do the impossible. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> And, last, but not least, you've got the
people of Colombia and Peru and so on. What business do we have
destroying and leading to the killing of thousands of people in
Colombia because we cannot enforce our own laws? If we could
enforce our laws against drugs, there would be no market for
these drugs. You wouldn't have Colombia in the state it's in. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Is it not true that the entire discussion here,
the entire drug problem is an economic problem to... </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> No, it's not an economic problem at all, it's
a moral problem. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> In what way? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I'm an economist, but the economics problem
is strictly tertiary. It's a moral problem. It's a problem of the
harm which the government is doing. </p>

<p>I have estimated statistically that the prohibition of drugs
produces, on the average, ten thousand homicides a year. It's a
moral problem that the government is going around killing ten
thousand people. It's a moral problem that the government is
making into criminals people, who may be doing something you and
I don't approve of, but who are doing something that hurts nobody
else. Most of the arrests for drugs are for possession by casual
users. </p>

<p>Now here's somebody who wants to smoke a marijuana cigarette.
If he's caught, he goes to jail. Now is that moral? Is that
proper? I think it's absolutely disgraceful that our government,
supposed to be our government, should be in the position of
converting people who are not harming others into criminals, of
destroying their lives, putting them in jail. That's the issue to
me. The economic issue comes in only for explaining why it has
those effects. But the economic reasons are not the reasons. </p>

<p>Of course, we're wasting money on it. Ten, twenty, thirty
billion dollars a year, but that's trivial. We're wasting that
much money in many other ways, such as buying crops that ought
never to be produced. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> There are many who would look at the
economics--how the eco- nomics of the drug business is affecting
America's major inner cities, for example. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Of course it is, and it is because it's
prohibited. See, if you look at the drug war from a purely
economic point of view, the role of the government is to protect
the drug cartel. That's literally true. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Is it doing a good job of it? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Excellent. What do I mean by that? In an
ordinary free market--let's take potatoes, beef, anything you
want--there are thousands of importers and exporters. Anybody can
go into the business. But it's very hard for a small person to go
into the drug importing business because our interdiction efforts
essentially make it enormously costly. So, the only people who
can survive in that business are these large Medellin cartel kind
of people who have enough money so they can have fleets of
airplanes, so they can have sophisticated methods, and so on. </p>

<p>In addition to which, by keeping goods out and by arresting,
let's say, local marijuana growers, the government keeps the
price of these products high. What more could a monopolist want?
He's got a government who makes it very hard for all his
competitors and who keeps the price of his products high. It's
absolutely heaven. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Of course, you know that there are conspiracy
theorists who suggest it's there for a reason, and that's because
governments are in cahoots with the drug runners; you wouldn't
say that. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> No, it's not. I don't say that at all. You
know, over and over again in government policy, good intentions
go awry. And the reason good intentions go awry is because you're
spending somebody else's money. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Many would say that a lot of your theories are
grounded in the notion of personal interest; if it is in an
individual's personal interest to do something, he or she will do
that. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> That's not a theory, and there's nobody who
will deny it. Is there anybody who will deny that you can expect
every person to pursue his own personal interests? Now those
personal interests don't have to be narrow. Mother Theresa is
pursuing her own personal interest just as much as Donald Trump
is pursuing his. But they're both pursuing the personal interest.
</p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Some would say that that notion--that personal
interest is what propels societies as well as people--is a
heartless philosophy and that the underclass would not fare well
under that kind of a notion. You've heard that before. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Yes, of course. But the evidence is so
overwhelming. The only countries in the world in which low income
people have managed to get a halfway decent level of living are
those which rely on capitalist markets. Just compare the quality
of life, the level of living of the ordinary people in Russia and
ordinary people in, I won't say the U.S., but in France, in
Italy, in Germany, in England, or in Hong Kong. Compare Hong Kong
with mainland China. </p>

<p>Every society is driven by personal interest. Mainland China
is driven by personal interest. The question is: How is personal
interest disciplined? If the only way you can satisfy your
personal interest is by getting something that other people want
to pay for. You've got to... </p>

<p>Page: Or by forcing down other people's throats at the point
of a gun, I suppose. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> If you can do it. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> At the extreme. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> At the extreme. But that won't get their
cooperation. You may be able to kill them. You may be able to
take their wealth. But it won't create any more wealth. So, the
only societies which have been able to create broadly based
relative prosperity have been those societies which have relied
primarily on capitalist markets. That's true whether you take
Hong Kong versus mainland China, East Germany versus West
Germany, Czechoslovakia before WW II and current. You cannot find
a single exception to that proposition. </p>

<p>Adam Smith put it best over two hundred years ago, when he
said people who intend only to pursue their self-interest are led
by an invisible hand to promote the public interest even though
that was no part of their intention. Mr. Ford did not develop the
Ford car for the public interest. He did it for his private
interest. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> But Adam Smith also saw a role for government,
for example, in the administration of justice, didn't he? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> So do I. I am not a zero government person. I
think there is a real role of government. And one of the reasons
I object to so many of the things that government has gotten into
is that it prevents government from performing its proper role. A
basic role of government is to keep you from having our house
burgled, to keep you from being hit over the head. And because
the larger fraction of our law enforcement machinery is devoted
to the war on drugs, you haven't got that kind of safety. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> But, of course, there is clearly the argument
that if the police come and pick up a person who is addicted to a
drug and does not have the money to buy those drugs, then they're
also taking a potential burglar off the street who's going to
come and get my house, right? <b>Friedman:</b> They are, but
they'll be more of them coming on, as we know, and besides what
are you going to do with them. Are you going to house them? A
majority of those people who are arrested are simply arrested for
possession, they're casual users. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> However, the sixty-five, seventy-five-year-old
woman who looks out her window and sees drug dealers out in the
street and she sees them carrying guns and selling drugs thirty
feet from her front door has a right to call police and say,
&quot;I want these people off the street.&quot; </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Absolutely. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> And police should take them off the street.
Correct? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Absolutely. But it's a mistake to have a law
which makes that the main function of the police. I don't blame
the police. I don't blame that woman. I don't blame the drug
dealers. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> In what way? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> We put them in a position where that's the
thing to do. When we say to a young man in the ghetto,
&quot;Look, you get a reasonable job at McDonald's or anyplace
else, you'll make five, six, seven dollars an hour. But on the
other hand, here's this opportunity to peddle drugs in the
street.&quot; Why does the juvenile have the opportunity? Because
the law is easier on juveniles than it is on adults. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> But how would you see legalization affecting
poor in this country? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> The poor? It depends on which poor. But in
the main, legalization as such would not have a major effect on
the poor. It would provide better opportunities for the poor by
rendering the inner cities safe and a place where you might have
some decent, proper business. It would provide an opportunity to
do more to improve schooling. The deterior- ation of the
schooling, which is another case of ineffective socialism, has as
much to do with the problems in the inner city as drugs do. Drugs
aren't the only thing at work. </p>

<p>But I don't believe that legalization should be viewed
primarily as a way to help the poor. Legalization is a way to
stop--in our forum as citizens-- a government from using our
power to engage in the immoral behavior of killing people, taking
lives away from people in the U.S., in Colombia and elsewhere,
which we have no business doing. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> So, you see the role of government right now as
being just as deadly as if Uncle Sam were to take a gun to
somebody's head. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> That's what he's doing, of course. Right now
Uncle Sam is not only taking a gun to somebody's head, he's
taking his property without due process of law. The drug
enforcers are expropriating property, in many cases of innocent
people on whom they don't have a real warrant. We're making
citizens into spies and informers. We tell people to call up, you
don't have to give your name, just give your suspicions. That's a
terrible way to run what's supposed to be a free country. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Let us turn in the final few minutes then to
specifically what your vision is then. Under your system, if you
could make a wish and have it come true, what system would that
be? How would you legalize drugs? How would you go about doing
that? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I would legalize drugs by subjecting them to
exactly the same rules that alcohol and cigarettes are subjected
to now. Alcohol and cigar- ettes cause more deaths than drugs do,
by far, from use, but many fewer innocent victims. And the major
innocent victims, in that case, are the people who are killed by
drunk drivers. And we ought to enforce the law against drunk
driving, just as we ought to enforce the law against driving
under the influence of marijuana, or cocaine, or anything else. </p>

<p>But I would, as a first step at least, treat the drugs exactly
the same way we now treat alcohol and tobacco, no different. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> You know what Representative Charles Rangel
(D-New York) would say. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I have heard Charles Rangel. He's a
demagogue, who has had no relationship between what he says and
the interests of his own constitu- ents. His own constituents,
the people he serves, are among the people who would be benefited
the most by legalization of drugs. Charles Rangel is pursuing his
own self-interest. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Forgive me for throwing out a name, but I just
wanted to mention a typical response to that would be if you
treat it like alcohol, you're talking about full-page ads in
magazines with cocaine. You're talking about TV advertisers.
You're talking about buying cocaine... </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I beg your pardon. TV advertising is
forbidden today for alcohol. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> For hard liquor, that's all. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> For hard liquor. And I say treat this the
same way as you would treat Alcohol. So, presumably such ads
would be forbidden for this. </p>

<p>But, of course, in any event I'm not prohibiting anybody from
reading Mr. Rangel, and his ideas are at least as dangerous as
those full-page ads you're talking about. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> What scares you the most about the notion of
drugs being legal? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Nothing scares me about the notion of drugs
being legal. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Nothing. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> What scares me is the notion of continuing on
the path we're on now, which will destroy our free society,
making it an uncivilized place. There's only one way you can
really enforce the drug laws currently. The only way to do that
is to adopt the policies of Saudi Arabia, Singa- pore, which some
other countries adopt, in which a drug addict is subject to
capital punishment or, at the very least, having his hand chopped
off. If we were willing to have penalties like that--but would
that be a society you'd want to live in? </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Do these notions seem obvious to you? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Yes. I have thought about them for a long
time. I have observed behavior in this country and in other
countries for a long time. And I find it almost incredible how
people can support the present system of drug prohibition. It
does so much more harm than good. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> If it is obvious, why is it that you're in such
a minority, particularly among...? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Of course. Very good question. And the answer
is because there are so many vested interests that have been
built up behind the present drug war. Who are the people who are
listened to about drugs? The people who have the obligation to
enforce drug laws. They think they're doing the right thing.
They're good human beings. Everybody thinks what he's doing is
worth doing. Nobody is doing it for evil motives. But it's the
same thing all over the government. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Wouldn't you agree that fear is one of the
strongest supports for the existing drug laws? Fear that, without
them, the bottom would fall out. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Yes, but it's a fake fear and it's a fear
that is promoted. Listen to what the former drug czar, Mr.
Bennet, said. First of all, he stated that consumption of alcohol
after Prohibition has gone up three or fourfold or something. He
was wrong, just factually wrong. He's made all sorts of scare
talk about how many new addicts there would be. He's never
provided a single bit of evidence, never provided any examples of
any other place or anything. But why? Because he's got a job to
do. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Vested interests, you're saying. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Vested interests, self-interest, the same
self-interest that people object to in the market. But in the
market, if you start a project and it goes wrong, you have to
finance it out of your own pocket. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Last question. You have grandchildren. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Absolutely. </p>

<p>You have a two-year-old granddaughter. </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> And her name is? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> Her name is Becca. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> When you look at Becca, what do you see for her
and for her future? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> That depends entirely upon what you and your
fellow citizens do to our country. If you and your fellow
citizens continue on moving more and more in the direction of
socialism, not only inspired through your drug prohibition, but
through your socialization of schools, the socialization of
medicine, the regulation of industry, I see for my granddaughter
the equivalent of Soviet communism three years ago. </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> Do you worry about drugs affecting your
granddaughter somehow? </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> I don't worry about drugs, but I worry about
government doing something about drugs. I do not worry about her
getting addicted to drugs. She has good parents. Her parents will
provide her with good role models... </p>

<p><b>Paige:</b> I just mean the violence surrounding the drug
trade, just the... </p>

<p><b>Friedman:</b> The violence is due to prohibition and
nothing else. How much violence is there surrounding the alcohol
trade. There's some, only because we prohibit the sale of alcohol
to children, which we should do, and there's some because we
impose very high taxes on alcohol and, as a result, there's some
incentive for bootlegging. But there's no other violence around
it.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>