
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-119</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/attitude.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130620 text/html 16531
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:11 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:22 GMT
Content-length: 16313
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Mental Attitude of the Marijuana Smoker Toward Society
and M</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>The Mental Attitude of the Marihuana Smoker Toward Society
and Marihuana</h1>

<hr>

<p>Most of the smokers of marihuana coming within the scope of
our survey were unemployed, and of the others most had part-time
employment. </p>

<p>Occasional, as well as confirmed, users were all aware of the
laws pertaining to the illegal use of the drug. They did not
indulge in its use with a spirit of braggadocio or as a challenge
to law as has been reported by some investigators in other
districts. They did not express remorse concerning their use of
marihuana, nor did they blame this habit as a causative factor in
the production of special difficulties in their personal lives.
Except for musicians there appeared to be no attempt at
secretiveness on the part of the habitual smoker. This attitude
is in marked contrast to that usually taken by those addicted to
morphine, cocaine, or heroin. </p>

<p>The consensus of marihuana users is that the drug is not
harmful and that infrequent or constant use of marihuana does not
result in physical or mental deterioration. </p>

<p>In describing the most common reaction to the drug they always
stated that it made them feel &quot;high.&quot; Elaboration of
just what the smoker meant by &quot;high&quot; varied with the
individual. However, there was common agreement that a feeling of
adequacy and efficiency was induced by the use of marihuana and
that current mental conflicts were allayed. Organic illness was
not given as a cause for smoking &quot;reefers.&quot; </p>

<p>A person may be a confirmed smoker for a prolonged period, and
give up the drug voluntarily without experiencing any craving for
it or exhibiting withdrawal symptoms. He may, at some time later
on, go back to its use. Others may remain infrequent users of the
cigarette, taking one or two a week, or only when the
&quot;social setting&quot; calls for participation. From time to
time we had one of our investigators associate with a marihuana
user. The investigator would bring up the subject of smoking.
This would invariably lead to the suggestion that they obtain
some marihuana cigarettes. They would seek a &quot;tea-pad,&quot;
and if it was closed the smoker and our investigator would calmly
resume their previous activity, such as the discussion of life in
general or the playing of pool. There were apparently no signs
indicative of frustration in the smoker at not being able to
gratify the desire for the drug. We consider this point highly
significant since it is so contrary to the experience of users of
other narcotics. A similar situation occurring in one addicted to
the use of morphine, cocaine, or heroin would result in a
compulsive attitude on the part of the addict to obtain the drug.
If unable to secure it, there would be obvious physical and
mental manifestations of frustration. This may be considered
presumptive evidence that there is no true addiction in the
medical sense associated with the use of marihuana. </p>

<p>The confirmed marihuana smoker consumes perhaps from six to
ten cigarettes per day. He appears to be quite conscious of the
quantity he requires to reach the effect called &quot;high.&quot;
Once the desired effect is obtained he cannot be persuaded to
consume more. </p>

<p>He knows when he has had enough. The smoker determines for
himself the point of being &quot;high,&quot; and is ever
conscious of preventing himself from becoming &quot;too
high.&quot; This fear of being &quot;too high&quot; must be
associated with some form of anxiety which causes the smoker,
should he accidentally reach that point, immediately to institute
measures so that he can &quot;come down.&quot; It has been found
that the use of such beverages as beer, or a sweet soda pop, is
an effective measure. Smokers insist that &quot;it does something
to the stomach&quot; and that it is always associated with
&quot;belching.&quot; A cold shower will also have the effect of
bringing the person &quot;down.&quot; </p>

<p>Smokers have repeatedly stated that the consumption of whisky
while smoking negates the potency of the drug. They find it is
very difficult to get &quot;high&quot; while drinking whisky, and
because of that smokers will not drink whisky while using the
&quot;weed.&quot; They do, however, consume large quantities of
sweet wines. It is their contention that this mild alcoholic
beverage aids the drug in producing the desired effect. Most
marihuana smokers insist that the appetite is increased as the
result of smoking. </p>

<p>We have been unable to confirm the opinion expressed by some
investigators that marihuana smoking is the first step in the use
of such drugs as cocaine, morphine, and heroin. The instances are
extremely rare where the habit of marihuana smoking is associated
with addiction to these other narcotics.<br>
</p>

<h2>Marihuana and Eroticism </h2>

<p>In the popular agitation against the use of marihuana, its
erotic effects have been stressed repeatedly. As previously
stated in this report, our investigators visited many
&quot;tea-pads&quot; in the Borough of Manhattan. It is true that
lewd pictures decorated the walls but they did not find that they
were attracting attention or comment among the clientele. In fact
one of the investigators who was concentrating his attention on
the relation between marihuana and eroticism stated in his report
that he found himself embarrassed in that he was the only one who
examined the pictures on the wall. </p>

<p>Numerous conversations with smokers of marihuana revealed only
occasional instances in which there was any relation between the
drug and eroticism. At one time one of our investigators attended
a very intimate social gathering in an apartment in Harlem,
having succeeded in securing the position of doorman for the
occasion. </p>

<p>There was a great deal of drinking, and the dancing was of the
most modern, abandoned, &quot;jitter-bug&quot; type. This form of
dancing is highly suggestive and appears to be associated with
erotic activity. The investigator made careful observation of
those who were dancing, and found that there was no difference
between the ones who were and the ones who were not smoking
&quot;reefers.&quot; Similar impressions were received after
careful observations in public dance halls, places where they
knew that some persons were under the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p>Visits to brothels which occasionally also served as
&quot;teapads&quot; revealed that the use of marihuana was not
linked to sexuality. These observations allow us to come to the
conclusion that in the main marihuana was not used for direct
sexual stimulation. <br>
</p>

<h2>Crime </h2>

<p>One of the most important causes of the widespread publicity
which marihuana smoking has received is the belief that this
practice is directly responsible for the commission of crimes. </p>

<p>During our investigation many law enforcement officers,
representing various federal, state and local police bureaus,
were interviewed and asked for a confidential expression of
opinion on the general question of crime and marihuana. In most
instances they unhesitatingly stated that there is no proof that
major crimes are associated with the practice of smoking
marihuana. They did state that many marihuana smokers are guilty
of petty crimes, but that the criminal career usually existed
prior to the time the individual smoked his first marihuana
cigarette. These officers further stated that a criminal
generally termed as a &quot;real&quot; or
&quot;professional&quot; criminal will not associate with
marihuana smokers. He considers such a person inferior and
unreliable and will not allow him to participate in the
commission of a major crime. </p>

<p>In the period beginning October 1939 and ending November 1940,
the Police Department made 167 arrests for the possession and use
of marihuana. Classified according to race they were: white, 33
men, 4 women; Latin-American, 26 men, 2 women; Negro, 83 men, 6
women; Latin-American (colored) 9 men, 1 woman- British East
Indies 1, Filipino 1, Chinese 1. Classified according to age, 12
per cent were between the ages of 16 and 20, 58 per cent between
the ages of 21 and 30, 24 per cent between the ages of 31 and 40,
and 6 per cent between the ages of 41 and 50. </p>

<p>During the period under discussion, the Police Department
confiscated approximately 3,000 pounds of marihuana. </p>

<p>The sale and use of marihuana is a problem engaging the
vigilance of the New York Police Department. However, the number
of officers available for such duty is limited. Officers
specifically assigned to the Narcotics Division of the Police
Department are acquainted with the problem, but the majority of
the officers are fundamentally without authoritative knowledge
regarding this subject. </p>

<p>The relation between marihuana smoking and the commission of
crimes of violence in the city of New York is described by Dr.
Walter Bromberg, psychiatrist-in-charge of the Psychiatric Clinic
of the Court of General Sessions, in an article published in the
Journal of the American Medical Association:<br>
</p>

<p>(start quotation) </p>

<p>In the south of this country (New Orleans) the incidence of
marihuana addicts among major criminals is admittedly high.
Sporadic reports from elsewhere in the country of murders and
assaults due to marihuana appear in the press frequently. It is
difficult to evaluate these statements, because of their
uncritical nature. The bulletin prepared by the Foreign Policy
Association lists ten cases &quot;culled at random from the files
of the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics&quot; of murder and atrocious
assault in which marihuana was directly responsible for the
crime. </p>

<p>Among the ten patients, the second, J. O., was described as
having confessed how he murdered a friend and put his body in a
trunk while under the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p>J. O. was examined in this clinic; although he was a
psychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was no
indication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.
The investigation by the probation department failed to indicate
use of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted to
heroin. </p>

<p>Our observations with respect to marihuana and crime were made
in the Court of General Sessions over a period of five and a half
years. The material in that court is limited as to residence to
New York County, although it must be remembered that the
offenders come from many sections of the country and are of many
racial types. This is important, because the British
investigators have noted in India that cannabis does not bring
out the motor excitement or hysterical symptoms in Anglo-Saxon
users that occur in natives. There are several other difficulties
in collecting reliable material, one being the complete
dependence on the history and statements of the prisoners without
an opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative check,
as in the case of other drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine. </p>

<p>During routine interviews of some 17,000 offenders in six and
a half years, several hundred have been found who had direct
experience with marihuana. Their testimony checks with
experimental results and clinical experiences with regard to the
symptoms of intoxication, the absence of true addiction, and the
negative connection with major crime. Especially is this
noteworthy among sexual offenders and in cases of assault or
murder. The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the press
that crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands careful
scrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction.... </p>

<p>Most of the narcotic cases in New York County are heard in the
Court of Special Sessions, where misdemeanants are handled and
where indictments on charges of the possession of drugs for use
are returned. In the Court of Special Sessions in the same
six-year period, of approximately 75,000 indictments for all
crimes, 6,000 resulted in convictions for the possession and use
of drugs. </p>

<p>Since neither the law, the district attorney nor the police
department makes any distinction between the several kinds of
narcotics in arraignments or indictments, there were no figures
from which to estimate the number of users of marihuana as
distinguished from the number of users of other drugs. A system
of sampling the 6,000 cases was therefore adopted in order to
furnish an approximate estimate of the total number of marihuana
users who came into conflict with the law. </p>

<p>In this sampling the records of 1,500 offenders, or 25 per
cent of the 6,000, were examined. Of these, 135 were charged in
connection with marihuana. From this fact it was estimated that
about 540 offenders, or 9 per cent of all drug offenders coming
to the Court of Special Sessions in six years, were users of
marihuana. In analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was found
that 93 offenders had no previous record, the previous charges or
charges of 8 concerned only drugs, 5 had records including drug
charges and 29 had records not including drug charges. Among
those with longer records, that is, from four to seven previous
arrests, none showed progression from the use of drugs to other
crimes. </p>

<p>As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions in
the Court of General Sessions (the only method of estimation) it
can be said that drugs generally do not initiate criminal
careers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions, only 8 per
cent of the offenders had previous charges of using drugs and 3.7
per cent had previous charges of drugs and other petty crimes. In
the vast majority of cases in this group of 135, then, the
earlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,
even that of using other drugs. Whether the first offenders
charged with the use of marihuana go on to major crime is a
matter of speculation. The expectancy of major crimes following
the use of cannabis in New York County is small, according to
these experiences.(4) </p>

<p>(end quotation)<br>
</p>

<ol>
    <li>Bromberg, W., &quot;Marihuana: a psychiatric study.&quot;
        J.A.M.A. 113: 4, 1939.<br>
        <br>
    </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>