
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B023-124</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/claim6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093928 text/html 11738
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:39:20 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:34 GMT
Content-length: 11520
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Claim VI: Legalization and decriminalization of drugs have
been a dismal failure</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<h2>CLAIM VI: LEGALIZATION AND DECRIMINALIZATION OF DRUGS HAVE
BEEN A DISMAL FAILURE IN OTHER NATIONS. </h2>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> <br>
</h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The experiences of a number of foreign countries including
Great Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland are often cited to
demonstrate that other nations have successfully controlled drug
use by offering access and areas where drug takers can obtain and
use drugs. Recently, an MTV documentary on the drug issue
highlighted coffeehouses in Amsterdam as a model for controlled,
successful environment in which young Europeans can enjoy
marijuana. </p>

<p>There was also a 60 Minutes segment on the drug clinics in
Liverpool, England, a special on the Arts &amp; Entertainment
Channel, and a special on ABC which explored the situation in
Europe. </p>

<p>Legalization proponents cannot find encouragement in the fact
that when drugs were once legal, cheap and available in the
United States, the impact on society was such that laws were
enacted to make drugs illegal. They ignore our own history and
point to Great Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland as free
and open societies where drug use is allowed with no adverse
effects. The Quantico experts believed it is important to shed
light on the foreign experience with increased drug access and
liberalized use policies, and explain that this experience has
been negative </p>

<p>The statement of our own history is plainly false. Interested
readers should any of the major studies of drug policy listed in
this book. </p>

<p>England tried prescribing heroin but gave it up. Until the
mid1960s, British physicians were allowed to prescribe heroin to
certain classes of addicts. After this experiment, according to
James Q. Wilson in his 1990 article &quot;Against the
Legalization of Drugs&quot;, &quot;a youthful drug culture
emerged with a demand for drugs far different from that of the
older addicts.&quot; </p>

<p>The British system didn't work. Addiction levels rose,
especially among teenagers, and many addicts chose to boycott the
program and continued to get their heroin from pushers. </p>

<p>In 1983, England began switching over to methadone and stopped
dispensing heroin from the clinics, and that caused even more
addicts to depart in favor of the real thing. According to the
late John Kaplan of Stanford University, the number of addicts
increased fivefold. James Q. Wilson states that the British
Government's experiment with controlled heroin distribution
resulted in, at a minimum, a 30fold increase in the number of
addicts in ten years. </p>

<p>The Netherlands, despite its controlled program, is having
troubles. Under the socalled &quot;expediency principle&quot;
Dutch law protects individuals from prosecution for acts that are
technically illegal, including the retaillevel sales and purchase
of marijuana and hashish. Dutch police are also instructed to
ignore streetlevel sales of all types of drugs. </p>

<p>The Amsterdam Municipal Health Service showed a rise in
hardcore addicts in 1992, attributable to a significant rise in
the local heroin supply which led to a price drop of as much as
75%. </p>

<p>Switzerland has become a magnet for drug users the world over.
One thing small European nations have learned is a little
tolerance about drugs brings a lot of unwelcome visitors. In
1987, Zurich permitted drug use and sales in a part of the city
called the &quot;Platzspitz&quot;, dubbed &quot;Needle
Park.&quot; Five years later the experiment was curtailed after
an influx of addicts and increased violence and deaths. In 1992,
Zurich Municipal spokesman Andres Ohler told the New York Times
that the number of regular drug users at the park had swelled
from a few hundred in 1987 to 20,000 by 1992. After the
Platzspitz closed, the price of heroin reportedly doubled. </p>

<p>RESOLUTION </p>

<p>EUROPEAN CITIES </p>

<p>AGAINST DRUGS </p>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>A number of European cities have taken the initiative of
organizing a Conference </p>

<p>for Cities Against the Legalization of Drugs. One of the aims
of the conference is </p>

<p>to adopt a resolution to enable towns that have not
participated in the conference to </p>

<p>support its work. </p>

<p>Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. The tide of the
drug policy debate began to turn against the DEA with the advent
of the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy
(sometimes referred to as the Hoover Resolution). A copy of this
Resolution and a list of some of the major signers is included in
this book. </p>

<p>The purpose of the conference is to increase cooperation
between cities, to provide </p>

<p>inspiration and hope for areas with particularly difficult
drug problems. The signatories to the resolution will affirm
their decision to fight against the spread of drugs. </p>

<p>The DEA apparently thought the Resolution for a Federal
Commission on Drug Policy was so important that they figured they
had to trump up something to counter it. The result is this
really phony and poorly worded resolution against drugs. It is
notable that the DEA did not name any of the people who signed
this resolution on behalf of their entire city. </p>

<p>STOCKHOLM · 28TH APRIL 1994 </p>

<p>Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forum
participants may be used in debates: </p>

<p>· In April, 1994, a number of European cities signed a
resolution titled &quot;European Cities Against Drugs,&quot;
commonly known as the Stockholm resolution. It states: &quot;The
demands to legalize illicit drugs should be seen against the
background of current problems, which have led to a feeling of
helplessness. For many, the only way to cope is to try to
administer the current situation. But the answer does not lie in
making harmful drugs more accessible, cheaper and socially
acceptable. Attempts to do this have not proved successful. We
believe that legalizing drugs will, in the long term, increase
our problems. By making them legal, society will signal that it
has resigned to the acceptance of drug abuse. The signatories to
this resolution therefore want to make their position clear by
rejecting the proposals to legalize illicit drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>It is interesting to note the differences between the
Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy and this
resolution. The biggest difference is that the Resolution for a
Federal Commission on Drug Policy does not say anything about
&quot;legalization&quot; but simply asks for an objective review
of the evidence. The DEA's resolution does not call for any
objective review of the evidence and, in fact, rejecting even the
idea of a discussion of alternatives. </p>

<p>Pointing to the appropriate international treaties which
require nations to &quot;protect children from the illicit use of
narcotic drugs,&quot; the signatories state that they
&quot;reject all demands for legalizing illicit drugs... We
request that our Governments respect and with determination apply
those conventions and agreements regarding drugs which they have
signed.&quot; </p>

<p>Again, the DEA's resolution calls for a blind rejection of any
ideas but there own, without consideration of any evidence. </p>

<p>The cities signing this resolution include: Berlin, Stockholm,
Budapest, Dublin, Gdansk (Poland), Gothenburg (Sweden), Helsinki,
Paris, Lugano (Switzerland), Madrid, Malmo (Sweden), Moscow,
Oslo, Prague, London, Reykjavik (Iceland), Riga (Latvia), St.
Petersburg (Russia), Tallinn (Estonia), Valletta (Malta) and
Warsaw. </p>

<p>It is notable that the DEA does not mention who in these
cities signed on behalf of the entire city. It is also notable
that many of the cities are former Soviet Union cities with
little experience in these areas. </p>

<p>· A study by the Rotterdam Municipal Council shows that the
number of cocaine users there has risen substantially. About 3.3%
of all Rotterdam residents over 15 years of age or approximately
12,000 people now use cocaine. </p>

<p>Violent crime is also a major problem in the Netherlands. A
1992 study of crime victims in twenty (mostly European) countries
ranks the Netherlands as the number one country in Europe for
assaults and threats. </p>

<p>The Dutch Criminal Intelligence Service reported 104
gunrelated deaths in the Netherlands in 1992, compared to 73 in
1991. Almost all involved drug disputes. Robberies have also
increased in each of the four years since 1988. </p>

<p>The Netherlands, smaller than West Virginia, has more than 50
clinics supplying methadone to heroin addicts, and drug violators
make up a large percentage of prisoners in the Dutch prison
system. </p>

<p>· Zurich authorities moved many addicts to a new site, a
nearby abandoned railway station, a few blocks north of Needle
Park. Here, addicts receive clean needles and are allowed to
inject heroin and consume other drugs. Writing in Drug Abuse
Update in 1994, Sue Rusche, executive director of National
Families in Action, gave this description of what passersby can
see if they look down from the Kornhaus Bridge: </p>

<p>&quot;Most people think shots are bloodless events. A nurse
inserts a needle, injects a medicine and you're on your way. But
here, bright red blood streams down arms, necks, legs, feet and
groins as addicts inject themselves. Festering red and purple
sores filled with pus, old blood and filthy scabs stretch from
wrist to elbow, ankle to knee.&quot; <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>