
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-133</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B009-99</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035009 text/html 14275
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:50:02 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:46 GMT
Content-length: 14057
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hopelessness, Drug Control, and Potential Solutions</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization: US Dept. of
Justice</p>

<h2>Chapter Eleven: &quot;Anything Is Better Than What We Are
Doing Now&quot; Hopelessness, Drug Control and Potential
Solutions </h2>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p><b>DISCUSSION</b> </p>

<p><b>I. Their Argument</b> </p>

<p>The final argument of the legalizers is one of hopelessness -
the status quo obviously is not working because we are spending
lots of money on the problem, and it is not yet solved.
Therefore, any policy is preferable to the present one. </p>

<p><b>II. Our Argument</b> </p>

<p>Such cynicism is understandable - drugs are a pervasive
problem in our culture. But legalization is not the answer, and
in order to prove this we should look at two points: first, that
the problem is getting better, and second, that many other viable
solutions besides legalization exist. </p>

<p><b>1. The Problem is Getting Better</b> </p>

<p>A mere purview of the facts proves that our problems with
drugs are not as bad as they used to be. For example, in 1979 the
percentage of 12 to 17-yr. olds who said they had used any
illicit drug in the past month was 17.6%. In 1992, it was down to
6.1%. Similarly, the percentages for ages 18-25 yrs. dropped from
37. 1 % to 13.0%. 155 Cocaine use is also down. In 1982 the
percentage of 18-25 yr. olds reporting past month use of cocaine
was 6.8 %. In 1992 the figure had dropped to 1.8%.156
Unfortunately, the 1993 data show a bottoming out and reversal of
this trend, which has been linked to a softening attitude about
the dangers of drug use.157 </p>

<p>Not only is drug use down, but public opinion has crystallized
into a &quot;no drug tolerance&quot; position. One Gallup poll
reported that over 80% of Americans said legalizing drugs was a
bad idea.158 A large majority said they feared legalization would
lead to increases in addiction, drug overdoses, drug-related
crime and drug use in schools. 159 Furthermore, a study conducted
in 1990 showed </p>

<p>that 89% of the population would be willing to pay higher
taxes to support the War on Drugs. 160 And as discussed above,
children and adolescents have become less tolerant of drug use.
As a letter to the New York Times on May 7, 1988, written by a
class of 14 and 15 yr. olds explained, &quot;America is in a
'moral rut' and ... drug abuse is one of the main
causes.&quot;161 </p>

<p>Thus, not only is drug use declining, but public opinion grows
increasingly hostile to any such behavior. No wonder so few
people favor legalization these days. </p>

<p><b>2. Alternative Solutions</b> </p>

<p>These facts are not to suggest, however, that we should become
complacent in our efforts. Drug use continues to be a severe
social problem, and we should always be on the lookout for
innovative policies. Here are just a few ideas. </p>

<p>First, we should continue our reliance on strong legal
sanctions to deter drug use. That is, keeping drugs illegal does
decrease their use. As one commentator noted, 70% of high school
students in New Jersey and 60% of those in California said that
fear of getting in trouble with the law was a </p>

<p>primary reason not to use drugs.162 Not only do legal
sanctions keep people from trying drugs in </p>

<p>the first instance, but they also help to get people off them
later. A study conducted by Douglas </p>

<p>Anglin of UCLA noted that the potential success rate of
treatment programs depends largely on how long the patient
remains with the program. The longer you stay, the better your
chances of </p>

<p>recovery. And Anglin also found that people who enter
treatment under legal compulsion (i.e., a court order) stay in
the program longer.163 </p>

<p>Thus, legal sanctions eventually correlate to treatment
success rate. </p>

<p>Second, we should continue to decrease social tolerance for
drug use at all levels of society and at all levels of drug use.
As former DEA Administrator Jack Lawn said, &quot;Here's what it
means in shirt sleeve English. [The] public is telling the drug
user, 'What you're doing is not just your business. It's criminal
and it's unacceptable. Get help and get treatment if you need it,
or face the consequences. We don't want to be hard-hearted, but
this problem exists only because you and people like you keep it
alive. The rest of us don't want to put up with it
anymore'&quot;. 164 </p>

<p>Third, we should use education to encourage people not to use
drugs. Educating the youth is one of society's most important
responsibilities, and nowhere is the need for education greater
than to teach children about the dangers of drug use.165 Such
policies are working with regard to smoking, for as Kurt Schmoke
admits, &quot;[t]he number of people smoking continues to fall
because of a concerted public education campaign about the health
effects of smoking.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>Fourth, we should encourage private enterprise to adopt
workplace rules restricting drug use. By implementing policies
such as drug testing, businesses can greatly reduce drug use
while at the same time increasing their productivity. For
example, Hoffman Construction of Portland, Oregon, implemented
drug policies and decreased workers' compensation claims by 17%.
Indeed, by year three, Hoffman had reduced its workers'
compensation costs by almost 90%.167 Perhaps the<i> </i>government
could use tax credits to encourage businesses to promote drug
policies. </p>

<p>Fifth, it is possible that the growing health-consciousness in
the United States today (favoring more exercise, less
cholesterol, less alcohol and smoking, etc.) will go a long way
in and of itself to decrease drug use.168 </p>

<p>Finally, we may be able to turn to science for help. Some
scholars are proposing the use of biotechnology to eradicate drug
crops while at the same time planting more socially useful plants
(wheat, soybeans, corn, etc.). 169 </p>

<p>In the final analysis of the legalization debate we must
remember that drug abuse is a long-term </p>

<p>problem: it took China over fifty years to kick its opium
addiction.170 And granted, drug use still </p>

<p>takes far too large a toll on the United States. But when we
consider the decreasing tolerance for, and use of, drugs in our
country, as well as the numerous alternatives we are pursuing and
have yet to pursue, it seems clear that legalization of drugs is
not the answer. </p>

<p>155 &quot;Preliminary Estimates from the 1992 National
Household Survey on Drug Abuse,&quot; U.S. </p>

<p>Department of Health and Human Services, June 1993. </p>

<p>156 Id. </p>

<p>157 &quot;Monitoring the Future Study - 1993,&quot; University
of Michigan Institute for Social Research, Jan 27, 1994. (Also
known as the High School Senior Survey) </p>

<p>158 David Zucchino, &quot;A Push to Make Drugs Illegal,&quot;
Philadelphia Inquirer, July 5, 1992. </p>

<p>159 Id. </p>

<p>160 Ralph A. Weisheit and Katherine Johnson, &quot;Exploring
the Dimensions of Support for Decriminalizing Drugs,&quot;
Journal of Drug Issues, Winter 1992. </p>

<p>161 Robert Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of Illegal
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. </p>

<p>162 Id. </p>

<p>163 James Q. Wilson, &quot;Against the Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Commentary, February 1990. </p>

<p>164 Jack Lawn, &quot;Time to Focus on the User&quot;, Drug
Enforcement Administration, 1990. </p>

<p>165 &quot;National Drug Control Strategy: Reclaiming Our
Communities from Drugs and </p>

<p>Violence,&quot; The White House, February 1994. </p>

<p>166 Kurt L. Schmoke, &quot;Decriminalizing Drugs: It Just
Might Work-And Nothing Else Does,&quot; </p>

<p>The Washington Post, May 15, 1988. </p>

<p>167 &quot;Position Paper in Opposition to the Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Regional Drug Initiative Task Force Position Paper,
September 1990. </p>

<p>168 &quot;A Ralph A. Weisheit and Kathrine Johnson, 'Exploring
the Dimensions of Support for Decriminalizing Drugs,&quot;
Journal of Drug Issues, Winter 1992. </p>

<p>169 Gabriel G. Nahas, &quot;A Battle Won, a Stalemated War and
A New Strategy,&quot; Position Paper. </p>

<p>170 Gabriel G. Nahas, &quot;The Decline of Drugged
Nations,&quot; Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1988. </p>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<h2>Chapter Eleven Summary Sheet: &quot;Anything Is Better Than
What We Are Doing Now&quot;, Hopelessness, Drug Control, and
Potential Solutions </h2>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>Any policy is better than the status quo. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you</b> <b>say...</b> </p>

<p>Drug use has been declining: in 1979 the percentage of 12 to
17-yr. olds who said they had used any illicit drug in the past
month was 17.6%. In 1992, it was down to 6.1%. Similarly, for
ages 1825 yrs. use dropped from 37. 1 % to 13.0%. In 1982 the
percentage of 18-25 yr. olds reporting past month use of cocaine
was 6.8%. In 1992 the figure had dropped to 1.8%. [Preliminary
Estimates from the 1992 National Household Survey on Drug
Abuse,&quot; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, June
1993]. </p>

<p>Public tolerance for drug use is declining. One Gallup poll
reported that over 80% of Americans said legalizing drugs was a
bad idea- A large majority said they feared legalization would
lead to increases in addiction, drug overdoses, drug-related
crime and drug use in schools. [David Zucchino, &quot;A Push to<b>
</b>Make Drugs Illegal,&quot; Philadelphia Inquirer, July 5,
1992]. In fact, 89% of the public would be willing to<b> </b>pay
higher taxes to support the War on Drugs. [Ralph A. Weisheit and
Kathrine Johnson, &quot;Exploring the Dimensions of Support for
Decriminalizing Drugs,&quot; Journal of Drug Issues, Winter
1992]. </p>

<p>Other solutions besides legalization exist: </p>

<p>We should continue to employ legal sanctions against drug
users for two reasons. First, studies of high school students
suggest that between 60% and 70% cite not wanting to get in
trouble with the law as a reason not to use drugs in the first
place. [Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of Illegal
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988].
Second, the use of legal sanction is a good means of keeping
addicts in treatment programs for longer periods of time, thus
increasing the probability of successful treatment [James Q.
Wilson, &quot;Against the Legalization of Drugs,&quot;
Commentary, February 1990]. </p>

<p>We should continue to decrease social tolerance for any and
all drug use at any and all levels of society. </p>

<p>We should promote drug awareness education as a means o
deterring use, as is presently being done successfully with
regard to tobacco use. </p>

<p>We should use tax incentives to encourage businesses to adopt
drug policies such as those of a Portland, Oregon business that
decreased its workers' compensation claims 90% in three years.
[&quot;Position Paper In Opposition To The Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Regional Drug Initiative Task Force, September
1990.] </p>

<p>The general health-consciousness sweeping the country may go a
long way to decreasing casual drug use. [Ralph A. Weisheit and
Kathrine Johnson, &quot;Exploring the Dimensions of Support for
Decriminalizing Drugs,&quot; Journal of Drug Issues, Winter
1992]. </p>

<p>We should research ways in which biotechnology could be used
to eradicate drug crops and replace them with socially useful
growth such as wheat or corn. [Gabriel Nahas, &quot;A Battle Won,
A Stalemated War, and A New Strategy,&quot; Position Paper]. </p>

<p>We should remember that drug use is a long-term problem that
will take a long time to solve: it took China 50 years to kick
its opium addiction. [Gabriel Nahas, &quot;The Decline of Drugged
Nations,&quot; Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1988]. <br>
<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>