
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B24-110</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA089-000954-B011-184</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.ldanatl.org:80/newsbriefs/oct96/kirk.html 206.86.190.251 19970109185158 text/html 6882
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 18:52:03 GMT
Server: BESTWWWD/1.0
MIME-version: 1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 6700
Last-modified: Wed, 09 Oct 1996 01:01:40 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Farewell to Father of Learning Disabilities</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">

<h2><i>LDA Bids Farewell to</i></h2>
<h1 align=center>Father of Learning Disabilities</h1>

<p>Samuel Alexander Kirk, one of the most influential figures in the
history of special education and especially learning disabilities, died
July 21 at the age of 93. He was often referred to affectionately as the
<i>Father of Learning Disabilities</i>.

<p>Dr. Kirk, who was born in Rugby, North Dakota, in 1904, obtained
bachelors and masters degrees in psychology from the University of Chicago
and a Ph.D. in physiological and clinical psychology from the University
of Michigan in 1935. He began his career in 1929 in Chicago teaching boys
who were mentally retarded and delinquent to read while employed at the
Oaks School. 

<p>Samuel Kirk continued his work on reading during his doctoral studies,
while also working at the Wayne County Training School in Michigan. At
Wayne Country Training School, Kirk collaborated with T. Hegge and W. Kirk
to create the Hegge, Kirk, and Kirk Remedial Reading Drills. These
materials, which were influenced by the work of most of the prominent
figures in remedial reading at that time (M. Monroe, S. Orton, and G.
Fernald) as well as the effects of Kirk's training in <i>functional</i>
(behavioral) psychology at Chicago, are still in use 60 years after they
were developed.

<p>The work with physiological psychology during his doctoral studies led
Kirk to discount biophysical identifications of disability and recommend
more behavioral descriptions (<i>child doesn't read</i>) that could lead
to remedial planning. After completing his Ph.D. in 1935, Kirk worked as
the director of a teacher education program at Milwaukee State Teachers
College (now University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee). Continuing his
interests in reading, in 1940 he published the book, <i>Teaching Reading
to Slow-Learning Children</i>. His early research on remedial methods for
students with mental retardation was interrupted by service in the U. S.
Army during World War II.

<p>In 1947 Dr. Kirk joined the faculty of the University of Illinois to
develop a program in special education for undergraduates and graduates.
Much of Dr. Kirk's pioneering work was done while he was Director of the
Institute for Research on Exceptional Children at the University of
Illinois, which he helped to establish and was its first Director. During
the 1 960s he also served as director of the Division of Handicapped
Children, forerunner to the US Department of Education's Office of Special
Education, in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

<p>Later Dr. Kirk devoted considerable effort to developing a means of
measuring specific aspects of linguistic, perceptual, and memory abilities
in young children. The Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities (ITPA)
appeared in an experimental version in 1961 and was revised and published
in 1968 (co-authored with J. McCarthy and W. Kirk). This test, which was
widely used in the 1960s and 70s as a clinical and research tool, provoked
some controversy in special education. Kirk explained that the controversy
was probably because the test  "spawned many illusions and false hopes.
Some people have taken the ITPA as the instrument for diagnosis of all
ills and educational problems. In spite of our warnings, it is used for
junior high school students, even though it is intended for young children
. Many also use it to diagnose problems to which the ITPA does not apply.
Furthermore, many people want to use it without taking the time to learn
how to give it." (Reference Kirk, S. A. ( 1976). In J. M. Kauffman & D. P.
Hallahan (Eds.), <i>Teaching Children with Learning Disabilities</i> (p.
253). Columbus, OH: Merrill.)

<p>Throughout his career, Dr. Kirk contributed regularly to the academic
literature. In addition to the volumes already noted, he also published
other books on mental retardation, reading, and learning disabilities.
Certainly one of the most influential of these was an introductory text in
special education, <i>Educating Exceptional Children</i> (1962), that has
been revised repeatedly and, now co-authored by James J. Gallagher, is in
its 6th edition.

<p>During his tenure in Washington, he contributed to early federal
legislation that ultimately led to contemporary laws on special education.
Perhaps his greatest legacy to the field of special education is the many
students who studied with him, including several who have been highly
influential figures in special education during the last 30 years.

<p>In addition to his scholarly work on mental retardation, Kirk is widely
known for his contributions to the development of the field of learning
disabilities and is often said to have coined the term <i>learning
disabilities</i>.

<p>Dr. Kirk was present when groups of frustrated parents first met to
seek help for their children who today we know had learning disabilities.
He was instrumental in helping those parents form the Association for
Children with Learning Disabilities (ACLD, now the Learning Disabilities
Association of America, LDA) and served as the first Chairman of its
Professional Advisory Board. In honor of his devoted service to the
organization and to the field of learning disabilities, he remained the
Honorary Chairman of the PAB for the remainder of his life.

<p>Much of the progress made in understanding learning disabilities and in
serving persons with learning disabilities is attributable to the
pioneering work of Samuel A. Kirk and his longtime collaborator and wife,
Winifred D . Kirk . We, in LDA, are thankful that we had the privilege of
knowing and working with Dr. Kirk. The insight shared by Dr. Kirk
benefited us all and the accomplishments of many professionals in the
field of learning disabilities are directly attributable to the
foundations he laid.    After more than 20 years at Illinois, Kirk moved
to the University of Arizona in Tucson, Arizona, where he continued to
play an active role in special education.

<p>He is survived by his wife, Winifred D. Kirk, his daughter, Lorraine
and son, Jerry. If you would like to write a note to Mrs. Kirk, her
address is 7500 N. Calle Sin Vidia, Tucson, AZ 85718. If you would prefer
to do something special in Dr. Kirk's honor, the ACLD Foundation has
established a fund in his memory. Contributions can be sent to ACLD
Foundation, 4156 Library Road, Pittsburgh, PA 15234. The Foundation will
acknowledge the gift directly to the family. 
<p>
<hr width="50%">

<p align=center><a href="../"><b><i>Newsbriefs</i></b></a> &nbsp; | &nbsp;
<a href="../../">LDA Home Page</a>
</body>
</html>

</DOC>