
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B35-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001021-B004-187</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch20.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223726 text/html 43602
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:35:28 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:56 GMT
Content-length: 43417
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ch20.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet <BR>
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CHINA TO CUT LPG, OLEFIN IMPORT TARIFFS TO 6% BY APRIL 1</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>METHANEX TO BUILD 900,000 MT/YR METHANOL PLANT IN CHILE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS UPDATE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INDIAN CHEMICALS MINISTRY WANTS IMPORT DUTY CUTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(619 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>1995 REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NWE POLYMERS PRICES REACH EXTREMES IN VOLATILE 1995 MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1127 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>ASIAN BENZENE PRICES SLUMP IN 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(775 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>US OLEFINS PRICES WEAKEN STEADILY AS DEMAND DWINDLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2215 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS DIGEST: ASIA</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>JAPAN'S SHIN-ETSU CHEMICAL CO LTD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ETHYLENE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>KOREA ETHYLENE DEREGULATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>JAPAN'S IDEMITSU PETROCHEMICAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS DIGEST: EUROPE/MIDDLE EAST</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>POLYETHYLENE TEREPHALATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>LPG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS DIGEST: US/LATIN AMERICA</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>SUPERFUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>UNION CARBIDE CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>PROPYLENE OXIDE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(124 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PRICESCORE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>PLATT'S AVERAGE MONTHLY PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

CHINA TO CUT LPG, OLEFIN IMPORT TARIFFS TO 6% BY APRIL 1

By:
David Hanna, Christopher Park, Platt's Tokyo


China this week announced plans to cut in half tariffs on chemical imports
effective Apr 1, pledging to 'open the chemical sector wider to foreign
investment'. Included in the change are import tariff cuts for olefins and
LPG to 6% from 12%. The International Business Journal under Ministry of
Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation published two lists of new tariff
rates for a total of 363 items, mostly related to petrochemical and
chemical industries. Import tariffs for liquefied ethylene, propylene,
butylene, butadiene will also be slashed by 50% to 6%. Rates for propane
and butane will be slashed by 3% to 6% starting April. New rates for
imported benzene, toluene and xylene will be lowered to 6% from the present
12% by then. China said it would cut import tariffs of over 4,000 items by
an average 35% to 23% from Apr 1. No information was forthcoming on duties
for polymer imports. Traders in Korea and Japan peg current duty rates on
commodity polymers at 15-30%. China's Ministry of Chemical Industry
forecasts that the industry's output value will grow by 8% from 1995 to
Yuan 245-mil ($306-mil) in 1996. Meanwhile, chemical imports grew by 8% to
$5-bil, while exports rose 20.9% to $3.8-bil during the first half of 1995.
Industry sources believe these figures should rise once the new tariffs go
into effect.

Illustration(s):
Table: China's New Import Duties (This table is not available
eletronically. Please see January 5, 1996 issue.)

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

METHANEX TO BUILD 900,000 MT/YR METHANOL PLANT IN CHILE

By:
Louise Egan, Santiago

   Methanex, the world's largest methanol producer which owns a methanol
plant in Cape Horn, Chile, will build a second plant in Cabo Negro, in the
southern region of the country. The new facility will have a capacity of
900,000mt/yr of methanol. Enap, the Chilean national oil company, which is
the principal supplier of natural gas for the project, has stated that
construction will be completed in December 1996. The Chilean government has
authorized $350-mil in additional investments by the Canadian company for
the project. Together with the Cape Horn plant, Methanex will be producing
1.7-mil mt/yr, or 12% of world demand for methanol. Methanex Cabo Negro
plans to eventually export methanol to other Latin American countries.
Chilean consumption is expected to reach 100,000mt/yr in the short term.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

INDIAN CHEMICALS MINISTRY WANTS IMPORT DUTY CUTS

By:
Neel Patri, New Delhi

   The Indian ministry of chemicals and petrochemicals has sought
across-the-board cut in the import duty on several chemicals and
petrochemicals to a uniform 10% from the present levels that range from 15%
to 50%, officials said.
   In its memorandum to the finance ministry which is preparing the 1996
federal budget, the ministry has also suggested hiking duties on some
catalysts.
   The chemicals recommended for duty reduction to 10% include carbon black
feedstock which bears 30% tariff at present, napthalene which carries 30%
duty, high purity limestone that is subject to 50% duty at present, and
cumene that carries 20% duty now.
   However, the import tariff on methanol may be set at 40% compared with
the present 50%. The ministry is seeking a cut in methanol duty from 50% to
40%.
   The items for which duty hikes have been recommended include four
specific catalysts used in the manufacture of ethylene, formaldehyde,
de-sulphurisation process, and methyl ethyl ketone from secondary butyl
alcohol (from the present 25% to 50%.
   Simultaneously, the ministry has favored reduction in import tariff on
specific pesticides to 30% from the present 40% and in order to encourage
caustic soda chemical manufacturers to shift to membrane cell technology
from mercury cell process of manufacture, total exemption of capital goods
imports needed for this switch-over has been recommended. The present duty
is 25% on capital goods imports.
   'The idea is to keep duties on basic rawmaterial low and the end
chemicals onthe higher side.' 'The idea is to keep duties on basic raw
material low and the end chemicals on the higher side to make import of
former cheaper for export after value addition. Some sort of protection for
the indigenous industry against cheap imports and dumping has been one of
the criteria,' explained a senior ministry official.
   Meanwhile, Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corp has selected Norsk
Hydro and the Madras-based WS Industries as partners for a proposed 150,000
mt/yr PVC resin project, expected to cost around Rupee 7.5-bil ($214-mil),
TIDCO officials said this week.
   Company directors have approved a proposal to offer 51% of the equity to
Norsk Hydro, while WS Industries would hold 10% and TIDCO 11%. The equity
sharing proposal would have to be approved by the Tamil Nadu government,
which owns TIDCO.
   The PVC project is likely to be located at Ennore, south of Madras,
where a new port is proposed to be built by the government. The port
project includes building a chemicals import terminal.
   The PVC project entails importing 124,000 mt/yr of ethylene dichloride
and 48,000 mt/yr as feed. A market survey commissioned by TIDCO showed that
the demand for PVC was growing in the southern region, and that fresh
capacity was called for.
   At present, there are two major PVC producers meeting demand in southern
India, Chemplast Sanmar with 48,000 mt/yr capacity, and Dhrangadhara
Chemical Works with 42,000 mt/yr capacity. Both are located in Tamil Nadu.
   State-owned Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd has been allotted land at
Baikampady village near the New Mangalore port in southern Karnataka state
to build a chemical terminal, a company release said.
   HOC will invest some Rupee 360-mil ($10-mil) in the 50,000 kl terminal,
to be built in two stages. HOC, a major importer and exporter of chemicals,
is currently renting storage tank facilities at the New Mangalore Port for
operations at Cochin, as well as for exporting phenol and acetone.
   'In all, 10 storage tanks are expected to be constructed under phase
one. It is proposed to handle a diverse range of chemicals, including
benzene, toluene, xylenes, cumene, phenol, acetone, and methanol. The first
stage is expected to be completed during 1996-97,' the release said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

NWE POLYMERS PRICES REACH EXTREMES IN VOLATILE 1995 MARKET

By:
Elinor Else, Platt's London


   European polymer prices rollercoastered in 1995, peaking on high demand
and tight supply but then crashing as a slower economy, high stocks and
higher prices undermined buying interest. Another major influence on Europe
was the Asian market, whose demand was the main motor behind market
balances world- wide.
   All the polymers started the year at relatively high price levels, with
the polyolefins averaging around DM1.80/kg FD Germany in early January, PVC
a few pfennigs lower and general purpose polystyrene a little over
DM2.00/kg FD Germany.
   There were some difficulties related to local currencies weakening
against the deutschmark in the UK and Italy which held back prices in those
markets. New import tariffs on polymers moving into the EU temporarily
slowed shipments from Mexico and eastern Europe. But underlying demand was
good and supply was balanced to tight in most markets.
   PVC, polystyrene and PP were all firm through the first quarter of 1995
as producers pushed through targets and supply was either tight - as in the
case of PVC which suffered a series of monomer and polymer outages - or at
least balanced to supply.
   But towards the end of the first quarter the first few signals of change
started to emerge. Firstly, demand for low density polyethylene began to
slip late in Q1 as consumers started to run down stocks built at the end of
1994. Also, prices adjustments were made to bring countries that had
suffered from a weak currency against the German mark back into line.
   This meant a push for price adjustments in the UK, Italy and France but
it also meant German prices had to be held steady while the rest of the EU
caught up.
   Meanwhile, relative strength in German prices started to attract the
attention of east European importers as well as sellers of other exotics.
This began to undermine the German LDPE market, the market which tends to
lead price levels around Europe.
   During April and May PVC prices were stabilizing as demand for pipes
proved slower than expected and finished pipe stocks were said to be high.
Polypropylene and polystyrene were both benefiting from stronger
fundamentals and prices for both of these polymers remained firm.
   Two things happened: the traditional summer slowdown and a crackdown on
VAT collection and smuggling of polymers into China.
   The effect of the 'summer lull' is a regular seasonal effect and is
factored into most people's forecasts for supply and demand during the
year: in later July, demand will tend to slacken off as converters in much
of Europe close their factories for all or part of Aug. Demand in Sep is
usually slow to start but will pickup until Oct, which is usually a 'normal
month'.
   However, the sudden halt to Chinese buying, along with the pressure on
Asian prices from ample US export availabilities, was not expected. The
initial effect was to divert a significant proportion of US and other
exports into Europe. Longer term, the effect was an overall dampening of
global polymer demand and a sense among consumers in Europe that there was
plenty of material available to cover their needs.
   Prices for PVC, PE and PP started to erode in June as European buyers
sensed a price decrease to come as the Asian problems emerged and European
demand was set to slow for the summer.
   PS resisted as producers pushed for another increase and succeeded in
both June and July.
   But by the end of July, all polymer prices were on a downtrend that was
only to bottom out at the very end of the year. With Chinese buying on
hold, exotic availabilities were plentiful and west European producers
found it more difficult to control stocks by selling excess supply
overseas.
   In addition, the summer lull lasted through Oct, adding several weeks of
very low demand to the expected period as consumers rode down their stocks
and were confident that prices would be lower in the coming weeks.
   This process of destocking and buying hand-to-mouth characterised the
latter half of 1995.
   The lack of forward buying kept up considerable pressure on producers
and attempts to control stocks through cutting production were only
partially successful.
   There was considerable competition to maintain market shares in the
various European markets: for example in the UK market there were several
instances of producers undercutting each others' prices for PP and PE.
Exports were moved out at discount prices to ease pressure on mounting
stocks.
   Through Oct and Nov, the production cutbacks did have an effect on
producers' stock levels which were better balanced by the end of the year
except for some cases in the PE market. The re-entry of Chinese buyers in
Nov lent some support to European and US markets, even if that demand was
only a form of prebuying ahead of import license changes in 1996.
   But prices in Europe had hit bottom and with or without China, many in
the industry said that with prices below available cost in many cases,
there was no room for further price erosion.
   PP, PE, and PVC all ended the year with the low end of the price range
firmly below the DM1/kg FD Germany level. PS had fallen steeply but had
stabilized close to DM1.50/kg FD Germany for general purpose material and
DM0.10/kg higher for high impact.
   Increases were announced for Jan 1 for PP and PE, which were felt to
have reached unsustainably low levels. PS has not seen a price increase
announcement and suppliers say they are looking to rollover prices from Dec
into Jan. However, consumers say there is still room for a slight erosion
in PS prices and as Chinese demand is not expected to pick up until later
in Feb, the impetus for price increases seems likely to be limited until
later in Q1.
   PVC pipe grade has seen a period of poor demand, the summer too dry to
allow for much construction or cable-TV pipe laying and the winter being
the traditionally low demand season. Some are indicating price increases
could be on the cards for Mar or Apr.
   In broader terms, most in the industry expect there to be some
improvement in early 1996 as demand and prices both recover to more normal
levels.
   Consumer stocks are more balanced now and prices are seen as either
stable or firming, producers argue, so that when demand kicks in in late
January, coverters will come into the market to top up low stocks.
   Overall growth in underlying demand for polymers is expected to grow at
around 3% in 1996 and both buyers and producers are hoping for a less
volatile year in 1996.

Illustration(s):
Illustration: Graph: Spot German Polymer Prices 1995

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

ASIAN BENZENE PRICES SLUMP IN 1995

By:
Joanna Lim, Platt's Singapore


   Asian benzene prices began the year bullish, driven largely by strong
styrene demand. In response to spiralling styrene prices, Japanese and
Korean producers cranked up operations at their plants, with less benzene
subsequently available in the spot market.
   The strength of the US benzene market also led to less deepsea product
moving into Asia. At the same time, plant turnarounds in Japan and Korea in
Mar through June also heightened the region's shortage.
   Benzene prices climbed $5-10/mt monthly during the first quarter, with
prices peaking in April at $395-400/mt FOB Korea from $365-370/mt in Jan.
   In May, styrene prices in Asia started to deteriorate, brought on by
China's sudden withdrawal from styrenic derivative imports, dueto Beijing's
measures to crack down on smuggling and tax invasion in China's ports.
   Local traders had been evading a 17% value added tax on imported resins
by negotiating private agreements with local authorities. State officials
were despatched to the ports to enforce the VAT collection, and this
brought business to a halt.
   Styrene producers throughout the region reduced their operating rates in
order to cope with high inventory. Japanese producers cut operations to by
20-30%; Taiwan producers reduced production by 30-50% and in Korea, Yukong
Oxichemical had a unscheduled shutdown of its 300,000 mt/yr styrene plant
for one week, citing bearish market conditions for the outage.
   Furthermore, ethylene plants throughout Asia cut runs by 15-20% in July.
Lack of Chinese demand for ethylene-derivative products had led to drastic
drop in its prices, prompting ethylene producers to run their plants just
enough for their own downstream requirements, dropping their export ratio
altogether.
   In Nov, benzene prices firmed in Asia, driven by a surge in Chinese
demand for styrenic derivatives. This time the Chinese government was known
to be planning to reduce the export rebate on the value added tax next
year.
   From Jan 1 1996, the current 17% VAT and 14% rebate for exports will be
revised to a 9% rebate. The new rebate will apply to imported material
delivered into China from Jan 1.
   Traders also report that import licenses for 1995 are due to expire on
Dec 20, and that the Chinese government is expected to severely limit the
number of new licenses issued next year.
   These two factors prompted Chinese end-users - who were already low on
stocks because of a clampdown on imports and speculative trading since May
- to buy large quantities before the end of the year.
   Last week Korea rejected bids at $240/mt FOB, holding out for $250/mt
and above. The last trade into India last week was at $290/mt C+F. This
week sellers have brought up their offers to around $300/mt C+F, following
the US Jan contract price nomination at 90 cts/lb, 10 cts/lb over Dec.
   Meanwhile other consumers in Asia are staying sidelined amid uncertainty
over the benzene price trend. Most agree that in the short term the market
is firm. However, they refer to waning Chinese demand for styrene and
ethylene derivatives as the basis for a possible return to weak benzene
prices in Asia.
   Toluene began the year on a bearish note in Asia, with ample deepsea
cargoes outpacing demand. It was only towards mid-March that the market
began to firm, as Korean producers began their plant turnarounds.
   Between May and July, toluene prices held up relatively better than
benzene due to its comparatively tighter supply. And, unlike benzene,
toluene enjoyed relatively steady demand from China where it is used to
upgrade 95 RON unleaded gasoline to 97 RON.
   But toluene's decline escalated with the unplanned shutdown of two TDP
units in Korea in early Aug. In order to cope with their benzene and
xylenes surpluses Korea's Yukong Ltd and HanWha Energy shut down their TDP
units indefinately from early August, and the surplus in Korean toluene
which subsequently followed led to increasingly bearish market sentiments.
Bearish benzene prices also severely softened the toluene markets.
   Producers also had been quick to decrease their prices in order to to
keep arbitrage cargoes out of the region.
   Taiwan's Chinese Petroleum Corp is known to issue monthly toluene buy
tenders for delivery two months out, thereby extending eligibility to US,
NWE and other deepsea product.
   Asian producers therefore did not rule out the possibility of the
traders shipping out additional toluene to Asia along with CPC's volumes
especially in times of weak market conditions in the US.
   Currently toluene prices have firmed in line with tight supply and also
because of strong benzene and MTBE markets in north and southeast Asia.

Illustration(s):
Illustration: Graph: Spot Asian Benzene, Toluene 1995

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

US OLEFINS PRICES WEAKEN STEADILY AS DEMAND DWINDLES

By:
Richard Capuchino, Platt's Houston; Nicholas Towasser, Platt's New York


   US olefin markets experienced a downturn in prices through 1995, however
none more drastically than ethylene and refinery grade propylene. Both
products lost about 10 cts/lb in contract prices from the beginning to the
end of the year.
   Ethylene began 1995 settling up 1 ct/lb in Jan, Feb and Mar to place
most contracts in 29-33 cts/lb range, while spot prices were at 31-34
cts/lb FOB USG by the end of Mar.
   The National Petroleum Refiners Association reported Q1 1995 inventories
at 1.28-bil lbs, up from the 1.11-bil lbs in Q1 1994. Meanwhile, Q1 1995
production totaled 11.64-bil lbs, down from the 11.70-bil lbs in Q1 1994.
   By late Mar, demand began to fall, while spot prices also fell from the
low 30s to 28-29 cts/lb. Producers rolled over contract prices from March
to 29-33 cts/lb in April and May.
   Jun brought the first decrease in ethylene prices, when producers agreed
to settle contracts down 0.50 cts/lb. Contract prices for Jul also settled
down 1 ct/lb to 27.50-31.50 cts/lb. Spot prices in Jul had also fallen to
25.50-26.50 cts/lb due to consumers meeting commitments from contract
material.
   The NPRA reported that both inventories and production increased in Q2.
Inventories in Q2 totalled 1.88-bil lbs, a two-year high, while Q2 outputn
totaled 11.95-bil lbs.
   High Q2 inventories were due to turnarounds scheduled for Sep and Oct.
High stocks and decreased demand from polyethylene producers caused several
ethylene producers to cut production rates to about 80% capacity. By late
Sep producers had settled Aug and Sep contracts down 1.50 cts/lb placing
Sep contracts at 24.50-28.50 cts/lb, with spot prices at 22-23 cts/lb FOB
USG.
   By early Oct, at least one producer made a three-month nomination of Oct
down 1 ct, November down 0.50 ct and a rollover for Dec. Some sources
doubted the nomination's chances of acceptance, and by mid-Nov it seemed
most consumers had chosen to take a month-by-month approach.
   Around the same time a rumor circulated that Union Texas had offered to
settle October volumes with a formula of 75-80% at an Oct contract price of
1.5 cts down from September and 20-25% at a Oct spot price of 15.5 cts/lb.
Two Texas producers said they settled some accounts for Oct at a level
'competitive' with the formula. One producer said the formula resulted in a
contract price of 20.70 cts/lb for Oct, and settled some accounts at that
level.
   Also complicating the Oct contract price was the question of at what
level exactly the Sep price had been. According to one report Exxon, in an
effort to devise a contract price that would more accurately reflect the
market price and eliminate the need for discounts, revised its Sep contract
price from 24.50 cts/lb to 23.50 cts/lb. However, another producer refused
to revise its Sep contact price, and maintained an Oct contract of 23
cts/lb.
   Early in Oct there was unconfirmed talk of some customers demanding an
additional 0.25 ct/lb discount on the Sep contract price, in addition to
the original 1.5 cts/lb decrease from Aug.
   By late Nov, most sources reported settling Oct at 22-23 cts/lb, down
1.5 cts/lb from Sep, though another producer, who had not yet settled
accounts, did report hearing an Oct contract of 21 cts/lb as a reference
point.
   By the year's end, neither Nov nor Dec had definitively settled. Some
producers reported invoicing or settling Nov down 1 ct/lb. One producer
reported settling half its accounts with a two-month settlement: Nov at 20
cts/lb, down 1 ct/lb, and Dec at 19.50 cts/lb, down a further 0.50 cts/lb.
   Another producer reported some participants were working toward a
two-month agreement. He said a reduction of 1 ct/lb for Nov was tentatively
agreed, and that talks centered around whether Dec would settle down 0.50
ct/lb or 1 ct/lb. However, one consumer reported offers to settle Nov at
more than 1 ct/lb down.
   This week, one producer reported that settlements for Nov varied from
down 1 ct to 1.50 cts/lb, and that Dec negotiations were still ongoing.
   To compound the year-end confusion, in Dec several US PE producers
announced a 5 cts/lb US domestic price increase for all grades of PE
effective Jan 1. Similarly, one producer expected higher feedstock prices
as the colder weather might make producers less inclined to give
concessions.
   Fiber grade ethylene glycol began the year tight due to strong global
demand for polyester, while weather continued to affect demand of
anti-freeze grade. Spot prices for A-F grade began the year at 30-31 cts/lb
FOB USG. Industrial grade was pegged at 29-31 cts/lb at first of the year,
with contract prices for fiber grade at 28.5 cts/lb.
   Strong demand for PET kept the MEG market tight. Fiber grade was tight,
with spot supply almost non-existent at the beginning of the year.
   In Mar, producers nominated a 2 ct/lb increase for fiber grade due to
strong demand and extremely low inventories. By mid-Apr, fiber grade had
settled at 30.5 cts/lb, while industrial and A-F grade were at 30-32 cts/lb
for spot deals.
   In mid-Apr sources reported that A-F grade buyers were looking to indus
grade market for incremental volumes. Export demand for fiber grade was
described as 'phenomenal' in May.
   In early Jun, one producer nominated 2 ct/lb increases on all grades for
both list and off-list prices. Stocks on all three grades remained
relatively low.
   Spot prices in late Jun were seen at 30-34 cts/lb FOB USG for industrial
and fiber grade.
   Mid-Jul saw fiber grade contracts settle at 33.5 cts/lb FD USG, while
spot prices for A-F and industrial grades around 33-35 cts/lb FOB USG.
Strong demand and low inventories forced some producers in late Jul to buy
material in the spot market.
   A traditional seasonal decrease in A-F grade demand saw a 'lull' in
demand. By late Aug spot prices for industrial and A-F grades fell to 29-31
cts/lb FOB USG, while demand for fiber grade continued strong. The decrease
in demand also allowed for a slight buildup in inventories.
   Mid-Sep saw producers cautiously building up stocks, recalling the
previous winter's mildness.
   Throughout Q4 sources reported generally less-than-dynamic A-F grade
sales. In mid-Oct there was talk of Mexican and Venezuelan industrial grade
material available at 26-27 cts/lb FOB USG, but few buyers were seen. Some
sources believe the A-F grade buying season will continue into 1996, as
consumers maintain low stocks.
   For propylene, the year began with contract prices for all grades in the
high teens and low 20 cts/lb range.
   Jan contracts for all grades settled up 1 ct/lb from Dec, with polymer
grade at 21.75 cts/lb, chemical grade at 20.25 cts/lb and refinery grade at
18.50-19 cts/lb. Spot polymer grade showed a 10 ct/lb premium above
contract, chemical grade had a 2-4 ct/lb premium, but spot refinery grade
was about 1-1.50 cts/lb below contract.
   Some tightness in supply was noted in the market when several producers
took turnarounds at FCC units along the Gulf Coast early in the year.
Strong demand and scheduled outages kept market snug for several months,
with producers having little opportunity to build inventories.
   Alkylation values for refinery grade propylene were at 7-8 cts/lb in
Feb, with values depressed by low gasoline prices. Values of 6-7 cts/lb in
late Mar continued to encourage producers to sell refinery grade on the
spot market where it commanded a higher value. Excess refinery grade
material was entering the US Gulf from California, the Midwest and South
Louisiana.
   By early Mar, producers were building inventories. Contract and spot
prices slipped for refinery grade propylene by early Jun to 15.75-18.25
cts/lb and 15.00-15.50 cts/lb FOB USG respectively, due to overproduction
and low alkylation values. However, contract prices for polymer and
chemical grade had added 1 ct/lb in Feb, Mar and Apr to 24.75 cts/lb for
polymer grade and 23.25 cts/lb for chemical grade for Apr.
   Although an increase was passed in Apr, discussions were drawn out due
to the levelling off in ethylene prices and the decline in the refinery
grade market. Discussions for Apr included talk of a 0.5-1 ct/lb decrease
in prices. However, after the 1 ct/lb increase in Apr, consumers settled
May as a rollover.
   By mid-May, outages at several Gulf Coast fluid catalytic cracking units
helped firm the market, while alkylation values as high as 15-17 cts/lb
were attributed to the onset of the driving season.
   Due to excess supply of polymer grade material, spot prices fell to
25-26 cts/lb FOB USG for polymer grade and 23-24 cts/lb FOB USG for
chemical grade in Jun. Demand for the higher grade propylene was softer due
to falling polypropylene demand.
   By mid-Jul the weak polymer market was also affecting refinery grade
propylene producers who upgrade material via splitting, and spot prices for
all grades had fallen below contract prices by late Aug. Polymer grade spot
was at 20.50- 21.50 cts/lb FOB USG, while chemical grade at 19.50- 20.50
cts/lb and spot refinery grade at 14.25-15.00 cts/lb ex-tank FOB USG.
   Inventories for Q2 totaled 965-mil lbs, while production totaled 6.7-bil
lbs. By late Sep, spot prices had declined further due to ample supply and
lower demand for all three grades. All spot prices had fallen considerably
below contracts prices by the end of Q3.
   Although some US sources reported settling Oct polymer and chemical
grade propylene down 1.5 cts/lb, Nov down 1.5 cts/lb and Dec down 1 ct/lb,
the Dec contract price for both grades seemed to be very much in question
by the year's end.
   One source reported discussions were divided between a large number of
producers who contended Dec should be down 1 ct/lb, and some consumers who
contended it should be down 1.5 cts/lb.
   By early Dec, polymer grade was heard in the pipeline at 11 cts/lb and
10 cts/lb in railcars. Chemical grade was heard at 10 cts/lb in pipeline
and 9.5 cts/lb in railcar. Refinery grade propylene also dropped to
significant lows. Its Dec contract price settled between 9.00 and 9.50
cts/lb, while Dec spot was reported between 8.50 and 9.00 cts/lb.
   Butadiene contracts began the year settling up 1 ct to 25 cts/lb, while
spot prices were at 25-27 cts/lb CIF USG. Jan 1 inventories totalled
221-mil lbs/yr, up 39-mil lbs/yr from Dec 1994.
   Feb 1 inventories totaled 229-mil lbs/yr, while spot market at 23-24
cts/lb CIF USG. Producers that were seeking to build inventories in
anticipation of turnarounds allowed stocks to total 235-mil lbs on Mar 1,
and reported approaching capacity at storage tanks by early Mar.
   After rolling over in Feb and Mar at 25 cts/lb, butadiene contracts
settled down 2 cts to 23 cts/lb in Apr. Apr 1 inventories totaled 225-mil
lbs/yr, which was the first decline in stock levels since Nov 1994. Spot
prices in mid-Apr were at 22-23 cts/lb CIF USG.
   May 1 inventories totaled 249-mil lbs, while spot prices were pegged at
20-22 cts/lb CIF USG. However, the industry was at odds over the reporting
of Jun 1 inventories at 145-mil lbs. The decrease was due to downtime at
ethylene and butadiene units, decreased imports and high freight rates.
Contracts settled at a rollover at 23 cts/lb in both May and Jun.
   Spot prices in early Jul were pegged at 23-24 cts/lb CIF USG. Jul 1
inventories rebounded somewhat to 166-mil lbs/yr, but this figure was
without the participation of one large consumer that took issue with the
Jun 1 figure.
   Jul contract prices settled late in the month at 25 cts/lb, while Aug
contracts settled unchanged. Aug 1 inventories totaled 173-mil lbs. In Sep
butadiene derivative markets reported weakness, though this was offset by
the turnaround of two major butadiene plants. Sep 1 inventories totaled
200-mil lbs, which was ascribed to expected turnarounds in Oct and to
several tanks taking on extra material for operators whose other tanks were
out of service.
   Contracts rolled over in Sep at 25 cts/lb. Spot transactions were
minimal due to high inventories. By the end of Sep, spot butadiene was
pegged at 23-23.5 cts/lb CIF USG.
   In late Oct, Lyondell, Texas Petrochemical and Shell nominated the Nov
contract price at 23 cts/lb, down 2 cts from Oct. The downward push came at
a time of high stocks.
   From Jul to Oct, consultants Hodson & Co reported a sustained rise in US
butadiene inventories. Oct 1 inventories were reported at 226-mil lbs, an
increase of 13% over Sep.
   As consumers sought to work off butadiene bought at 25 cts/lb, the spot
market seemed to vanish by mid-Nov. Aside from the uneconomic pricing of
imported material, sources also said storage was often an issue.
   As the year closed, high inventories continued to weigh on the market,
and there was unconfirmed talk of at least a large consumer demanding yet
another price decrease for Jan of 2 cts/lb, pushing the contract down to 19
cts/lb.
   In early Jan, one trader heard reports that three producers are indeed
settling at this level. Two producers have reportedly settled 19 cts/lb for
Jan, while a third has granted a 'temporary volume allowance', in the
trader's words, bringing the net contract price to 19 cts/lb, but
preserving 21 cts/lb as a basis for Feb negotiations.

Illustration(s):
Illustration: Graph: Spot US Ethylene, Propylene Prices 1995

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

JAPAN'S SHIN-ETSU CHEMICAL CO LTD

   Japan's Shin-Etsu Chemical Co Ltd plans to construct its second PVC
plant in the US with a capacity of 400,000 mt/yr, local press reported.
Shin-Etsu reportedly plans to startup the PVC plant in early 1998.
   Meanwhile, the company's US subsidiary, Sintech, is currently surveying
possible plant locations along the Gulf of Mexico. The company will
reportedly makes its decision in the spring of 1996. Total investment in
the new PVC plant is estimated at $700-mil.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

ETHYLENE

   Shanghai is to invest an estimated Yuan 40-bil ($4.8-bil) to build an
ethylene plant in a joint venture with neighbouring Zhejiang province, the
Shanghai Star bi-weekly newspaper reported.
   The plant would be built in the Caojing chemical base near Hangzhou Bay
and would produce 600,000 mt/yr, with production starting as soon as
possible, according to the report.
   'Foreign funds would be introduced to promote the project,' the report
quoted Yu Dexiong, a senior chemical industry industry official, as
saying.
   Yu said Shanghai's strategy was to develop the chemical industry not
only in the city but also in the Yangtse river valley.
   The Shanghai Chemical Industry Bureau was recently transformed into an
entreprise and renamed Shanghai Chemical Shareholding (Group) Co in a move
to give new impetus to the chemical industry.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

KOREA ETHYLENE DEREGULATION

   Eight of Korea's ethylene producers plan to negotiate with the
government on matters regarding deregulation of investment policy on naptha
cracker expansions, according to a Korean press report last week.
   A meeting was held recently of senior officials from eight of the
nation's top petrochemical producers who are discussing how to better
coordinate investments in naphtha cracker expansion projects.
   According to an industry source, the government is concerned about the
new round of ethylene expansions based on negative results from previous
expansions.
   However, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy is set to deregulate
the petrochemical industry in mid-1996 and is reportedly set to authorize
Hyundai Petrochemical's new naphtha cracker expansion project by early
1996. Currently, all investments geared toward expansion projects must meet
approval from the Ministry.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

JAPAN'S IDEMITSU PETROCHEMICAL

   Japan's Idemitsu Petrochemical has sold its 15% stake in a polyethylene
joint venture based in Malaysia to UK's BP Chemicals, a Petronas source
said last week.
   BP now has a 60% controlling interest in the 200,000 mt/yr PE plant in
Kertih, on the northeast coast of the Malaysian peninsula, with Malaysian
national oil company Petronas holding 40% as before, the source said.
   The plant produces high density polyethylene and linear low density
polyethylene using BP technology.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

POLYETHYLENE TEREPHALATE

   Continental Pet Espana announced plans to construct a new
bottle-manufacturing plant that will more than double polyethylene
terephalate demand to 55,000 mt/yr.
   The facility, to be located in Madrid, is expected to be completed in
1997. A possible second phase would boost PET demand to 70,000 mt/yr.
   Although the Continental Pet Europe subsidiary, which currently has four
plants in Spain, usually buys raw material from central European producers,
local supply is poised to increase.
   In November, Seda de Barcelona subsidiary Catalana de Polimers announced
plans to boost PET production to 150,000 mt/yr from 40,000 mt/yr by
year-end 1996.
   Meanwhile, Eastman Chemical is building a 120,000 mt/yr PET plant in San
Roque in southern Spain, in conjunction with Cepsa subsidiary Interquisa
doubling purified terephthalic acid capacity to 400,000 mt/yr. Both
projects are also scheduled to be completed by year-end 1996.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

LPG

   Saudi Aramco and Kuwait Petroleum Corp have announced January LPG
postings for propane at $205/mt FOB, an increase of $10/mt over the
December price. Butane has been set at $188/mt FOB, unchanged from the
December level.
   Last week, BP announced January North Sea prices at $230/mt FOB for
propane, an increase of $50/mt, while butane was posted at $155/mt, down
$7/mt from December.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

SUPERFUND

   The Republican balanced budget plan vetoed by President Clinton included
a short-term extension of the Superfund excise tax on petroleum and
chemical feedstocks and a corporate environmental tax.
   The tax was due to expire midnight Dec 31, and will not be collected
after that date until there is a budget agreement between the White House
and houses of Congress.
   The excise tax on petroleum and chemical feedstocks was extended for
nine months, pending efforts to overhaul and reauthorize the existing
program. The budget plan also extended the 5 cts/bbl oil spill liability
tax, which was due to expire Dec 31.
   The fund is close to its $1-billion cap, at which point collections
cease. The 0.1 ct/gal tax to clean leaks from underground storage tanks
also expired Dec 31, and is not extended under the Republican plan.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

UNION CARBIDE CORP

   Union Carbide Corp has named William H Joyce president and chief
executive effective Jan 1. Joyce succeeds Robert D Kennedy, who retired at
the end of Dec but who remains on the board.
   Joyce was elected chief executive officer in April, having been
president and chief operating officer since 1993. Joyce is on several
boards including the Chemical Manufacturers Association and American
Plastics Council.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

PROPYLENE OXIDE

   Dow Chemical and its subsidiaries plan to expand propylene oxide
capacity at Freeport, Texas; Stade, Germany; and Aratu, Brazil, by a total
of 250,000mt/yr through continuous process technology improvements, the
company said.
   In 1994, Dow announced the addition of more than 227,000mt/yr of PO
capacity at its Plaquemine, Lousiana; Freeport, Stade and Aratu facilities.
All of these expansions will be completed by the end of 1996.
   Dow will now add an additional 45,000mt/yr at its Freeport plant by the
end of 1996, bringing the plant's total capacity increase to 160,000mt/yr
since 1994.
   An additional 205,000mt/yr of capacity will be added at the Stade and
Aratu sites. Dow expects to achieve these two increments between mid-1998
and early 1999.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   Vol. 15, No

PLATT'S AVERAGE MONTHLY PRICES

Illustration(s):
Table: PLATT'S AVERAGE MONTHLY PRICES ($/tonne unless indicated): December
1995 (This table is not available eletronically. Pleas see January 5, 1996
issue.)

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>