
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B39-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA074-000493-B043-182</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122011931 text/html 45197
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:17:34 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:23 GMT
Content-length: 45010
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
S&P'S REV. OF BANKING & FINANCIAL SVCS. via NewsNet <BR>
January 31, 1996   Vol. 12, N<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>THE NEW CRA EXAMINATION PROCEDURES&nbsp;Changes Designed To Reduce the Examination Burden Have Focused Regulatory&nbsp;Attention on Community Reinvestment Results. The Interpretation of Key CRA&nbsp;Standards Remains Subject to Substantial Examiner Discretion.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(6504 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
S&P'S REV. OF BANKING & FINANCIAL SVCS. via NewsNet
January 31, 1996   Vol. 12, N

THE NEW CRA EXAMINATION PROCEDURES
Changes Designed To Reduce the Examination Burden Have Focused Regulatory
Attention on Community Reinvestment Results. The Interpretation of Key CRA
Standards Remains Subject to Substantial Examiner Discretion.

By:
Christina M. Gattuso*

In May 1995, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of
Thrift Supervision, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (collectively, the
``Agencies'') issued final revised regulations under the Community
Reinvestment Act (``CRA'') (the ``Revised CRA Regulations'').1 In the
preamble to that rulemaking, the Agencies noted that they would work
together to improve training for examiners, to increase interagency efforts
to apply standards consistently and reliably, and to minimize unnecessary
compliance burdens. Consistent with those efforts, on November 13, 1995,
the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (``FFIEC'')
officially released new CRA examination procedures that were jointly
adopted by the Agencies for monitoring an institution's compliance with the
Revised CRA Regulations (the ``Procedures'').
There are four sets of examination procedures -- procedures for large,
retail institutions; for small institutions; for wholesale and limited
purpose institutions; and for institutions with an approved strategic plan.
In accordance with the Revised CRA Regulations, examiners began using the
small institution examination procedures on January 1, 1996. The other
three sets of procedures do not become mandatory until July 1, 1997.
However, examiners will use the Procedures in conducting examinations of
those institutions that elect to be evaluated under the Revised CRA
Regulation prior to that date.2
In some instances, the assessment criteria set forth in the Procedures
mirror the twelve assessment factors under the prior CRA regulations.3
Examiners will still review and rate institutions on the geographic
distribution of their loans; their record of opening and closing offices;
their participation in community development projects; their real estate,
small farm, and small business loans; and their participation in government
loan programs for housing, small farms, and small businesses. Under the
Procedures, the examiners will continue to review, but the institution will
not be rated, on any practices by the institution that are intended to
discourage applications, any prohibited discriminatory or other illegal
credit practices,4 the institution's ability to meet community credit
needs, the institution's delineated community, and the institution's
willingness to explore other activities. Under the Revised CRA Regulations
and the Procedures, examiners will no longer look at, and an institution
will not be rated on, its ascertainment of community credit needs,
marketing, and board of director involvement in the CRA process.
   The Procedures emphasize that examiners are expected to exercise
judgement and common sense to minimize the burden imposed on the
examination process and to perform only those steps necessary to arrive at
an accurate assessment of the institution's CRA performance.5 Consistent
with the Revised CRA Regulations, the Procedures establish evaluation
methods based on a review of objective data that can also be used by
institutions to measure their own performance under the CRA. An examiner's
assessment of an institution's CRA performance will be based on a number of
objective factors, which include the number and amount of loans originated,
the amount of qualified investments, and the types of services provided by
the institution.6 However, by necessity the Procedures allow for examiner
discretion in the assessment process in order to account for the
differences among institutions and the communities they serve. While the
need for flexibility in assessing an institution's performance is
important, unless the examiners are provided with clear guidance and
comprehensive training, inconsistencies in CRA examinations are likely to
continue. The Agencies believe that the training examiners have received
and will continue to receive in the future will enable examiners to make
more informed judgements in the areas in which they have discretion and
should ensure consistency in the examination process.7

EXAMINATION PROCEDURES FOR LARGE RETAIL INSTITUTIONS
The Revised CRA Regulations provide that a financial institution with total
assets of $250 million or more or, regardless of size, one that is owned by
a holding company with total banking and thrift assets greater than $1
billion, will be examined under the Lending, Investment, and Service Tests.
The Procedures set forth the items that will be reviewed in assessing an
institution's performance under those three tests.

Examination Scope
The Procedures set forth factors that will be reviewed and compiled by the
examiners at the pre-examination stage to determine the scope of the
impending CRA examination.8 To make this determination, the examiners will
review the institution's prior CRA evaluations, information provided by
community contacts, and the lending data and demographic data reported for
each assessment area.9 The examiners will also consider the number of other
institutions in the assessment area and the opportunities available in the
assessment area for lending, investment and other services. Based on this
information, the examiners will determine the scope of their on-site and
off-site examinations.

Performance Context
The Procedures require the examiners to establish a ``performance context''
for the examination by evaluating information about the institution, its
community and its competitors. In this regard, the examiners will review
standardized worksheets and other agency information to obtain relevant
demographic, economic, and loan data on each assessment area under
review.10 The examiners will also review agency-prepared community contact
forms for groups within the institution's assessment area, and may contact
local community, governmental, or economic development representatives to
update such information.11 To determine the institution's ability and
capacity to serve its assessment area, the examiners will review Call
Reports or Thrift Financial Reports (``TFRs''), annual reports, supervisory
reports and prior CRA evaluations. The examiners will also consider any
information the institution provides on its local community and economy,
its business strategy, and its lending capacity, and any information that
otherwise assists in the evaluation of the institution.12 However,
examiners will not require the institution to create such information; nor
will they ask for any information other than what the institution has
developed as part of its normal business practice.
   Finally, by reviewing the public evaluations and other financial data,
the examiners will determine whether any similarly situated institutions13
serve the same or similar assessment area and, if so, whether they would
provide relevant and accurate information for evaluating the institution's
CRA performance. The Procedures note that the examiners should consider
whether such information would help to identify lending opportunities
available in the institution's assessment area that are compatible with the
institution's business strategy and consistent with safe and sound banking
practices; constraints affecting opportunities to make safe and sound loans
and qualified investments compatible with the institution's business
strategy in the assessment area; and successful CRA-related product
offerings or activities used by other lenders serving the same or a similar
assessment area.
   The development of the performance context will likely occur prior to
initiation of the on-site examination. The Revised CRA Regulations and the
Procedures make clear that an institution need not compile or maintain
information related to the performance context. However, to the extent the
institution compiles information to analyze the demand for loans,
investment and services within its assessment area, it would be to the
institution's advantage to provide such information to the examiner for use
in developing the performance context.

Assessment Area
Under the prior CRA regulations, an institution's delineated community was
reviewed and rated as part of an institution's overall CRA performance. The
Revised CRA Regulations require an institution to define its assessment
area but do not require that an examiner rate the institution's assessment
area. The Procedures and the Revised CRA Regulations state that examiners
will use the institution's assessment area unless they determine that ``the
assessment area does not comply with the requirements for assessment areas
set forth in the final rule.''14 Since this is not a rated area, an
incorrect identification or definition of an institution's assessment area
will not result in a downgrading of an institution's CRA Rating.15
As long as an institution's assessment area meets the requirements of the
Revised CRA Regulations, the examiners should not second guess the
assessment area. In order to meet the requirements of the Revised CRA
Regulations, the assessment area should consist of one or more metropolitan
statistical areas (``MSAs'') or contiguous political subdivisions. It
should also include the geographies16 where the institution has its main
office, its branches, and any deposit-taking ATMs, and the areas
surrounding such locations where the institution originated or purchased a
substantial portion of its loans. In addition, the assessment area should
consist of whole geographies; it should not exclude low or moderate income
geographies and should not illegally discriminate; and not extend
substantially across consolidated MSAs or state boundaries unless the
institution is in a multi-state MSA. If the examiners find that the
assessment area fails to meet these regulatory criteria, the examiners will
develop a revised assessment area and will evaluate the institution's
performance based on that revised assessment area.

Public File Checklist
The Procedures provide that there is no need for the examiners to review
each branch or each complete public file during every examination,
particularly if the institution has complied with the public file
requirements of the Revised CRA Regulations in previous examinations.
However, it is likely that the examiners will review the public files in
the first examination of every institution under the Revised CRA
Regulations and the Procedures. In cases where a review of the public file
is undertaken, the examiners will determine whether an accurate public
notice is displayed in the lobby of each branch, and whether the file(s) in
the main office and in each state contain all information required by the
Revised CRA Regulations.17

Performance Criteria
Lending Test
The Lending Test is the primary test for large, retail institutions, since
failure to achieve at least a Low Satisfactory rating in this area makes it
impossible to achieve an overall Satisfactory rating. The examiners will
rate the institution's lending performance under the following criteria:
lending activity; geographic distribution; borrower characteristics;
community development lending; and innovative or flexible lending
practices. The analysis under the Lending Test is similar to the analysis
conducted under the prior CRA regulations.
   After the examiners determine the loans to review for purposes of the
Lending Test,18 the examiners will test a sample of loan files to verify
the accuracy of data collected and/or reported by the institution and to
ensure that (i) affiliate loans reported by the institution are not also
attributable to another affiliate subject to CRA;19 (ii) loans reported as
community development loans meet the definition of community development
loans;20 and (iii) all consumer loans in a particular loan category have
been included, when the institution collects and maintains the data for one
or more loan categories and elects to have the information evaluated. The
examiners will also identify the dollar amount and number of loans under
evaluation that the institution has made or purchased within its assessment
area, taking into account the institution's resources and business strategy
and other information that the examiners gather under the performance
context, including population, income, housing, and business data. The
examiners will also review any analyses offered by the institution to
provide insight into the reasonableness of the institution's geographic
distribution of lending.21 If the areas of low- or no-loan penetration are
found in the institution's analyses, the examiners will review explanations
and determine whether the institution took action to address the
disparities.
   While the Procedures direct the examiners to supplement their review
with an independent analysis of geographic distribution as necessary to
determine the extent to which the institution is serving geographies in
each income category, they make clear that an institution is not required
to lend in every geography. The Procedures also permit the examiners to
compare the institution's lending performance to that of other lenders
within its assessment area if the examiners determine that such an analysis
would provide insight into the reasons for an abnormally low penetration of
lending in the assessment area. Taking all of these factors into
consideration, the examiners will determine whether the institution's
abnormally low loan penetration in certain areas should constitute a
negative consideration in rating the geographic distribution of the
institution's loans.
   In terms of borrower characteristics, the examiners will review any
analyses prepared by or for the institution to determine the reasonableness
of the institution's loan distribution by borrower characteristics. To the
extent necessary, the examiners will supplement the analysis provided by
the institution with an independent analysis. If the institution adequately
serves borrowers within its assessment area, the examiners will look to its
performance outside its assessment area based on borrower characteristics
to determine whether such performance would enhance the assessment of the
institution's overall performance.
   The examiners will also review the institution's community development
lending, using information obtained in the performance context to determine
the responsiveness of the institution to available community development
opportunities and the extent to which the institution has demonstrated
leadership in community development lending.
   Finally, the examiners will evaluate whether the institution uses
innovative or flexible loan products, and, if so, the degree to which the
loans serve low- and moderate-income individuals in new ways or serve
borrowers not previously served by the institution. In addition, the
examiners will look at the success of any innovative or flexible loan
products offered by the institution, including the number and dollar amount
of such loan products originated during the review period.22 To some
degree, an institution's rating under the Lending Test will be based on
objective data. However, examiners will still be required to determine
whether an institution's lending activity is reasonable or adequate, terms
that are not defined in the Revised CRA Regulations or the Procedures, in
order to reach a conclusion as to which rating to assign to the
institution.

Investment Test
The review of an institution's performance under the Investment Test is
similar to the examiners' review of this area under the prior CRA
Regulations. Under the Investment Test, the examiners will identify
qualified investments23 by reviewing the institution's investment
portfolio, and, if elected by the institution, the investment portfolio of
its affiliate(s). Investments that were made since the last CRA evaluation
and those that were made prior to the previous CRA evaluation but still
remain outstanding will be considered. The examiners will also consider
qualifying grants, donations, or in-kind contributions of property since
the last evaluation that are for community development purposes.
   In evaluating the institution's investment portfolio, the examiners will
determine whether the investments benefit the institution's assessment area
or a broader area that includes the institution's assessment area; whether
the investments have been considered under the Lending or Service Tests;
whether an affiliate's investments have been claimed by another
institution; the dollar volume of investments made to entities that are in
or serve the assessment area, in relation to the institution's capacity and
constraints, and the assessment area's characteristics and needs; the use
of any innovative or complex investments; and the degree to which the
investments serve low- and moderate- income areas or individuals, and are
responsive to available opportunities for qualified investments.24
   After considering the number and dollar amount of qualified investments;
the innovativeness and complexity of qualified investments; the degree to
which these types of investments are routinely provided by other private
investors; and the responsiveness of the institution's qualified
investments to available opportunities, the examiners will reach a
conclusion regarding the institution's performance under the Investment
Test. As with the Lending Test, there will be some degree of subjectivity
in reaching this conclusion since examiners will need to determine the
adequacy of an institution's qualified investments in order to assign a
rating.

Service Test
The Service Test evaluates the institution on the basis of the retail
banking and community development services provided by the institution.
With respect to retail banking service, the information used by the
examiners to evaluate the institution is similar to information reviewed
under the prior CRA regulations. As was the case under the prior CRA
regulations, the institution should be prepared to provide an explanation
for any material differences in the hours of operations or services
available at branches within the institution's assessment area.
   The examiners will also review the institution's record of opening and
closing branches within its assessment area since the previous evaluation
and the extent to which any such openings or closings have had a negative
or positive impact on low- and moderate-income geographies within the
institution's assessment area. In addition, the institution will be
evaluated on the basis of the accessibility and use of alternative systems
of delivering banking services in low and moderate income geographies and
to low and moderate income individuals.25 Finally, the examiners will
assess the quantity, quality, and accessibility of the institution's
service-delivery systems provided for all income areas within its
assessment area. In making such an assessment, the examiners are directed
to consider the degree to which services are tailored to the convenience
and needs of each geography.
   As part of the Service Test, the examiners will also review the
institution's community development services, which can include at the
institution's option, services through affiliates of the institution. The
examiners will identify such services and determine whether the services
qualify under the definition of community development services, benefit the
assessment area or a broader statewide or regional area encompassing the
institution's assessment area; and ensure that any services provided by
affiliates of the institution are not claimed by other affiliated
institutions. Taking into account the information gathered in the
performance context, the examiners will evaluate the extent of the
community development services offered by the institution; the
innovativeness of any such services, including whether they serve low- and
moderate- income customers in new ways or serve groups of customers not
previously served; and the degree to which they serve low- or moderate-
income areas or individuals and their responsiveness to available
opportunities for community development services.

Ratings
Based on the analysis discussed above, an institution will be rated
Outstanding, High Satisfactory, Low Satisfactory, Needs to Improve, or
Substantial Noncompliance for each of the Lending, Investment, and Service
Tests.26 These rating descriptions are relatively subjective in order to
provide the examiners with the flexibility to accommodate differences in
institutions and their communities. The Procedures do not provide any
guidance on interpretation of the descriptions. The examiners will total
the institution's scores on the three tests to assign the institution an
overall composite rating. Under the Procedures, an institution's assigned
rating can be no more than three times its score on the Lending Test.27 In
addition, the examiners must take into account the results of the fair
lending component of the institution's most recent compliance examination
and determine whether these findings should lower the institution's overall
CRA Rating. In determining whether to downgrade the institution, the
examiner will also take into account the nature and extent of any evidence
of discrimination, the policies the institution has in place to prevent
discriminatory or other illegal credit practices, any corrective action
taken, and any other relevant information.

EXAMINATION PROCEDURES FOR SMALL INSTITUTIONS
Generally
Under the new Procedures, the scope of the examination for small
institutions is streamlined, with the primary focus on the institution's
lending performance. If a small institution has more than one assessment
area, the examiners will select the assessment areas for on-site review
based on the institution's prior CRA performance, its lending activity in
the assessment area, information obtained from community contacts, and
demographic data on each assessment area.
   The performance context for small institutions generally includes the
same information that is reviewed in the performance context for
examinations of large, retail institutions. The primary difference is that
the examination is much more streamlined, and while the examiners will
review financial information and the prior CRA evaluations of institutions
of similar size that serve the same or similar assessment area(s), they
will not consider the same detail of information regarding similarly
situated institutions as will be considered in examining large retail
institutions. The review of the assessment area of a small institution is
the same as that of a large, retail institution, as is the review of the
small institution's public files.
   The examiners will review small institutions in five areas: (i) the
loan-to-deposit analysis; (ii) comparison of credit extended inside and
outside of the assessment area; (iii) distribution of credit within the
assessment area; (iv) review of complaints; and (v) investments and
services (at the institution's option to enhance a satisfactory rating.)

Performance Criteria
Loan-to-Deposit Analysis
Examiners will use the data contained in Call Reports and TFRs to calculate
the institution's average loan-to-deposit (``LTD'') ratio since the
institution's last examination by adding the quarterly loan-to-deposit
ratios and dividing by the number of quarters covered by the examination.
If the LTD ratio is high, the examiners will only analyze financial
information. If the ratio is low, the examiners will make a determination
about the reasonableness of the LTD ratio by reviewing information gathered
in the performance context, including the institution's capacity to lend,
the capacity of other similarly situated institutions to lend in the
assessment area, demographic and economic factors present in the assessment
area, and the lending opportunities available in the institution's
assessment area.28 If the examiners determine that the LTD is not
reasonable in light of the performance context, they will also consider the
number and dollar volume of any loans sold by the institution to the
secondary market, the innovativeness or complexity of community development
loans and qualified investments by the institution, to assess the extent to
which those activities compensate for a low LTD ratio or supplement the
institution's lending performance as reflected in its LTD ratio.
   Comparison of Credit Extended Inside and Outside of the Assessment
Area(s)
The examiners will review HMDA data, automated loan reports or other
reports generated by the institution to analyze the extent of lending by
the institution both inside and outside the assessment area. If such data
is not available or cannot be verified, the examiners will use sampling
guidelines to select a sample of loans originated, purchased, committed to
calculate the percentage of loans located within the assessment area. Only
if the percentage of loans or other activities inside the assessment area
constitute majority of the institution's lending and other activities will
the institution meet the standards for a Satisfactory rating under this
category. If such activities are less than a majority, the examiners will
consider information from the performance context with respect to economic
conditions, loan demand, and the institution's size, financial condition,
branching network, and business strategies.29 If an institution has a
significant amount of lending outside of its assessment area, it may want
to provide the examiners with a geocoded lending analysis since sampling
may not accurately reflect the institution's lending activity.

Distribution of Credit within the Assessment Area
The Procedures direct the examiners to determine first whether the number
and income distribution of geographies in the assessment area are
sufficient for a meaningful analysis of the geographic distribution of the
institution's loans in its assessment area. If such an analysis would be
meaningful and the necessary geographic information is collected by the
institution in the ordinary course of business, the examiners will
determine the distribution of the institution's loans in its assessment
area within the four geographies. While the Procedures state that the
absence of loans in any particular geography should not be a concern, the
examiners are directed to identify groups of geographies by income
categories in which there is little or no loan penetration.30 If the
institution collects information about borrower income or revenue, the
examiners will review such information to determine the distribution of the
institution's loans in the assessment area by borrower income and business
revenue, and to identify categories of borrowers for which there is little
to no penetration of loans.
   If an analysis of the distribution of loans would not be meaningful or
could not be performed, the examiners may analyze the geographic
distribution by street address rather than geography (if such data is
available and the analysis would be reasonable), or they may analyze the
distribution by loan size as a proxy for income or revenue of the borrower.
If the analysis shows that the institution is not penetrating some areas or
has low penetration in some areas, the examiners are directed to form a
conclusion about the reasons for the loan penetration using information
gathered in the performance context. If the institution is found to have
low penetration of some areas, it may be useful for the institution to
provide the examiners with data to justify its loan distribution.

Review of Complaints
The examiners will review all complaints received by the institution
regarding the institution's CRA performance and the institution's action
with respect thereto as well as any complaints regarding the institution
received by the Agencies.

Investments and Services
These areas will only be reviewed by the examiners at the institution's
option to enhance a Satisfactory rating. If the institution chooses to have
these areas reviewed, the examiners will consider the dollar amount of
qualified investments, the impact of those investments on the institution's
assessment area, and the innovativeness or complexity of the investments.31
With respect to services provided by the institution, the examiners will
take into account the same general information considered under the Service
Test for large retail institutions.

Ratings
A small institution will be assigned a Satisfactory rating if it meets each
of the standards set forth in the Revised CRA Regulations for that rating
or if it has exceptionally strong performance with respect to some of the
standards that compensates for weak performance in other standards.32 If an
institution fails to qualify for a Satisfactory rating, the examiners will
assign a Needs to Improve or a Substantial Noncompliance Rating depending
on the degree to which the institution's performance falls short of a
Satisfactory rating. The Procedures also direct the examiners to review the
results of the fair lending component of the institution's most recent
compliance examination to determine whether those findings should lower the
institution's overall CRA Rating.

PROCEDURES FOR LIMITED PURPOSE AND WHOLESALE INSTITUTIONS
Generally
Under the Revised CRA Regulations, limited purpose and wholesale
institutions are evaluated under separate examination procedures on the
basis of the community development test.33 The scope of the examination for
limited purpose and wholesale institutions will focus on community
development lending, qualified investments, and community development
services. In defining the performance context for the examination, the
examiners will review the same types of information reviewed under the
performance context for large, retail institutions except that the analysis
will focus on the information as it relates to community development. Thus,
to the extent the institution collects data to analyze the types of
community development opportunities in its assessment area, it should
consider providing such information to the examiners for their use in
establishing the performance context. The evaluation of the assessment area
is generally the same as for large, retail institutions.

Performance Criteria
Under the Community Development Test, the examiners will review the
institution's performance with regard to community development lending,
qualified investments, and community development services. The examiners
will review the number and dollar amount of community development loans
made by the institution and will test a sample of the institution's
community development loan files to verify that such loans qualify as
community development loans. The examiners also will review qualified
investments and other community development services provided by the
institution and, at the institution's option, will include activities by
affiliates and community development lending by consortia or third parties.
In reaching a conclusion about the institution's community development
performance, the examiners will take into account the degree of innovation
in community development lending activities and the responsiveness of the
institution to the opportunities for community development activities.34 To
the extent the institution is collecting information regarding community
development loans and qualified investments, the institution should provide
the examiners with such information, as well as information on the
beneficiaries of such loans and investments.

Ratings
The institution will be rated based on the examiner's analysis of the
institution's performance under the Community Development Test in
accordance with the criteria set forth in the Revised CRA Regulations.35
While the rating descriptions set forth in the Revised CRA Regulation are
highly subjective, the Procedures are fairly straightforward.

PROCEDURES FOR INSTITUTIONS WITH STRATEGIC PLANS
Generally
The examination scope for institutions with strategic plans will focus on
whether or not the institution has met the goals stated within its
strategic plan.36 In order to make such a determination, the examiners may
also consider the level of the institution's lending, investment and
service activity in the different assessment areas, particularly in low-
and moderate- income areas, the importance of the institution in meeting
the credit needs in its assessment area, information provided by community
contacts and the institution's prior performance evaluations.37
As part of the performance context, the examiners will consider any
information that the institution provides on its record of meeting the
goals of the strategic plan and will contact local community, governmental
and other representatives to update or supplement information about the
institution's record of meeting the plan goals. Since the institution is
likely to be gathering data to show its progress toward meeting its goals
under the plan, the institution should consider providing that information
to the examiners. The review of the institution's assessment area will
occur when the strategic plan is submitted.

Performance Criteria
The examiners will review the institution's performance to evaluate the
institution's record of meeting the performance goals set forth in its
plan. If the goals were not met, the examiners will determine whether the
plan goals were ``substantially met'' by considering the number of unmet
goals, the degree to which the goals were not met, the importance of those
goals and the reasons why the goals were not met.

Ratings
A rating will be assigned to the institution based on the goals and rating
objectives established by the plan. If the institution has not
``substantially met'' its goals, it can elect to be evaluated under the
small institution, large or retail institution, or wholesale or limited
purpose institution test, as appropriate.38 The examiners will also review
an institution's fair lending performance based on its most recent
compliance examination to determine whether evidence of discrimination
exists that should lower the institution's overall CRA Rating.

CONCLUSION
The Procedures are designed to reduce the burden associated with the CRA
examination process while at the same time ensure consistency in the
examination process. While the Revised CRA Regulations and the Procedures
shift the focus of the examination process from documentation to community
reinvestment results, examiners will continue to exercise a fair amount of
discretion in interpreting the CRA standards. For example, under the
Procedures, examiners will still be required to make subjective
determinations with regard to the ``innovativeness'' of loans and
investments and they will be required to differentiate between ``adequate''
responsiveness and ``poor'' responsiveness or ``excellent'' and
``reasonable'' dispersion of loans. In the past, the attempts by the
federal banking regulators to ensure certainty and consistency in the
examination process by revising their examination guidance and training
programs did not achieve the intended results. The success of the most
recent attempt by the regulators will be determined over time as
examinations are conducted pursuant to the Procedures. In the meantime,
institutions would be well advised to continue to maintain data to support
their CRA performance.

About the Author(s):

*CHRISTINA M. GATTUSO is an attorney with Muldoon, Murphy & Faucette, a
Washington, D.C. law firm specializing in the representation of financial
institutions.

Reference(s):

1. 60 Fed. Reg. 22156 (May 4, 1995).
2. Even though the Revised CRA Regulations are not effective for other
than small institutions until July 1, 1997, according to an official of the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (``OCC''), between now and that
date, examiners will focus on five of the twelve assessment factors set
forth in the prior CRA Regulations -- geographic distribution of loans,
number of home mortgage and small business loans, participation in
government loans programs, participation in community development
activities and the bank's record of opening and closing branches. M.
Schulz, Until New CRA Rules Take Effect, Regulators to Focus on 5 Criteria,
American Banker, Oct. 26, 1995 at 9.
3. See 12 C.F.R. Part 25 (1995) for a description of the 12 assessment
factors under the prior CRA Regulation. For convenience, all citations to
the Revised CRA Regulations are to the OCC's regulations.
4. An institution's fair lending program is no longer rated under the
Revised CRA Regulations. However, the Procedures provide that an examiner
may decrease an institution's CRA Rating if instances of illegal
discrimination are discovered in the institution's credit practices. See,
e.g., Large Institution Examination Procedures at 14
5. The Procedures eliminate 50 steps, some of them multi-part, from the
old examination procedures under the prior CRA regulations. See Letter from
the Agencies to The Honorable Joseph P. Kennedy II, dated Jan. 3, 1996.
6. See 12 C.F.R. Section25.22 (b). For small institutions, the examiners
will look at objective factors such as an institution's loan to deposit
ratio; the percentage of loans located in the institution's assessment
area; and the geographic distribution of the institution's loans. See 12
C.F.R. Section25.26(a).
7. The Agencies are in the process of drafting an ``Official Staff
Commentary'' to the Revised CRA Regulations which will be published for
notice and comment in the Federal Register and which is intended to provide
the public and examiners with a consistent interpretation of the Revised
CRA Regulations.
8. The Revised CRA Regulations require large institutions to collect and
report certain data that will be used by the examiners to evaluate CRA
performance. See 12 C.F.R. Section25.42. The data will be reported to the
Agencies electronically in standardized format which will enable the
examiners to conduct much of the necessary analysis prior to the on-site
examination.
9. The Revised CRA Regulations and the Procedures address the means by
which an institution's performance will be reviewed if it has multiple
assessment areas. For purposes of this article, an institution's assessment
area is referred to in the singular.
10. The Agencies have devised standardized worksheets for use by the
examiners in determining community profile, economic patterns, and lending
distribution.
11. The examiners will conduct interviews with local community, civic, or
government leaders to help learn about the community, its economic base,
and local community development initiatives. These interviews may be
conducted prior to the examination or as part of the examination.
12. While an institution is not required to provide such information to
the examiners or to create such information, it may still be advisable to
maintain the data necessary to respond to any issues that may be raised in
the examination. To the extent an institution maintains such information,
it should provide it to the examiners to assist them in establishing the
performance context for the examination.
13. The examiners will look to institutions that are similarly situated in
terms of size, financial condition, product offerings, and business
strategy.
14. 60 Fed. Reg. at 22171.
15. However, if the assessment area reflects illegal discrimination,
examiners will take into account problems with the designation of the
assessment area when assigning a rating to the institution. Large
Institution Examination Procedures at 3.
16. A ``geography'' is defined in the Revised CRA Regulations to mean a
census tract or a block numbering area delineated by the Bureau of the
Census in the most recent decennial census. 12 C.F.R. Section25.12(l).
17. See 12 C.F.R. Section25.43 for a description of the items that must be
contained in a public CRA file. Generally, these items include, but are not
limited to, all written comments from the public relating to the
institution's CRA performance; the institution's most recent CRA Public
Performance Evaluation; a map of the assessment area; a list of services
provided by the institution; and, if applicable, the number and amount of
consumer loans make to the four income categories of borrowers and
geographies and the number and amount located inside and outside the
assessment area.
18. This will be accomplished by reviewing the institution's most recent
HMDA and CRA Disclosure Statement, interim HMDA Loan Application Register
(``LAR''), and any interim CRA data collected by the institution; a sample
of consumer loans if consumer lending represents a substantial majority of
the institution's business and any other information the institution
chooses to provide regarding its lending activities. The institution may
also provide information on small business loans secured by non-farm
residential real estate, home equity loans not reported for HMDA, unfunded
commitments, and information on loans outstanding and loan distribution
analysis conducted by and for the institution, including any explanations
for identified concerns or actions taken to address such concerns. Large
Institution Examination Procedures at 4
19. Examiners will accomplish this by requesting the institution to
identify how loans are attributed and how it ensures that all loans within
a given lending category (e.g., small business loans, home equity loans,
and other types of loans ) in a particular assessment area are reported for
all of the institution's affiliates if the institution elects to count any
affiliate loans. Id.
20. The examiners will also determine whether community development loans
benefit the institution's assessment area or a broader area that includes
the assessment area.
21. The examiners will test the accuracy of the data provided by the
institution and determine if the institution's analysis is reasonable.
22. See Id. at 8.
23. The Revised CRA Regulations define a qualified investment to include a
lawful investment, deposit, membership, share or grant that has community
development as its primary purpose. 12 C.F.R. Section25.12(s).
24. Large Institution Examination Procedures at 9.
25. Such alternative systems for delivering retail banking services
include, but are not limited to, nonproprietary and proprietary ATMs, loan
production offices, on-line banking, banking by telephone, and bank at work
or by mail programs. 12 C.F.R. Section25.24(d)(3).
26. See 12 C.F.R. App. A to Part 25.
27. Large Institution Examination Procedures at 13.
28. Small Institution Examination Procedures at 3.
29. Id.
30. Id. at 4.
31. Id. at 6-7.
32. See 12 C.F.R. App. A to Part 25.
33. In order to be evaluated under the Community Development Test, an
institution must first receive a designation as a wholesale or limited
purpose institution. See Guidelines for Requesting Designation as a
Wholesale or Limited Purpose Institution for Purposes of the Community
Reinvestment Act, OCC Bulletin 96-11 (Jan. 25, 1996).
34. Wholesale and Limited Purpose Institution Procedures at 3-4.
35. See 12 C.F.R. App. A to Part 25.
36. An institution that wishes to be evaluated on the basis of a strategic
plan needs to submit such a plan to its federal banking regulator for
approval. See Guidelines for Requesting Approval for a Strategic Plan Under
the Community Reinvestment Act, OCC Bulletin 96-11 (Jan. 25, 1996).
37. Strategic Plan Examination Procedures at. 2.
38. An institution should indicate its intent in this regard at the time
it initially submits its strategic plan to its federal banking regulator
for approval.


Information has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable.
However, accuracy, adequacy, or completeness is not guaranteed.
Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>