
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B20-60</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA001-000011-B023-292</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/i-procon.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074635 text/html 23909
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Communications/1.1
Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:46:42 GMT
Last-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:26:00 GMT
Content-length: 23716
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Inclusion-ProCon</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">

InclProCnFAQ (Last updated July 23, 1996)<P>

<ul>THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED
EDUCATION (ERIC EC) <BR> The Council for Exceptional Children<BR> 1920
Association Drive<BR>
Reston, VA  20191<BR>
Toll Free:     1-800-328-0272<BR>
TTY:      703-264-9449<BR>
E-mail:        <a href="mailto:ericec@cec.sped.org"> ericec@cec.sped.org</a><BR>
Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm</ul><P>


<B><I> Please discuss the pros and cons of inclusion. </B></I><P>
This file includes information about the pros and cons of inclusion. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic.  There may be a ERIC digest that
provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests
under our listing at <a
href=gopher://ericir.syr.edu:70/11/Clearinghouses/16houses/ERIC_EC> the U.S.
Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. </a><P>

Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database.  These records are a
sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database.  For more
citations on your topic of interest, you may want to <a
href=http://ericir.syr.edu/ERIC/eric.html> search the ERIC database  yourself </a> on
the Internet. <P>

References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited  in
the ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999.  ERIC documents are
available in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your
local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee  through the ERIC
Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. <P>

 References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through  interlibrary loan services, or from article reproduction clearinghouses,  such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850.<P>

<HR> <P>




 ED352778  EC301708 <br>
  Report Card to the Nation on Inclusion in Education of Students with Mental
Retardation.<br>
  Davis, Sharon <br>
  Arc, Arlington, TX.  Oct 1992
  39p.<br>
  Available From: The Arc, 500 E. Border St., Suite 300, Arlington, TX 76010
($2).<br>
  EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141);  EVALUATIVE REPORT (142)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 <br>
  Target Audience: Policymakers; Administrators; Practitioners
  This paper presents a summary of the current status of efforts to include
students with mental retardation in mainstream educational programs.  It begins
with a summary of a New Jersey federal court's ruling requiring more inclusive
education and a discussion of the commitment of the Arc (formerly The
Association for Retarded Citizens of the United States) to greater inclusion.
The benefits of inclusive education for students with and without disabilities
are briefly reviewed.  Summary data (for 1989-90) are then given on placements
nationally in eight different instructional arrangements.  The next sections
provide national and individual state data on the extent to which children with
mental retardation are being educated in the following instructional settings:
regular classes, resource rooms, separate classrooms, and separate schools.  A
summary points out that only 6.7 percent of children with mental retardation
are being educated in regular classrooms and that children with mental
retardation are much more likely than children with other disabilities to be in
segregated settings.  Ranking of states by a weighted formula finds most states
place fewer than 10 percent of children with mental retardation in regular
classes.  The paper ends with a call to action for policymakers and
administrators in the federal, state, and local governments as well as Arc
chapter members.  An appendix provides a table of state data.  (DB)
  Descriptors: Court Litigation; *Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary
Education; *Equal Education; *Mainstreaming; *Mental Retardation; Resource Room
Programs; Special Classes; Special Schools; State Programs; Statistical  Data;
*Student Placement; Trend Analysis <br>
  Identifiers: *Arc (Association for Retarded Citizens)<P>


  ED331261  EC300244 <br>
  Implications of the Regular Education Initiative Debate for School
Psychologists.<br>
  Davis, William E.<br>
  13 Aug 1990   24p.<br> Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American
Psychological Association (98th, Boston, MA, August 13, 1990).<br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120);  CONFERENCE PAPER (150)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Maine <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIESEP91 <br>
  Target Audience: Counselors; Practitioners <br>
  The paper examines critical issues involved in the debate over the Regular
Education Initiative (REI) to merge special and regular education, with
emphasis on implications for school psychologists.  The arguments of proponents
and opponents of the REI are summarized and the lack of involvement by school
psychologists is noted.  The REI is seen to effect school psychologists by a
possibly drastic reduction in the demand for professional psychological
services in the schools, and by the denial of valuable and necessary
psychological services to many special needs students.  Specific issues that
psychologists need to address are: (1) pupil identification and classification;
(2) pupil placement; and (3) changing roles and responsibilities.  School
psychologists are urged to become more involved in the debate because their
expertise is needed, because they have a professional responsibility to
contribute, and because REI could have a direct impact on their future
employment possibilities.  They are urged to become involved at the
professional/organizational level and at the local school level.  Includes 33
references.  (DB)<br>
  Descriptors: *Ancillary School Services; *Disabilities; Educational Change;
Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Handicap Identification;
Labor Market; Psychological Services; Regular and Special Education
Relationship; *School Psychologists; *Staff Role; Student Evaluation; Student
Placement<P>


  EJ387199  EC212326 <br>
  The Regular Education Initiative Debate: Its Promises and Problems.<br>
  Davis, William E.<br>
  Exceptional Children, v55 n5 p440-46 Feb   1989 <br>
  Available From: UMI <br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080);  PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141);
POSITION
PAPER (120)<br>
  Journal Announcement: CIJAUG89 <br>
  This paper analyzes the debate over the merger of special and regular
education through the Regular Education Initiative.  It identifies specific
problems and issues, suggests strategies for overcoming perceived obstacles,
and recommends more substantial involvement of students and special and regular
educators at the local education agency level.  (Author/JDD)<br>
  Descriptors: *Disabilities; *Educational Policy; Educational Practices;
*Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Policy Formation; School
Districts; *Special Education <br>
  Identifiers: *Regular and Special Education Relationship<P>


 ED364046  EC302618 <br>
  Inclusive Schools Movement and the Radicalization of Special Education
Reform.<br>
  Fuchs, Douglas; Fuchs, Lynn S.<br>
  [Jul] 1993
  42p.<br>
  Sponsoring Agency: National Inst. of Child Health and Human Development
(NIH), Bethesda, MD.; Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington,
DC.<br>
  Contract No: H023C10086-92; HD-15052 <br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Tennessee <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEAPR94 <br>
  This critical discussion of current trends in special education examines the
current inclusive schools movement and compares it to the regular education
initiative (REI).  After contrasting the two movements' respective advocates,
goals, tactics, and understanding of and links to general education, the paper
argues that the field's rhetoric has become increasingly strident and its
perspective has become increasingly insular and disassociated from general
education's concerns.  Especially noted is the disproportional influence in the
inclusive schools movement of those concerned with individuals with severe
intellectual disabilities (especially The Association for the Severely
Handicapped) and their rejection of the concept of a continuum of placement
options.  Goals of the inclusionists are seen as focusing on abolishing special
education and promoting social competence (in contrast to REI's emphasis on
preventing academic failure and emphasizing academic standards and
accountability).  Special education is blamed by many in the inclusive schools
movement as being responsible for general education's failure to accommodate
diverse student needs.  Believers in full inclusion are urged to put the
specific needs of individual children first and to compromise with general
education.  However, a pessimistic prediction is proffered concerning the
current movement's ability to forge a productive alliance with general
education.  (Contains 120 references.) (Author/DB)<br>
  Descriptors: Attitudes; *Disabilities; Educational Change; *Educational
Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; *Mainstreaming; Normalization
(Handicapped); Opinions; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; School
Restructuring; *Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; *Special Education;
Trend Analysis <P>


  EJ413309  EC231438 <br>
  Major Accomplishments and Future Directions in Early Childhood Mainstreaming.<br>
  Guralnick, Michael J.<br>
  Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, v10 n2 p1-17 Sum
  1990 <br>
  Theme Issue: Mainstreaming Revisited.<br>
  Report No: ISSN-0271-1214 <br>
  Available From: UMI <br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080);  POSITION PAPER (120)<br>
  Journal Announcement: CIJJAN91 <br>
  The article looks at trends in early childhood mainstreaming of children with
disabilities.  Specific discussions focus on implementation, the perspectives
of parents, and the development of friendships and peer relations in
mainstreamed settings.  A convergence among public policy, educational
practice, and developmental principles and research is noted.  (Author/DB)<br>
  Descriptors: Child Development; *Disabilities; *Early Childhood Education;
Educational Practices; *Educational Trends; *Mainstreaming; Parent Attitudes;
Peer Relaionship; Program Implementation; Public Policy<P>


  ED366145  EC302739 <br>
  Full Inclusion: Analysis of a Controversial Issue.<br>
  Reganick, Karol A.<br>
  [1993]
  24p.<br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070);  POSITION PAPER (120)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEJUN94 <br>
  This review of the literature and analysis looks at the concept of full
inclusion of students with disabilities in the context of the regular education
initiative (REI).  The concept of full inclusion is explained as the use of new
methods, techniques, and strategies to teach students with and without
disabilities in the same classroom.  Identification of assumptions underlying
the issue precede specific arguments both for and against full inclusion.  An
analysis of the validity of both sets of arguments considers attitudes of
educators, parents, and students.  Next, the paper looks at values emphasized
and compromised by the full inclusion model such as increased emphasis on
cooperative learning and social development and possible compromises in the
values of educational excellence and efficiency.  The paper concludes that full
inclusion is the preferred condition but should not be the only possibility.
Also stressed is the importance of specialists, classroom teachers, parents,
and students all participating in student program development and decision
making.  (Contains 212 references.) (DB)<br>
  Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary
Education; *Mainstreaming; Normalization (Disabilities); Opinions; *Regular and
Special Education Relationship; School Restructuring; *Social Integration;
Trend Analysis <br>
  Identifiers: *Inclusive Schools; *Regular Education Inservice Initiative<P>


  ED279140  EC192102 <br>
  Implementation of P.L. 94-142 and Its Accomplishments, Problems and Future
Challenges: A State Education Agency Perspective.<br>
  Schrag, Judy A.<br>
  1987
  36p. In: The Future of Special Education: Proceedings of the Council for
Exceptional Children Symposium (Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, May 1986); see ED 276
245.<br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120);  CONFERENCE PAPER (150)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Washington <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEJUL87 <br>
  Written from the perspective of a state director of special education, the
paper identifies and discusses accomplishments in special education during the
10 years since the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (P.L.  94-142)
was enacted, current problems and issues, and future challenges within the
following key areas of change: (1) access to education for all handicapped
children; (2) continuum of services from birth to adulthood--early childhood
intervention; (3) continuum of services from birth to adulthood--transition
programs for older students with handicaps; (4) least restrictive environment;
(5) special education manpower; (6) monitoring of special education
programs/related services; and (7) programs for gifted students.  Despite the
increasing financial challenges facing special education the future is likely
to bring solidified regular and special education partnerships, programming for
unserved and underserved groups of handicapped students, improved
implementation of the continuum of services delivery approach, increased
effective integration of severely handicapped into the public schools,
maintenance of procedural safeguards along with efforts to reduce the
legalistic burdens on special education, increased emphasis on technical
assistance in state monitoring of special education programs, and continuation
and enhancement of gifted programming.  (DB)<br>
  Descriptors: Access to Education; Accountability; Administrator Attitudes;
*Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; *Educational Trends; Education Work
Relationship; Elementary Secondary Education; Equal Education; Federal
Legislation; Futures (of Society); *Gifted; Labor Force; Mainstreaming;
Normalization (Handicapped); Program Evaluation; Retrenchment; *Special
Education; *Trend Analysis <br>
  Identifiers: Early Intervention; *Education for All Handicapped Children Act<P>


 ED366151  EC302746 <br>
  Education Reform: A Step Forward or a Step Backward for Students with
Learning Disabilities. <br> Proceedings of a Symposium (Atlanta, Georgia, March 7-8,
1992).
  Learning Disabilities Association of America, Pittsburgh, PA.
  Mar 1992
  91p.<br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEJUN94 <br>
  This proceedings document includes 11 papers presented at a 1992 symposium on
the impact of current educational reform initiatives on students with learning
disabilities.  Preceding the papers is a summary of the outcomes of the
symposium, which are enumerated in terms of questions generated, commonalities,
unresolved topics, and next steps.  Papers have the following titles and
authors: "Education Reform: The Future Is a Continuation of Times Past" (Judith
Schrag); "Education Reform: A Step Forward or a Step Backward for Individuals
with Learning Disabilities" (La Nelle S. Gallagher); "Learner-Centered
Psychological Principles: Guidelines for School Redesign and Reform" (Roy
Martin); "Education Reform, Communication, and Learning Disabilities" (Diane
Paul-Brown); "Statement on the Implications of Educational Reform on
Individuals with Learning Disabilities" (Jean Lokerson); "School Reform Must Be
a Step Forward for Students with Learning Disabilities" (Steve Kukic);
"Difference--A Focus of Reform in Education" (William Ellis); "The School as a
Quality Organization for All Students" (Jeffrey Schneider); "The School Board's
Role in Educating Children with Special Needs" (Delores G. McGhee); "The Role
of Teacher Education in the Educational Reform Movement" (Rosemary F. Bowler);
and "The Special/Regular Education Integration Initiative for Students with
Specific Learning Disabilities: Preliminary Findings from a Current
Investigation of Program Change" (Cherry K. Houck).  Some papers include
references.  (DB)<br>
  Descriptors: Administrator Role; Boards of Education; *Educational Change;
Educational Needs; *Educational Policy; Educational Trends; Elementary
Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities; Regular and Special Education
Relationship; Teacher Education; Trend Analysis <br>
  Identifiers: Regular Education Inservice Initiative<P>



  EJ443456  PS519249 <br>
  Educating Students with Severe Handicaps in Regular Classes.<br>
  Alper, Sandra; Ryndak, Diane Lea <br>
  Elementary School Journal, v92 n3 p373-88 Jan   1992 <br>
  Special Issue: Integrating Learners with Disabilities <br>
  ISSN: 0013-5984 <br>
  Available From: UMI <br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080);  REVIEW LITERATURE (070);
PROJECT
DESCRIPTION (141)<br>
  Journal Announcement: CIJAUG92 <br>
  Discusses the growing legal, philosophical, and empirical support for
allowing students with severe handicaps to attend regular classes with peers of
the same age.  Presents advantages of integration for students with and without
handicaps.  Resources for bringing about integration are described.  (GLR)<br>
  Descriptors: Computer Assisted Instruction; Educational Quality; Elementary
Secondary Education; *Equal Education; Friendship; Grouping (Instructional
Purposes); Individualized Education Programs; *Mainstreaming; *Peer Groups;
Peer Teaching; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; *Severe
Disabilities; Social Integration; Special Education; Student Attitudes; Student
Placement; Teacher Role; Tutoring <br>
  Identifiers: Education for All Handicapped Children Act; McGill Action
Planning System; Peer Modeling; Reintegration; Zero Rejection Concept<P>


  ED353764  EC301798 <br>
  Philosophy, Differences, and Education.<br>
  Baumgart, Diane <br>
  1992
  15p.; In: Bunsen, Teresa D., Ed., And Others. Forum on Emerging Trends in
Special Education: Implications for Personnel Preparation (4th, Washington,
DC, April 9-10, 1992); see EC 301 793.<br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; Idaho <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEJUN93 <br>
  This paper argues that the philosophic assumptions underlying full inclusion
efforts for students with severe disabilities and other restructuring movements
are actually barriers to "best practice" implementation, and an alternative
perspective based on social relations is offered.  First two different
perspectives on disability, the "different person" perspective (which sees
differences as inherent and immutable) and the rights perspective (which views
all individuals as entitled to the same rights, services, and outcomes) are
compared.  Both perspectives are seen to result in a dilemma and be
inappropriate to guide current restructuring.  In contrast, the social
relations perspective views differences in the context of relationships which
are expected to change with time or as the comparison basis changes.  This
perspective is applied to a case in which an emphasis on gender differences in
provision of maternity leave is replaced with relation-based provision of
parental or family leave.  Other examples apply the social relations
perspective to inclusion of students with severe disabilities and the provision
of bilingual/bicultural education to all students and not just to the Spanish-
speaking minority.  (Contains 15 references.) (DB)<br>
  Descriptors: *Access to Education; *Educational Philosophy; Educational
Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Human Relations; *Individual
Differences; Interpersonal Relationship; Limited English Speaking;
*Mainstreaming; Models; *Severe Disabilities<P>


  ED365051  EC302676 <br>
  An Analysis of Student Outcomes Associated with Educational Programs
Representing Full Inclusion and Special Class Models of Integration.<br>
  Beckstead, Susan Porter; And Others <br>
  San Francisco State Univ., CA. California Research Inst.  22 Jan 1992
  33p.<br>
  Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services
(ED), Washington, DC.<br>
  Contract No: G0087C3056-90; G0087C3058 <br>
  EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage.<br>
  Language: English <br>
  Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141)<br>
  Geographic Source: U.S.; California <br>
  Journal Announcement: RIEMAY94 <br>
  This descriptive study formulates a comprehensive picture of the structure,
educational practices, and associated positive student outcomes of integrated
programs for students with severe disabilities across a variety of California
communities.  Three of the seven participating programs represented the full
inclusion model of integration implemented at the elementary level.  Four of
the programs represented special class models of integration; two were located
at elementary schools and two at high schools.  The study presents descriptive
information on each of the models of integration, with quantitative measures of
positive student outcomes.  Outcome measures in this preliminary study were
restricted to the quality of the students' individualized education programs
(IEP), the extent of integrated activities for each child across the school
day, and the extent and type of interactions occurring between the students
with disabilities and their nondisabled schoolmates.  Findings included the
following: (1) the high school special class model received the highest rating
for quality of IEPs; (2) students in the full inclusion programs spent an
average of 94 percent of school hours in integrated settings; and (3) the
amount of reciprocal interaction was almost identical across the three models.
(Contains 37 references.) (DB)<br>
  Descriptors: *Delivery Systems; Elementary Education; Elementary School
Students; High Schools; High School Students; Individualized Education Programs;
Interaction Process Analysis; *Mainstreaming; Models; Normalization
(Disabilities); *Outcomes of Education; Peer Relationship; *Program
Effectiveness; *Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; *Special Classes <br>
  Identifiers: California<P>

<hr>
<a href="inclus-x.htm"> Internet Resources </a><p>
<a href="/ericec/ld-sped.htm"> Internet Listservs </a><P>

<a href="#top"> Top of Page </a>
<img src="/gif/space.gif" HEIGHT=1 WIDTH=18 BORDER=0>
<a href="/er-menu.htm"> Back to ERIC Menu </a>
<img src="/gif/space.gif" HEIGHT=1 WIDTH=18 BORDER=0>
<a href="/home.htm"> Back to CEC Home Page </a>

<P>
<hr>
<center><i>copyright &#169; 1996 <br>
ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education <br>
URL:  http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm</i></center><P>
</BODY> </HTML>
</DOC>