
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B38-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA074-000493-B039-349</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi69.html 205.156.212.5 19970122005645 text/html 44400
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:54:49 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:14 GMT
Content-length: 44213
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi69.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 17, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Network Marketers Give POS Center Stage</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1172 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>AT&T Disconnects Itself From The Busy Smart Card Lines</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1057 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Visa Leads The Canadian Prepaid Push</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1078 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Another President Departs From Debit Processor Deluxe Data</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(490 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NACHA Adds More Pieces To The Nationwide EBT Puzzle</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Blockbuster Has A Casting Call For Its Corporate Prepaid Card</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(488 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>California Surchargers Survive A State Sales Tax Scare</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(532 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Debit-Conscious Australia Says G'Day To Prepaid Cards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(904 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Quick Hits</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(352 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

Network Marketers Give POS Center Stage


Having been given center stage by many shared regional electronic funds
transfer networks, point of sale is on track to become one of EFT's greatest
marketing hits.  Looking to further spur transaction volume, which has
increased by more than 77% over the last two years, networks are expanding
their direct debit marketing budgets while incorporating non-traditional
vehicles to expand their geographic reach.

More regional networks are offering incentives and developing education
programs to generate activity, while minimizing use of the more expensive
television, radio and newspaper advertising.  "The cost for television
advertising is way over our budget for effectively communicating in a
seven-state region," says Cindy Ballard, senior vice president of
Houston-based Pulse, the sixth-largest network.  "Instead, we're working with
banks to help them market to their merchant customers in all areas."

Pulse is focusing on the acquirer side by holding retailer workshops and
making joint sales calls with independent sales organizations to sign new
merchants to accept on-line cards.  The network switched strategies following
a 1994 TV campaign in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, which increased network
awareness but did not change consumer usage habits.

Also moving away from media advertising is Chicago-based Cash Station, the
10th-largest POS network, which aired television commercials after launching
direct debit in 1992, but now is working more closely with merchants and
members to spur activity.

Cash Station expects to expand an incentive program it tested at an Illinois
Kmart Superstore last year, in which coupons were distributed to consumers for
discounts when the Cash Station card was used for purchases.  Clerks also were
given prizes if they prompted customers to pay with the Cash Station card.
"Television is very effective when a new product is introduced, but awareness
of POS debit in our area already is high," says Cathy Alexander, Cash Station
senior vice president.  "But there still is an absence of knowledge on the
part of members and merchants."

Indeed, even with network POS transaction volumes soaring, hundreds of
thousands of retailers still do not accept debit cards for payment.  Many
merchants that acquire debit transactions, meanwhile, do not adequately market
the products to customers.  Thus, networks are devising methods to spur
retailers to promote debit.

Louisiana-based GulfNet, the 14th-largest network, has devoted more than half
of its 1996 marketing budget to POS, up 10% from last year, with most of the
funds being used to expand merchant debit acceptance.  The network wants to
expand distribution of incentive coupons at the point of sale to consumers who
paid for purchases with a check or credit card.  The coupons give cardholders
$2 off their next purchase with a GulfNet card.  Schwegmann Giant Supermarkets
ran the promotion for a month last year and $15,000 worth of coupons were
cashed in, says Del Tonguette, GulfNet president.

"Offering incentives is key because studies show that if you can get people to
use the card twice you, might create habitual users," says Ronald Rawson,
president of San Francisco-based R.  C.  Rawson Co., a consulting firm
specializing in EFT awareness, education and usage.  GulfNet also will focus
on expanding network signage at the point of sale and assisting independent
sales organizations in signing retailers.  All but four of GulfNet's 2,000
retailers were recruited by ISOs.

But while many networks have devised strategies for marketing POS at the local
level, some still expect to use the media to reach specific markets.
Virginia-based Most, the fifth-largest network, which attributes much of its
60% increase in POS volume last year to radio and billboard advertisements,
will again use the vehicles to emphasize the different applications tied to
the Most card.  "Television is too costly," says Mary Kilby, Most senior vice
president.  "We believe in supporting a brand across a broad region, but we
can only support TV in one or two markets."

Multiple Methods

Most also expects to work with a product manufacturer in distributing savings
coupons to consumers if they buy a specific product with the Most card.  Last
year more than 5 million coupons were distributed between September and
December for savings on Haagan Daz ice cream.  The network, which advertised
in a minor league baseball park last year, also is considering expanding its
sports marketing activities.  "We have 94% total awareness and 80% POS
awareness, but we still have to look at increasing POS usage, which is only
40%," Kilby says.

Yet, while many networks have diminished their media advertising, some still
have not abandoned the airways as a prime marketing source.  Florida-based
Honor, the fourth-largest network, will advertise from August to December on
such cable stations as Cable News Network, ESPN, A&E, TNT, USA and The Weather
Channel.  Honor is concentrating on cable because it is less costly than
network television and many viewers have the same demographics as active EFT
users, such as being upwardly mobile and early adopters of new technology.

The network will use 85% of its marketing budget for POS this year, up from
50% in 1995.  Honor's activities are being financed by the network's 6-cent
acquirer-paid POS interchange fee.  While 3 cents of the fee is passed on to
card issuers, the network maintains 3 cents for POS promotions.  "POS has the
greatest potential for growth so we promote it more than ATMs," says Elizabeth
Storm, Honor director of marketing.

Also using television in its POS marketing mix is Michigan-based Magic Line,
the 7th-largest network.  Magic Line will run POS TV commercials this spring
and fall in Michigan and Indiana.  The network also will hold seminars to
educate merchants on direct debit, and is considering reinstating an incentive
program that ran for eight weeks last year in which merchant acquirers
received cash awards for each new POS device they deployed.  Of Magic Line's
$1.1 million marketing budget, $400,000 will be spent on POS in 1996.

Some networks, meanwhile, are distributing their marketing dollars in
accordance with the volume generated by the different applications.  San
Diego-based Star System, the largest regional network, will use 30% of its
advertising budget for POS.  Star switched more than 25 million ATM
transactions in December and over 12 million POS transactions.

Star will promote POS on cable television and radio this year, and expand its
marketing in Oregon and Washington.  The majority of Star's marketing will
focus on the network itself and not a specific application.

Another major player incorporating radio advertising is New Jersey-based NYCE,
the second-largest network, which plans to run two 60-second spots for an
eight week period across its entire Northeast region.  NYCE also is devising a
co-op program with merchants which could include electronic coupons or a
loyalty program.

NYCE expanded its market when it merged with Connecticut-based Yankee 24 in
1994 "Radio reaches our target audience, which is typically younger people on
the move," says Scott Strug, NYCE director of marketing.

Other major networks, such as Washington-based The Exchange, Delaware-based
MAC and Massachusetts-based X-Press 24 still are finalizing their marketing
plans.  L





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

AT&T Disconnects Itself From The Busy Smart Card Lines


While foreign and domestic vendors are flooding the U.S.  smart card market to
position for an expected chip card boom, a major player is departing.  Debit
Card News has learned that AT&T Corp.  is selling its smart card business
unit, which develops and markets contactless card systems.

AT&T is reportedly looking for a buyer because the unit did not fit into the
company's recent reorganization and was not profitable, sources say.  AT&T
reportedly will finish its existing smart card contracts, but will not take on
new customers.  An AT&T spokesperson would not confirm the planned sale.

The move to sell the smart card unit follows AT&T's 1995 announcement that the
global telecommunications and technology company is streamlining its operation
for greater efficiencies.  AT&T is creating three distinct companies for long
distance services, technology and systems, and computer hardware
manufacturing.  The AT&T Smart Cards business unit was created in 1982.

Companies using AT&T contactless smart cards include Delta Airlines, which has
a ticketless boarding program for its Northeast shuttle, and New York-based
Chemical Bank, which is running an in-house contactless card pilot with 300
employees.  Both projects are expected to continue.  Drew University in
Madison, N.J., suspended an AT&T contactless card pilot last year, but is
considering reinstating it.

While most payments industry players are gravitating to a contact card system
in which a smart card is swiped through a card reader, AT&T is marketing
contactless smart cards that must be passed in front of, or near, a card
reader.  While contactless cards are best suited for applications where
transaction speed is crucial, such as persons going through turnstiles in a
train station, the systems are more expensive to implement.  Contactless cards
and terminals are estimated to cost more than twice that of contact cards.
Cards range from $10 to $20, and terminals from $200 to $1,000.

Change Of Plans

AT&T's reported plan to sell its smart card unit follows its announcement last
spring that it would license its contactless technology in hopes of making it
the world's standard for cashless wallets and electronic commerce.  At that
time, AT&T said it was negotiating with three companies in the U.S.  and
abroad.  However, Italy-based Olivetti Co.  reportedly was the only company to
license AT&T's technology, which it used to pilot contactless cards on the
Autostrada, Italy's main freeway.

"When AT&T decided to license its technology to other companies, that was a
signal that they were looking for the way out," says an industry observer
familiar with AT&T.

Indeed, a lack of payments industry interest in contactless technology could
have led to AT&T's decision to sell its operation.  Most observers say AT&T's
system was too expensive for widespread use in supporting stored-value card
programs, which are typically positioned to replace low-value cash
transactions.

In addition, more efficient contactless systems already are being marketed.
For instance, while AT&T's design requires cards to be brought within inches
of a reader, radio frequency-based contactless systems only require cards to
come within a few feet of a reader.  Analysts believe AT&T's design is too
similar to swipe technology.  "Contactless smart card technology is great, but
AT&T never got any real applicable products off the ground," says Jerome
Svigals, a Redwood City, Calif.-based smart card consultant.

A Brighter Future

But while AT&T had problems expanding its smart card business, analysts say
there still is a future for contactless cards.  Indeed, some players that have
encountered difficulties with contactless cards still are planning to utilize
the technology.  Drew University discontinued an AT&T contactless campus card
program that was being used by about 2,500 students and faculty after a year
because the cards were too weak to support high usage.  However, Drew is
considering reinstating the technology with more resilient cards.

Drew's cards were used for identification, stored value and to pay for meals,
but problems stemmed from cardholders' mistreatment of the plastic.  "The
technology worked fine, but students shove their cards in their book bags and
jeans pockets and if it doesn't work, then a student doesn't get a meal," says
Harry Scarpa, Drew University director of purchasing.  Drew is currently using
a mag-stripe campus card.

Still, Drew was impressed with the potential for supporting multiple functions
on the AT&T contactless card.  Drew's chip cards 3 kilobytes of memory,
compared to the one kilobyte of memory in most contact cards.

In addition to cost and reliability issues, contactless card acceptance also
is hindered by a smart card industry that still is evolving.  New applications
that generate additional fee revenue are needed to support a more expensive
card product,such as contactless cards, says Timothy McNaughton, manager of
pilots and implementation at Royal Bank of Canada.  Royal Bank will issue
contact smart cards for the Mondex electronic purse program that will be
launched in Canada later this year.

But while the payments industry is not ready to embrace contactless cards, the
technology is still expected to find a niche in the transportation sector.
The San Diego-based Cubic Automatic Revenue Collection Group, which designs
and implements contactless systems, reports that contactless cards permit more
than 72 persons to move through turnstiles in two minutes, compared to about
60 with contact cards.

Indeed, a number of metropolitan transit authorities, including those in New
York and San Francisco, are reportedly considering implementing contactless
systems.  Washington, D.C.'s Metropolitan Area Transit Authority already is
testing contactless smart cards for rail, bus and parking services.  More than
1,000 employees are involved in the one-year pilot.  The Washington's transit
authority also is negotiating with North Carolina-based First Union for the
cards to be used in an open contact environment (Debit Card News, 11/30/95).

Easier Access

Meanwhile, enhancements to contact smart card systems are expected to make it
easier for card issuers to upgrade their products for contactless smart card
applications.  One method under study would be to place card jackets with
contactless capability over contact cards.

"One reason why the industry decided on contact cards was because it is much
easier to make a contact card contactless than vice versa," says David Lott,
senior associate at Dove Associates, an Atlanta-based payments consulting
firm.

And Visa and MasterCard, which are supporting contact smart card programs, say
market demand could result in hybrid products.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

Visa Leads The Canadian Prepaid Push


When the SmartCash stored-value venture was announced last summer, a major
payments participant was conspicuously absent from its proposed ownership
list:  Visa International.  But while SmartCash and its participants, such as
MasterCard International, Electronic Payment Services and Chemical Bank, still
are cementing the business plans for their nationwide stored-value business,
Visa has taken a lead role in expanding smart card activity in North America.

The California-based bank card association recently signed four Canadian
institutions to pilot its Visa Cash stored-value product.  And with its
sponsorship of a smart card program that will be launched in conjunction with
the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Visa has become the instrumental player
in generating prepaid card activity in the region.

But the North American programs are just one piece of Visa's worldwide smart
card initiative.  Visa already is piloting Visa Cash in Australia, and plans
to have the product issued in markets around the globe.  Indeed, Visa expects
its chip card activities to expand in six regions this year.  "Visa Cash not
only will grow in various parts of Canada, but it will expand over time in
each of our operating regions," says Gaylon Howe, Visa senior vice president
of stored value products.

However, the most recent Visa activity is occurring in Canada, where Toronto
Dominion Bank, Scotiabank, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union and Les
casisses Desjardins, will be piloting Visa Cash.  Toronto Dominion and
Vancouver City Savings went live in December.

Toronto Dominion is issuing 10,000 disposable Visa Cash cards to 5,000
employees in Toronto, who can purchase cards through a card dispensing machine
at bank headquarters for use in a cafeteria.  Up to 15 card readers are
expected to be installed at retail locations over the next several months,
including Michel's Baguette, MMMarvelous MMMuffins, and The UCS Group
convenience stores.

Adding Income

In addition, Toronto Dominion expects to eventually add other retailers, pilot
a rechargeable Visa Cash card, add smart card features to existing debit and
credit cards and support a loyalty program.  "We see the stored-value product
creating a new revenue stream for the bank," says Steve Phillips, Toronto
Dominion manager of access cards and smart card development.  "Visa research
shows consumers are willing to pay a fee to obtain cards, so we wanted to get
our feet wet and generate technical and business expertise with a pilot."  The
test is expected to last six to 10 months.  The bank expects to eventually
roll out the card to other provinces, Phillips says.

Stored-value card activity also is under way at Vancouver City Savings, which
is issuing 1,200 Visa Cash cards in $20 denominations to its employees in the
Vancouver area.  The cards can be used for purchases at a local McDonald's, a
Subway shop, a bank cafeteria, a gift shop at the Science World children's
museum, and a Starbucks coffee shop.

Vancouver City Savings is one of Canada's largest credit unions with 250,000
members.  "We compete with larger banks and feel we can get ahead in the
market with stored value," a spokesperson says.  Vancouver City's pilot will
run through the spring.  The credit union plans to eventually roll out Visa
Cash throughout British Columbia.

Still developing its chip card program is Toronto-based Scotiabank, which
plans to launch a six-month in-house pilot in early February at two bank sites
in Toronto with 5,000 employees.  Employees can use the cards at the bank
cafeteria, MMMarvelous MMMuffins and Starbucks Coffee shops.  "We want to be
ready when the market moves," says Bob Lounsbury, Scotiabank vice president of
card products and marketing.  "But we don't yet see stored-value cards as
providing an opportunity to steal customers away from other banks."

Quebec's largest credit union, Les caisses Desjardins, will launch a Visa Cash
pilot by March in a yet to be determined location.  The credit union is
scouting for an area with a high concentration of stores that deal in
small-value transactions, such as in an office complex.  Program details are
expected to be finalized by the end of the month.

Acquirer-paid interchange pricing for Visa Cash in Canada has not yet been
determined, though each bank will set its own fees, participants say.
Consumer pricing has not been set, but employees will not pay extra card fees
during the test.

The Canadian financial institutions are positioning to garner a piece of the
large market for low-value transactions.  Visa estimates that transactions of
under $10 account for $75 billion annually in Canada.

Bank executives believe Canadians will embrace stored-value cards because many
consumers already are active debit users.  For instance, Toronto-based
Interac, the national on-line point-of-sale network that was launched in 1990,
has doubled its POS transaction volume in the last year.

More than 7 million Interac cards have been issued up, from 5 million in 1994.
Interac had 50 million POS transactions in December, up from 25 million a year
earlier.  Yet, Interac executives do not expect stored-value activity to cut
into on-line volume because stored value is designed to replace cash or
low-ticket transactions.  The average Interac purchase is about $47.

Competitive Pressures

But while Visa Cash is expected to operate alongside Interac, the stored-value
product could still face strong competition from the London-based Mondex
electronic purse program.  Mondex has signed Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce-two of the largest institutions in the country-and
Hongkong Bank, to issue cards.  Mondex plans to test its product in Guelph,
Ontario, during the second half of 1996.  Guelph has 100,000 residents and
1,200 merchants (Debit Card News, 11/15).

Mondex is positioned as a cash replacement and cards can be loaded with value
at ATMs, bank counters and telephones.  Consumers also can transfer value
among cards, and send value electronically from the point of sale to the bank.

"We are looking to get practical experience from an actual market test, which
shows we are moving faster to bring smart cards to the marketplace," says
Timothy N.  McNaughton, Royal Bank of Canada's manager of pilots and
implementation.

Though some observers believe Visa Cash has an advantage with name awareness,
analysts say both companies face the challenge of getting consumers to try a
new stored-value product.  "Visa's brand recognition gives it an edge, but
both products are starting from scratch," says David Lott, senior of Dove
Associates, a payments consulting firm.  "There is ample room in Canada for
both products."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

Another President Departs From Debit Processor Deluxe Data


For the second time in less than three years, one of the debit industry's most
renown processors, Deluxe Data Systems, is working to keep its course in the
midst of a leadership upheaval.  Milwaukee-based Deluxe has named John B.
Benton as interim president, replacing James E.  McGowan.  Benton is chairman
and chief executive officer of Benton International Corp., a Torrance,
Calif.-based consulting firm which develops processing systems.

McGowan exits his position just 28 months after being named president.
McGowan replaced Alan G.  Brown, who reportedly was forced out in 1993.  In a
statement released by Deluxe, Gus Blanchard, president and chief executive
officer of parent company Deluxe Corp., said that a number major changes and
additions to product offerings are planned, and "I felt this major expansion
required new leadership to move us to a higher plane."

Deluxe's new growth strategy, which was developed after a six-month analysis,
features four major initiatives including enhancing the company's payments
protection capabilities and creating larger information data bases.  The aim
is for Deluxe to function as a technology partner and act as a link between
financial institutions and their customers.  Client institutions would be able
to electronically hook their customers to a variety of banking application,
such as being able to check balances from a home computer.

Other initiatives involve restructuring the company's catalog and direct
marketing units, and a major cost reduction and asset redeployment program to
help finance Deluxe's expansion plans.

This development of new initiatives and the replacement of McGowan follows a
rough period for Deluxe.  The company has faced difficult times in recent
years as EFT networks, Deluxe's Data's major clients, have taken their
processing in-house.  For instance, New Jersey-based NYCE, the second-largest
shared network and a former Deluxe client, began processing its own
transactions in 1992

Deluxe also lost a major processing customers in 1990 when Brown Deer,
Wis.-based Tyme, the 22nd--largest network, switched from Deluxe to M&I Data
Services.  Tyme, however, still is a software customer of Deluxe.

Some analysts also say that Deluxe has made some questionable business
decisions in recent years.  In 1994, the company purchased Louisville-based
Financial Alliance Processing Services, one of the industry's fastest growing
credit card processors that offers credit and debit services to about 150
financial institutions.  Some observers believe Deluxe overpaid for Financial
Alliance.

Other observers attribute Deluxe's situation to McGowan's inexperience in EFT.
Though McGowan spent 18 years with IBM and was an executive with three
software and technology firms, he was new to the electronic payments industry
when hired by Deluxe.  McGowan has has been placed on special assignment,
reporting to Blanchard.

"I'm not surprised by this because McGowan was in over his head," says Donald
Atkinson, president of Atkinson & Associates, an Irving, Texas-based data
processing consultant.  Some observers also were surprised by the suddenness
of McGowan's departure and the naming of Benton as interim president.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

NACHA Adds More Pieces To The Nationwide EBT Puzzle


Seven months after stating plans to develop national electronic benefits
transfer operating rules, the National Automated Clearinghouse Associ-ation's
electronic benefits transfer council is moving forward.  The council has
developed a set of preliminary rules to clarify the roles of such EBT players
as banks, processors and state governments.  NACHA also has started
negotiations to acquire a logo for a national EBT network.

The EBT council, which is working to create a nationwide EBT system, expects
to release the final version of the rules in March.  State EBT consortiums,
such as the seven-state Northeast Coalition and the eight-state Southern
Alliance of States, plan to incorporate the NACHA rules in their operating
procedures.

"We are trying to create an interoperable environment for EBT so it makes
sense to incorporate these standards," says Daniel Berry, EBT coordinator for
New York State, which is part of the Northeast Coalition.

NACHA's EBT Council consists of representatives from state governments, banks,
processing companies and shared regional EFT networks.  The council is working
with the U.S.  Treasury and the Federal EBT task force to create
specifications for a national EBT program.

The NACHA rules are designed to clarify a wide range of EBT issues.  They
state, for instance, that scrip machines in retail locations can be used to
dispense benefits as long as the device is treated as point-of-sale terminals
and not ATMs.  Scrip machines dispense vouchers that are redeemed for cash by
a store clerk.  Networks have different fee schedules for ATM and POS
transactions.

While some observers say the EBT Council's operating rules will duplicate
existing EFT operating rules, participants say the NACHA group is helping to
simplify procedures.

In addition to developing rules, the EBT council is negotiating with directors
of the defunct Quest shared regional EFT network to use the Quest logo for a
national EBT mark.  The deal is expected to be completed within several weeks.

Kentucky-based Quest was merged into Delaware-based MAC, the third largest
shared regional EFT network last July, but the Quest name is still owned by
Transaction Services Co., which represents seven Kentucky-area financial
institutions.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

Blockbuster Has A Casting Call For Its Corporate Prepaid Card


One of The Blockbuster Entertainment Group's newest releases, a prepaid debit
card for consumers, has been re-edited.  Blockbuster has shelved plans to
issue cards to consumers and is concentrating on signing corporate customers
to distribute the stored-value products.

Blockbuster is aggressively working to sign product manufacturers, restaurants
and other merchants to purchase and disperse the prepaid cards to their
customers as a marketing incentive.  Already, Planet Hollywood and publisher
Simon and Schuster have formed alliances with Blockbuster.  Simon and Schuster
is including the disposable magnetic-stripe cards in books sold at college
bookstores.  The co-branded cards can be used for purchases at 3,300
Blockbuster Video, 520 Blockbuster Music and 330 Discovery Zone children's
play-area locations in the U.S.

By targeting the corporate customer, Florida-based Blockbuster has turned its
attention from the consumer market.  Blockbuster began testing its disposable
Value Card in Salt Lake City last summer at 25 Blockbuster Video, Blockbuster
Music and Discovery Zone locations (Debit Card News, 9/7).  The company
reportedly invested more than $1 million in hardware and software for the
program.  Consumers paid $15 for cards that held $20 of value.

Yet, despite strong consumer interest in the cards, Blockbuster did not expand
the program outside of Utah.  More than 100,000 Blockbuster Value Cards were
sold in three weeks and Blockbuster said last fall that the company was
encouraged by the test.  The card was expected to cut transaction times at the
checkout, increase the average ticket size and generate interest income on
unspent funds that are held by Blockbuster.

A Blockbuster spokesperson now says the Salt Lake City program was primarily
designed to test the stored-value operating system and that the company now is
putting all its efforts "into the corporate direction."

In addition to signing product manufacturers and service companies,
Blockbuster is marketing its stored-value GiftCard as a vehicle through which
companies can distribute bonuses to their employees.  Blockbuster also is
positioning the cards as a collectible, which can feature designs depicting a
wide range of themes, such as pictures of hit movies when the films are
released on video.

Most recently, Blockbuster sold GiftCards to consumers during the holiday
season to use as gift certificates.  The Blockbuster spokesperson says using a
mag-stripe card as an electronic gift certificate cut the company's processing
costs and the vehicle is expected to be used again this year.  The GiftCard is
expected to be marketed internationally.

Blockbuster stored-value transactions are processed by Omaha-based First Data
Corp.'s Card Establishment Services/NaBANCO unit, the company's credit card
processor.  During a transaction, the cards are swiped through the stores'
credit card devices and sent to CES/NaBanco for authorization and processing.
Cardholders can check remaining account balances at the point of sale.

The move to market a stored-value product is just Blockbuster's latest
activity in the card market.  Last spring Blockbuster rolled out a co-branded
Visa credit card with NationsBank.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

California Surchargers Survive A State Sales Tax Scare


The threatened extinction of the surcharge in California has subsided for the
time being.  The state has backed away from a plan to collect sales tax on
consumer fees that are attached to on-line point-of-sale and automated teller
machine transactions.

The measure, which was proposed last summer by the California Board of
Equalization after an audit of the Atlantic Richfield Co.'s Prestige Stations
Inc.  subsidiary, could have cost companies that surcharge millions of dollars
in back taxes.  The regulation also could have resulted in a decrease in
merchant surchargers, and hefty consumer fee increases to compensate for the
taxes, analysts believe.

California determined last year that it was owed taxes from consumer
surcharges on transactions generated at 280 Arco service stations in
California.  Prestige Stations Inc.  operates Arco's 400 company-owned
stations in California, Oregon, Nevada, Washington and Arizona.  Arco charges
consumers 25 cents to initiate on-line debit POS transactions.  While Arco and
California officials would not state the amount of taxes that were in
question, which date back several years, observer believes it was in the
millions of dollars.

The Board of Equalization last month ruled that Arco and other surcharges
should not be subjected to a sales tax because the consumer fee is more of a
financing charge than the sales price of an item, says Dennis Fox, supervisor
of audit planning for the California Board of Equalization.

The board recently published regulations for EFT fees which state that vendors
could be taxed on surcharges if, for instance, the extra fee is not stated
separately; if the consumer could not purchase the property at a price which
does not include the amount of the fee; or if the fee is calculated as a
percentage of the sales price.  The provision is expected to become law in
about four months, following public hearings and a comment period.

By excluding surcharges from the tax code, California has kept a strong
merchant revenue pipeline in place.  Anaheim-based Carl's Jr., for instance,
one of the U.S.'s largest on-line POS merchants with close to 2,000 terminals
in more than 500 outlets, surcharges consumers 50 cents a transaction on
purchases.  Indeed, Fox said the fast-food industry lobbied the state to drop
its plan to tax surchargers.

While Carl's Jr.  reportedly implemented the fee to discourage consumers from
initiating small purchases just to get $40 or more in cash back, analysts
believe the fast-food outlet, as well as Arco, is generating strong income
from the fee.

"This removed a significant barrier to the imposition of surcharges in
California," says Eric Bell, vice president of Los Angeles-based First
Interstate, a leading merchant acquiring institution.  "Most of the surcharge
revenue was pure gravy."

But while California point-of-sale surchargers might have dodged a major tax
bullet, the merchants could be facing another obstacle later this year when
California-based Visa's Interlink national POS network is expected to ban all
merchants from surcharging transactions.

Though the network outlawed surcharging as of November 1993, retailers that
were surcharging prior to that date are allowed to continue the practice until
this November.  The Visa board could address the issue this year, analysts
believe.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

Debit-Conscious Australia Says G'Day To Prepaid Cards


While Australia may be best known for its kangaroos and koala bears, some
North American payment players might also be equating the country with guinea
pigs.  For Australia has become a major test site for new and advanced debit
products that eventually will be employed in the U.S., including smart cards.

A stored-value card test is under way on the Gold Coast, a tourist area on the
east coast of Australia, by Visa International.  MasterCard International will
launch a pilot in Canberra, Australia's capital, in March.  The smart card
pilots will help determine how stored-value programs will be designed and
promoted in the U.S.  and other regions.

"The Australia pilot will help us leverage what we learn from consumers,
merchants and member banks about product positioning and marketing," says
Walter Greenberg, MasterCard senior vice president and stored-value project
manager.

Debit Savvy

The bank card associations are using Australia as a test site because research
found that the majority of Australian consumers are willing to use
stored-value smart cards in lieu of cash.  Australians already have embraced
on-line debit cards, with 17 million debit cards issued to the population of
17 million.  Last year, Australian taxis began accepting MasterCard's Maestro
global POS network cards for payment in Sydney.

But while both associations are expanding into Australia, they are following
different routes.  Visa's Visa Cash product currently is just distributed as a
disposable stored-value card, but a reloadable application is expected to be
rolled out in February.

Meanwhile, MasterCard will offer a rechargeable MasterCard Cash card when it
rolls out a stored-value program in March.  "We started with the disposable
card to gain critical mass," says Bruce Mansfield, Visa's head of chip cards
in Australia.  "Because reloadable cards feature bank logos, we didn't want
our banks to compete against each other at the beginning of the pilot."

MasterCard, which is marketing its MasterCard Cash product to consumers this
month via direct mail, will link its stored-value smart card to existing
credit and debit accounts.  MasterCard is not issuing disposable cards for the
Australian pilot.  "Our research shows that consumers want enhancements to
existing cards, rather than have more cards in their wallet," Greenberg says.

Targeting Tourists

Australian stored-value activity was kicked off by Visa in mid-November on the
Gold Coast, an area that attracts nearly 3 million visitors per year.  The
smart cards are being issued by five major financial institutions:  Australia
New Zealand Banking Group Ltd., Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Credit Union
Services Corp.  Australia Ltd., National Australia Bank and Westpac Banking
Corp.

The banks have issued more than 10,000 cards and installed 250 card-reading
terminals at an estimated 100 retail locations.  Visa is implementing a
marketing campaign which includes print advertisements and billboards.
Approximately 150,000 cards will be issued during the year-long pilot.

The Visa Cash cards are being sold at about 50 locations, including movie
theaters, theme parks, hotels and financial institution branches.  Reloadable
cards will be added in February and cardholders will be able to add value
through automated teller machines and at the point of sale.

Visa also expects to have 1,000 smart card terminals installed by February.
Most merchants, which include Kmart, Target, McDonald's, 7-Eleven, Shell Oil
and Bond University's book and coffee shop, are situated near two major
shopping centers.  Three theme parks, including Sea World, will accept cards
at about 150 terminals and are expected to go live this month.

About a half-dozen card dispensing kiosks also will be tested and the pilot
might incorporate home-based telephones to add value.  An upgrade to allow
cardholders to store multiple currencies at sites around the world is planned
for 1997.  Pricing for reloadable cards could range from 50 cents per
transaction to $10 annually.

While Mansfield will not disclose current Visa Cash volume, he projects that
activity will reach 25,000 transactions per week in March.  Acquirer-paid
interchange pricing will be determined by each bank.

Meanwhile, MasterCard is just as aggressive in expanding its Australian
program.  MasterCard has been signing merchants since October and expects more
than 200 retailers and 300 smart card terminals to be involved in its pilot in
Belcommen, a suburb of Canberra.  Retailers are paying for terminal
installations.

Gauging Interest

MasterCard Cash issuers-Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, Westpac Banking Corp.  and Standard Charter Bank-will run
month-long, in-house tests with up to 500 employees to strengthen employee
understanding of the product and to test the stored-value operating system.
The employee pilots also will test different consumer pricing.  The banks
expect to issue up to 10,000 cards for the nine-month consumer pilot.
MasterCard banks began a direct mail campaign this month for MasterCard Cash.

Final pricing schedules will be completed by March.  While Australian
regulations restrict banks from publicly disclosing consumer and merchant
pricing, research shows that customers prefer monthly or annual fees, rather
than per-transaction fees.

MasterCard Cash cards will be distributed through bank branches and
cardholders can reload value onto the card's computer chip by transferring
funds from bank accounts at ATMs and at the point of sale.  Future
enhancements could include loading value through home-based telephones.
Full-function kiosks also will be installed, where customers can check
balances and transaction information.

In addition to their Australian effort, Visa and MasterCard also expect to
sign issuers in New Zealand.  L





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DEBIT CARD NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 17, 1996

Quick Hits


Visa Stored Value Hits South America

Visa International is expanding into South America with its Visa Cash
stored-value product.  Thirteen Burger King restaurants in Buenos Aires,
Argentina, are accepting the smart cards as part of a six-month test thatbegan
last week.  Visa also is testing Visa Cash in an unspecified number of
McDonald's restaurants in Colombia.

The Buenos Aires project includes 52 merchants, including drug stores,
newspaper stands and taxis.

Debit Puts A Tiny Dent In Bank Branch Activity

Despite expanding debit card activity, bank branches still are capturing the
bulk of retail transactions.  Tampa-based Payment Systems Inc.  reports that
in 1995, 52% of all retail transactions were initiated at financial
institution branches, down just 2% from 1994.  The total volume of
transactions conducted at a traditional branch increased by 6% between 1994
and 1995.

Meanwhile, the share of all transactions conducted at automated teller
machines increased from 22% to 26%, with ATM volumes increasing by 32%, PSI
reports.  Phone banking's share of total transactions increased from 12% to
15%, with a 39% volume increase from 1994 to 1995.

Payment Systems Inc.  determined that active ATM users also use phone banking
systems to transfer funds between accounts or inquire about cleared checks,
and use bank branches to initiate deposits.  ATMs account for 47% of
transactions made by consumers to obtain cash, up from 39% in 1994.
Traditional financial institution branches account for 49% of cash
transactions, down from 54% in 1994, PSI reports.

Paypoint Network Gets A New President

Steve Minihan has been named president of the Atlantic Richfield Co.'s
PayPoint subsidiary.  Minihan replaces John K.  Lannan, who reportedly left
Paypoint because of disagreements with its directors on the future direction
of the operation.  Lannan was responsible for turning Los Angeles-based
Paypoint from a proprietary switch into a major third-party debit and credit
card processor.

In another personnel move, MasterCard International name Sheila Scarry senior
vice president in charge of U.S.  debit products.  Scarry replaces Arthur
Kranzley, who left MasterCard last year to become senior vice president for
Pennsylvania-based Advanta Corp.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>