
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-44</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B047-31</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030600 text/html 13352
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:05:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:57 GMT
Content-length: 13134
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Claim II: We have made significant progess in reducing
drug use.</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<h2>CLAIM II: WE HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS IN REDUCING DRUG
USE IN THIS COUNTRY. NOW IS NOT THE TIME TO ABANDON OUR EFFORTS. </h2>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>No one has suggested that we should &quot;abandon&quot; our
efforts to reduce the problems associated with drugs. What we
have suggested is that we should make those efforts more
cost-effective. Prison is not cost effective. </p>

<p>Even if we accepted this claim as true, there is no evidence
that the progress in reducing drug use was at all due to the
number of people put in prison. In fact, the evidence clearly
shows that the number of people put in prison could not have had
enough of an impact on the average white, middle-class drug user
to make any difference at all in drug use. If there was any
actual reduction in drug use (and not just in
&quot;reported&quot; drug use) then it seems clear that it must
have been due to other factors. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Legalization advocates claim that the fight against drugs has
not been won, and is, in fact, unwinnable. They frequently state
that people still take drugs, drugs are widely available, and
that the changing that fact is a lost cause. Legalization is the
alternative. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>It should be clear to anyone that the war on drugs has not
been won. There is no credible evidence anywhere which would
suggest that the war could be won by the current methods, and the
DEA has presented no such evidence here. The alternative is to
look for a better approach, whatever we might choose to call it. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>The conference participants disagreed with the notion that we
should wave the white flag of surrender because people still take
drugs. The experts contended that there have been many positive
developments over the past fifteen years in reducing drug use,
and stated that the good news is often given short shrift. Our
drug problem did not happen overnight, and it will take a number
of years to eliminate the problem. Legalization is not an
alternative to combating the drug problem. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>As happened with Vietnam, there comes a point when must
recognize that we never should have taken this course in the
first place. It is not surrender to end the war on drugs, it is a
recognition of what we should have recognized years ago. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>The United States faces a number of problems today which, like
our drug problem, are not susceptible to easy solutions,
including illegal immigration, declining education quality and
public health problems. Should we just post signs on our borders
that we've given up and invite a tide of immigrants in? Should we
declare that our education system has been a failure and give
children a permanent vacation from school? Should we throw up our
hands in frustration about AIDS and stop searching for a cure? Of
course not. Americans are a people committed to solving problems,
not running from them. Why should our commitment to stopping
drugs be any different from our approach to other national
interests? </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>There is no doubt that there are many difficult problems. Of
all the problems mentioned, the DEA does not propose to solve any
of them by throwing people in prison. </p>

<p>The final question here asks for a commitment to
&quot;stopping drugs&quot; which, the DEA itself admits, is
clearly impossible. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Furthermore, ask proponents of legalization just what they are
proposing be legalized. Just marijuana? Marijuana and heroin? All
drugs? </p>

<p>And for what age group? Will children be able to buy drugs? </p>

<p>Will prescriptions be necessary? </p>

<p>And what will they tolerate as the price of legalization? A
permanent underclass of drug users? </p>

<p>Will a 10% increase in the number of traffic fatalities be
accepted? What about 50%? </p>

<p>Would they be relieved to know that their child care provider
had been smoking legally-purchased marijuana? How many
borderbabies is too many? </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The question really is: for what drugs are we willing to throw
people in prison? </p>

<p>Can children buy drugs now? Obviously, they can because only
the outlaws control distribution of drugs. The questions try to
insinuate that people in favor of reform want to distribute drugs
to children. Nothing could be further from the truth. The
question also conveniently ignores the fact that the number one
drug killer, tobacco, is still freely available to children
through vending machines. </p>

<p>There are any number of possible policies, besides the current
one. The question of whether prescriptions would be necessary
should not stop us from recognizing that prison is unnecessary. </p>

<p>We already have a permanent underclass of drug users. </p>

<p>There is no evidence that the number of traffic fatalities
would change. About half of all traffic fatalities are now caused
by alcohol, but the DEA does not propose that arresting all the
people who drink beer or wine is a sensible solution. </p>

<p>The laws and social rules for things such as caring for
children would not change regardless of the legal status of any
drug. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forum
participants may be used in debates: </p>

<p>· The 1993 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, released
in July, 1994, demonstrates unequivocally that drug use declined
significantly between 1979 and 1993. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The same figures show it is going back up again, particularly
among children. Those figures show large increases in the last
year alone -- and the laws have not changed. </p>

<p>It must also be recognized that the data gathering methods of
this survey are open to question. The survey is conducted by
calling people at random on the telephone and asking if anyone in
the household has committed a felony (used drugs) in the past few
weeks or months. Instead of an accurate measure of the amount of
drug use, it may just be a measure of the number of people who
are stupid enough to answer such a question from a stranger on
the phone. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· In 1993, an estimated 11.7 million Americans were current
illicit drug users, meaning they had used an illicit drug in the
month prior to the interview. This represents no change from 1992
when the estimate was 11.4 million. The number of illicit drug
users had been declining since its peak in 1979 at 24 million. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The DEA needs to take elementary math again. The figures shown
represent a rise of 300,000 drug users. </p>

<p>The figures show one thing above all else-- there is no way we
can throw that many people in prison, and our jails are full
already. How many of these millions does the DEA propose that we
throw in prison? </p>

<p>The DEA's own figures also clearly show that all of the
supposed decline in drug use has been among casual drug users.
Their own figures show that this policy has had no effect on the
number of hard core drug users, where the problem really lies. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· The number of current cocaine users remained at 1.3 million
users in 1993, the same as 1992. This is down from a peak of 5.3
million in 1985. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>Does the DEA suggest that we throw all 1.3 million cocaine
users in prison? </p>

<p>Since 1979, rates of current illicit drug use have dropped for
12 17 year olds, 1825 year olds, and 2634 year olds, but not for
the age group 35 and older. </p>

<p>The latest figures show that drug use among these groups has
risen dramatically again, and yet the laws are just as harsh as
they always were. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· Teenage drug consumption, despite recent upturns, is down
in the long term. There is an obvious concern in the United
States about the consumption of drugs by teenagers--the adults of
tomorrow. Recent upturns demonstrate to us the clear need to
continue doing what we've done for more than the past decade:
combine law enforcement, education, and international efforts to
address all aspects of the drug situation. The Monitoring the
Future Study, conducted annually by University of Michigan
research scientists for the US Department of Health and Human
Services, has been tracking the drug consumption of American high
school seniors since the 1970s. In the past few years, the study
has been broadened to embrace drug use by 10th grade and 8th
grade students as well. </p>

<p><a name="DDE_LINK10"><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif"
align="bottom" width="562" height="19"></a> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>This is obviously wrong. See the latest figures cited above. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>When the first Monitoring the Future Study was published, 27.1
% of the members of the Class of 1975 (eighth and 10th graders
were not surveyed then) reported having used marijuana or hashish
in the previous month. The figure for the Class of 1980 was
33.7%--which puts that 2.4% figure 13 years later into
perspective. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>If the study is looking at the drug use of eighth to tenth
graders then it would seem obvious enough that the campaign to
put people in prison would not have had much real effect on this
group. This is evidence that any drop in use was not due to
tougher criminal enforcement. </p>

<p>Source 1993 National Household Survey <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>