
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B06-117</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B018-124</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/facts3.html 205.177.10.31 19970215014059 text/html 11374
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:39:41 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Methods to Communicate over the Internet</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Methods to Communicate over the Internet</h2>

<font size = +1>

<p>52.  Once an individual has access to the Internet,
there are a wide variety of different methods of communication
and information exchange over the network.  These numerous
methods of communication and information retrieval are constantly
evolving and are therefore difficult to categorize concisely. 
The most common methods of communications on the Internet (as
well as within the major online services) can be roughly grouped
into six categories:  one-to-one messaging (such as "e-mail"),
one-to-many messaging (such as "listserv"), distributed message
databases (such as "USENET newsgroups"), real time communication
(such as "Internet Relay Chat"), real time remote computer
utilization (such as "telnet"), and remote information retrieval
(such as "ftp," "gopher," and the "World Wide Web").  Most of
these methods of communication can be used to transmit text,
data, computer programs, sound, or visual images.

<p>53.  <strong>One-to-one messaging.</strong>  The simplest method of
communication on the Internet is via electronic mail, or "e-
mail," the modern equivalent to a first class letter.  An
individual can address and transmit a message to one or more
specific other individuals.  E-mail on the Internet is not routed
through any central control point, and can take numerous and
varying paths to the recipients.  Unlike postal mail, simple e-
mail is not "sealed" or secure, and can be accessed or viewed on
intermediate computers between the sender and recipient (unless
the message is encrypted).

<p>54.  <strong>One-to-many messaging.</strong>  The Internet also contains
automatic mailing list services (such as "listserv") that allow
simple and efficient communications about particular subjects of
interest.  For example, individuals can subscribe to a "listserv"
mailing list on a particular topic of interest to them.  The
individual can submit messages on the topic to the listserv that
are automatically forwarded (via e-mail) to anyone who has
subscribed to the mailing list.  A recipient of such a message
can reply to the message and have the reply also distributed to
everyone on the mailing list.  This service provides the
capability to keep abreast of developments or events in a
particular subject area.  Most listserv-type mailing lists
automatically forward all incoming messages to all mailing list
subscribers.  There are thousands of such mailing list services
on the Internet, collectively with hundreds of thousands of
subscribers.

<p>55.  <strong>Distributed message databases.</strong>  Similar in
function to listservs -- but quite different in how
communications are transmitted -- are distributed message
databases such as "USENET newsgroups."  Like listservs,
newsgroups are open discussions and exchanges on particular
topics.  Users, however, need not subscribe to the discussion
mailing list in advance, but can instead access the database at
any time.  An individual user can post a message to a newsgroup,
and the message is then automatically forwarded to all other
computers that furnish access to the newsgroups (but not to any
individual users).  The messages are temporarily stored on each
receiving computer, where they are available for review and
response.  The messages are automatically and periodically purged
from each system to make room for new messages.  Responses to
messages -- like the original messages -- are automatically
distributed to all other computers receiving the newsgroup. 
There are newsgroups on more than fifteen thousand different
subjects.  In 1994, approximately 70,000 messages were posted to
newsgroups each day, and those messages were distributed to the
approximately 190,000 computers or computer networks that
participate in the USENET newsgroup system.  Messages posted to
newsgroups are not stored on or channelled through any central
computer or location.

<p>56.  <strong>Real time communication.</strong>  In addition to
transmitting messages that can be later read or accessed,
individuals on the Internet can engage in an immediate dialog --
in "real time" -- with other individuals on the Internet.  In its
simplest forms, "talk" allows one-to-one communications and
"Internet Relay Chat" allows two or more individuals to type
messages to each other that almost immediately appear on the
other individuals' computer screens.  In addition, commercial
online services such as America Online, CompuServe, eWorld, the
Microsoft Network, and Prodigy have their own "chat" systems
allowing their members to converse. 

<p>57.  <strong>Real time remote computer utilization.</strong>  Another
method to utilize information on the Internet is to access and
control remote computers using "telnet."  For example, using
telnet, a researcher at a university would be able to utilize the
computing power of a supercomputer located at a different
university.  A student can use telnet to connect to a remote
library to access the library's online card catalog program.  Or,
individuals can link via telnet to a computer to interact
directly and communicate with other users linked to the same
computer.  Accessing a computer via telnet occurs in "real time,"
and content and communication accessed via telnet is often
created only at the time of the communication.

<p>58.  <strong>Remote information retrieval.</strong>  The final major
category of communication may be the most important and well
known use of the Internet -- the search for and retrieval of
information located on remote computers.  There are numerous
methods to locate and retrieve information on the Internet.  A
simple method uses "ftp" (or file transfer protocol) to list the
names of computer files available on a remote computer, and to
transfer one or more of those files to an individual's local
computer.  Another approach uses a program and format named
"gopher" to guide an individual's search through the resources
available on a remote computer.  A third approach, and fast
becoming the most well known on the Internet, is the "World Wide
Web."  The Web utilizes a "hypertext" formatting language called
hypertext markup language (HTML), and programs that "browse" the
Web can display HTML documents containing text, images, and
sound.  Any HTML document can include links to other types of
information or resources, so that while viewing an HTML document
that, for example, describes resources available on the Internet,
an individual can "click" using a computer mouse on the
description of the resource and be immediately connected to the
resource itself.  Such "hyperlinks" allow information to be
accessed and organized in very flexible ways, and allow
individuals to locate and efficiently view related information
even if the information is stored on numerous computers all
around the world.

<p>59.  With the exception of point-to-point mail, no
information flows through cyberspace to a particular individual
unless the individual requests the information.  Listservs,
newsgroups, chat lines, telnet, ftp, gopher and the World Wide
Web all require an affirmative request by the Internet user prior
to the user receiving information over the Internet.  Further-
more, when a user makes such an affirmative request it is usually
clear what type of content will be delivered.  Thus, unlike radio
or television, there is no significant risk that a user will be
"assaulted" with unsolicited and undesired content.

<p>60.  The vast majority of transmissions of content from
specific sites on the Internet are in response to electronic
requests the user could not have anticipated more than a few
seconds or moments before making the request.  Because
information is located on millions of computers around the world,
with no central organization or control, a user cannot possibly
know which computers might have useful information until starting
a search.  Instead, the user could access any of dozens of
different search databases, obtain a list of sites that might be
of interest, and then immediately link to one or more of the
sites.  Indeed, the very theory of "hyperlinks" and the hypertext
markup language (HTML) (the foundation of the World Wide Web) is
that the user can jump from site to site to site without ever
needing to know where physically in the world the next site is
located.  Thus, there is no way for a user to pre-register with
every computer that might contain useful content on a particular
topic.  Moreover, when an individual is researching a topic on
the Internet, he or she might access dozens of newsgroups, telnet
computers, and ftp, gopher, and Web sites around the world in a
matter of minutes.  If a researcher was required to request
access from content providers prior to actually viewing the
information (and prove to the provider that the researcher was
not a minor), the Internet would be transformed from a dynamic
and instantaneous content searching tool into a cumbersome,
multi-step, much slower, and much less useful research tool.  The
vibrancy and immediacy that sparked the Internet's recent
extraordinary expansion and development would be lost.

<p>61.  The inability to predict where on the Internet a
user would want to access information is not limited to research,
and applies equally to any attempt by a user to access
information on the Internet when the individual does not know in
advance the precise location of that information.  There are
millions of computers on the Internet that contain content, and
it would be practically and economically impossible for the tens
of millions of Internet users to pre-register with each of those
millions of content sites, and equally impossible for those
millions of content sites to maintain and instantaneously update
lists of registered users.

<p>62.  For both the speaker and the listener,
communications on the Internet bear virtually no similarity to
communications on television and radio.  With radio and
television, the number of speakers is limited by the available
spectrum, the ability to speak is limited by the high cost of
speaking, and listeners are merely passive recipients of the
communications.  With the Internet, the number of speakers is
boundless, anyone can speak for pennies a day (or for free at his
or her public library), and listeners can respond and engage the
speaker in an interactive and on-going dialogue.  Furthermore,
unlike television and radio, on the Internet viewers and
listeners generally receive only the communications they
affirmatively request, and are not a passive or "captive"
audience.  Moreover, unlike with television and radio, on the
Internet a speaker can reach the entire world (at no additional
cost) yet at the same time can direct his or her speech to
individuals who share an interest in a particular subject.  In
the twenty-first century, the Internet -- if allowed to flourish
unhindered by government censorship -- can revive the now-little-
used public square and convert it into a global medium of
communication and discourse.
</font>

<hr>

<p>Go back to the <a href = "complaint.html">index</a>.
<br>Go to <a href = "facts4.html">next section</a>.

</body>
</html>
</DOC>