
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B03-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B043-62</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020827 text/html 28669
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:21 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:39 GMT
Content-length: 28451
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Alcohol</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h3>ALCOHOL </h3>

<p> </p>

<p>59. Alcohol is one of the most widely used psychoactive drugs
known to man; it has apparently been with us since the dawn of
civilization. Breweries flourished in Egypt almost six thousand
years ago and there is evidence that Stone Age prehistoric man
made alcoholic beverages long before that.223 The use of alcohol
has appeared in varying degrees in most societies throughout
recorded history and has traditionally played an important
symbolic as well as pharmacological role in many social,
religious and medical practices and customs. Just as the use of
alcohol has been almost universal, so, apparently, has its
misuse. Consequently, some degree of opposition to 'drink'
appears to have arisen in all indulging cultures, although
attempts to eradicate its use have met with a uniform lack of
success. </p>

<p>What is this drug which has been hailed as the 'water of life'
and 'nectar of the gods' by some, and damned by others as 'second
only to war' as a source of human problems? Made up of three
common elements, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, ethyl alcohol
(C2H5OH) is a colourless, inflammable and volatile liquid. The
word 'alcohol' by itself is usually taken to mean ethyl alcohol
or <i>ethanol </i>(common beverage alcohol), although there is a
vast number of other substances in the aliphatic alcohol family,
many of which are highly toxic in even low doses. </p>

<p>Although the technique of producing alcoholic beverages by
fermenting fruit, grain, vegetables, and other food-stuffs has
hardly been a secret over the past few thousand years, the exact
process by which the drug is generated was first illuminated by
Louis Pasteur in the middle of the nineteenth century. His
investigations revealed that alcohol was produced by a single
celled microscopic plant, one of the yeast fungi, which by a
metabolic form of combustion breaks down certain sugars,
releasing carbon dioxide (CO2) with ethyl alcohol as a
by-product. This production of CO2 is responsible for the 'head'
on a glass of beer, and the 'popping' of champagne corks, as well
as the leavening effects of yeast in the rising of bread. Since
yeast cannot digest starch, mash from cereal grains such as
barley, rye, corn and rice must be malted (i.e., converted to
maltose sugar) prior to fermentation in the production of beer,
gin and whisky. </p>

<p>60. Fermentation normally continues until the sugar supply is
exhausted. However, as the amount of alcohol in the fermenting
solution increases, the metabolic activity of the yeast is slowed
until it is finally killed when the alcohol level reaches about
14%, thus setting a limit on the maximum strength of natural
(undistilled) beverages. The distillation process of boiling off
and isolating the more volatile alcohol from the other fluids
(mostly water) allows a further increase in ethanol
concentration. Although this technique was used in Middle Eastern
cultures centuries earlier, the production of 'spirits' by
distillation has been known in Europe for less than seven hundred
years. Today, ethanol can be produced synthetically. </p>

<p>In Canada, beer usually contains about 5% alcohol by volume,
natural wine 7% to 14%, fortified wine up to 20% and spirits or
liquor (distilled) approximately 40% alcohol. In other words, a
12 oz. bottle of beer or 3 to 4 oz. of wine contain about as much
alcohol as 11/2 oz. of whisky. </p>

<p>61. The notion of alcohol 'proof' originated centuries ago
from a crude but effective analytic technique designed to assess
the strength of spirits. If gun powder soaked with the beverage
exploded on ignition, this was taken as 'proof' that the liquor
was more than half alcohol. 'Proof spirit' in the United Kingdom
and Canadian system contains about 57% alcohol, while in the
United States proof is calculated as twice the per cent by volume
(e.g., 80% proof whisky is 40% alcohol).80 </p>

<p>Canada has experimented with alcohol prohibition in varying
ways since 1878. Although there are currently some 'dry'
localities, alcohol is generally legally available across the
country. An interesting bit of drug history is connected with
alcohol law: over 300 years ago the prohibition of liquor sales
to Indians was Canada's first alcohol regulation. Some such
discriminatory policies are only now being eliminated. 32 </p>

<p>62. There was a 15-year period of prohibition in the United
States, ending in 1934. The failure of that programme has been
attributed to the unworkable form of the laws, inadequate
enforcement, corruption among public authorities and, perhaps
most importantly, a general lack of public support. During that
period, the elimination of legitimate alcohol outlets resulted in
home breweries and distilleries, 'bootleg' liquor or toxic
substitutes, and smuggling, and created an economic vacuum
rapidly filled by organized crime. Many authorities feel that
this multi-million-dollar illicit market provided the initial
capital for the construction of a network of syndicated criminal
and quasilegal business empires which have considerable economic
and political strength in North America today. </p>

<p>Alcohol is now used by more than three-quarters of the
Canadian population over the age of 15. Although most of it is
undoubtedly consumed primarily for its pharmacological
properties, there is a significant aspect of alcohol usage which
is, in some respects, independent of its immediate drug effects.
There are many long-standing customs, traditions and
superstitions which pervade alcohol use in the Western world.
Because it has become an integral part of our culture, the set
and setting surrounding alcohol use is substantially different
from that associated with other drugs in Canada. </p>

<p>63. Alcohol may have special meanings in various social
contexts. Alcohol use is often symbolically and pharmacologically
associated with the acknowledgment of birth, death, marriage and
other contracts, adulthood, friendship, and, to some, it may
imply virility and masculinity. Although it is employed in some
religious ceremonies, many individuals have moral apprehensions
about alcohol and may approach its use with feelings of
ambivalence and guilt. Some reject it outright on grounds of
principle, while still others feel that moderate use is morally
acceptable. In many social circles abstinence is frowned upon and
'teetotallers' are looked upon with suspicion. On the other hand,
it is obvious that considerable alcohol intoxication is
tolerated, condoned and even encouraged in many situations in
North American society. When one considers the fact that these
various attitudes are ultimately tied to, or interact with, the
diverse pharmacological potentials of alcohol in determining the
overall drug effect, the complexity of the psychopharmacology of
the drug in North America becomes apparent. Because its use is so
ingrained at all levels of society, there is a tendency for many
Canadians not to even consider alcohol a drug. </p>

<p>In a wider context, Jaffe, in <i>The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics </i>observes: 111 </p>

<p>The large role that the production and consumption of
alcoholic beverages plays in the economic and social life in
Western society should not permit us to minimize the fact that
alcoholism is a more significant problem than all other forms of
drug abuse combined. </p>

<h3>Medical Use </h3>

<p>64. Alcohol is currently recognized as an official drug in the
British and U.S. Pharmacopeias, although the various alcoholic
beverages, as such, are no longer listed for medical use. Alcohol
has been cited over the past few thousand years as a cure for
nearly every ailment or disease. Most of the medical benefits
were probably more imagined than real, and many of alcohol's
legitimate pharmacological functions have now been filled by more
effective drugs, although it still plays a useful role in
medicine. </p>

<p>Alcohol is often used as a preservative, solvent, and vehicle
for other drugs, and is contained in tinctures, elixirs, spirits
and many medicinal syrups. It is used to cleanse, disinfect and
harden the skin, to cool it during fever, to decrease sweating
(and is included in many antiperspirant deodorant), to reduce bed
sores, to treat fainting, to temporarily or permanently block
nerves by injection, and to stimulate appetite and digestion. In
concentrations around 70%, alcohol is an effective antibacterial
agent, although it is not satisfactory for disinfecting open
wounds since it damages the raw tissue.186 </p>

<p>Alcohol is still sometimes recommended as a tranquillizer,
sedative, or hypnotic and may also serve as a mild mood stimulant
for<i> </i>some individuals. It is no longer considered a safe
surgical anaesthetic, since the dose necessary to produce
unconsciousness is often dangerously close to the fatal level.
However, the drug does produce mild analgesia (pain reduction) at
lower doses. Alcohol is still used in the lay and folk medicine
to 'treat' the common cold, although its benefits, if any, are
probably limited to an improvement in mood and increased
relaxation and rest. </p>

<h3>Administration, Absorption, Distribution and Physiological
Fate </h3>

<p>65. Alcohol is usually taken orally and is rapidly and
completely absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract. Some
absorption takes place in the stomach although diffusion into the
blood stream is most rapid from the upper intestine and,
consequently, the quicker the alcohol passes through the stomach
the shorter the latency of its action. Food eaten before or with
alcohol tends to decrease the drug effect by slowing stomach
emptying, and a meal before drinking alcohol may reduce the peak
alcohol level in the blood by almost one-half compared to that
attained by drinking on an empty stomach. Once absorbed, alcohol
is distributed quite uniformly in all bodily fluids, easily
enters the brain, and in pregnant women crosses the placental
barrier into the foetus. Alcohol temporarily diffuses into fat
tissue and consequently, a lean muscular individual will normally
experience a greater pharmacological effect with a given dose
than will a person with much body fat. </p>

<p>Approximately 95% of the alcohol in the body is broken down by
oxidation in the liver and the rest is excreted unchanged,
primarily in the urine and breath. While certain alcoholic
beverages, such as beer, contain some protein and carbohydrates,
alcohol itself provides only calories when metabolized and has
little general food value. Depending on the form of alcoholic
beverage and possible mixers, an ordinary drink may contain 90 to
150 calories or<b> </b>more. The rate of disappearance of alcohol
from the body is quite constant within individuals at a given
time, and the average 150 lb. man can metabolize about 9 ml. (0.3
oz) of alcohol per hour. </p>

<p>A convenient index of the quantity of the drug in the body is
the <i>blood alcohol level, </i>represented in per cent by
weight. Since the amount of alcohol excreted in the breath bears
a fixed relationship to that in the blood, it is possible to
accurately estimate the blood alcohol level from expired air.
This principle is utilized in the <i>Breathalyzer </i>tests now
employed in the enforcement of driving laws. </p>

<h3>Short-Term Effects </h3>

<p>66. Alcohol exerts its more significant effects through the
central nervous system, usually producing a general sedation or
depression of neural activity over a wide dosage range, although
in certain circumstances, considerable behavioural and
psychological arousal may result. Little is known as to the
specific mechanism by which alcohol produces its
psychopharmacological action. As with most drugs, alcohol
effects, especially those resulting from low or moderate amounts,
depend to a large extent on the individual and the situation in
which the drinking occurs. A drink or two may produce drowsiness
and lethargy in some instances, while the same quantity might
lead to increased activity and psychological stimulation in
another individual, or in the same person in different
circumstances. Furthermore, a dose which is initially stimulating
may later produce sedation. </p>

<p>In many social settings, alcohol seems to result in a
lessening of inhibition and a feeling of well being, sociability
and camaraderie in most individuals. For many people alcohol
relieves tension and anxiety - the common notion that one 'needs
a drink' when worried, irritated or upset, reflects a general
acknowledgment of this function. Although alcohol usually
elevates mood at first, a general lack of emotional control,
including anxiety, withdrawal, self-pity and depression may occur
later. Alcohol has been frequently cited as an important
contributing factor in many suicides. </p>

<p>Hostility and aggression are not at all uncommon in some
drinkers, and fights and other forms of violent antisocial
behaviour are often reported to accompany bouts of heavy
drinking. It appears that some criminals fortify their courage by
drinking prior to a sortie and alcohol intoxication reportedly
plays a significant role in a large proportion of the violent
crimes (murder, rape and assault against persons and property) in
North America.18 </p>

<p>67. Alcohol does not have a specific aphrodisiac (sex
stimulating) effect <i>per se, </i>although the emotionality and
general lessening of inhibitions often induced may lead to an
increase in sexual activity and other normally restricted
behaviour. An increase in desire or opportunity may be neglected
by acute sexual impotence, however. </p>

<p>Although delusions, illusions and amnesic 'black outs' may
occur in some individuals, acute alcohol psychosis (pathological
intoxication) in normally moderate drinkers is rare. Even so,
many persons might sympathize with the Roman philosopher Seneca
who, almost 2,000 years ago, observed that, 'Drunkenness is
nothing but a condition of insanity purposely assumed'.197 </p>

<p>In moderate amounts (e.g., a few drinks) alcohol may increase
or decrease heart rate, produce a 'flushing' or dilation of small
blood vessels in the skin (giving a sensation of warmth), lower
body temperature, stimulate appetite and the secretion of saliva
and gastric juices, increase urination, produce a slowing of the
electroencephalogram (EEG), increase reaction time, reduce
muscular co-ordination. In addition, alcohol generally reduces
performance on tests of a wide variety of psychological
functions. Tests requiring a high degree of attention,
concentration or vigilance are particularly sensitive to alcohol
effects, and impairment is usually most pronounced on complex and
recently learned tasks. In a few situations, however, a small
amount of alcohol may actually improve performance. In high
doses, alcohol produces drunkenness, disorientation and
confusion, slurred speech, blurred vision, inadequate muscular
control, and often induces nausea and vomiting. As an increasing
quantity is ingested, there occurs a depression of respiration,
general anesthesia and unconsciousness and, rarely, death due to
respiratory arrest and circulatory failure. Acute alcohol
intoxication is often followed by pronounced 'hangover' symptoms
characterized by nausea, weakness, dizziness, poor coordination
and a variety of aches and pains. Some authorities consider this
post-inebriation phase a form of acute withdrawal syndrome. </p>

<p>68. Effects of alcohol on driving ability are well known -
even moderate amounts produce serious impairment in many
individuals. A recent study of alcohol involvement in fatal motor
vehicle accidents in three Canadian provinces presented findings
similar to those reported regularly across North America.37 It
has commonly been observed that alcohol is a factor in a large
proportion of all fatal traffic accidents. Approximately 70% of
drivers killed in single vehicle accidents and 50% of drivers
killed in multi-vehicle collisions had been drinking. Among all
driver fatalities, alcohol was detected in the blood of 60 to 70
per cent of those considered responsible for their own deaths.
Furthermore, more than half of the pedestrians killed in traffic
accidents had recently been drinking, and there are numerous
reports that alcohol is a contributing factor in a great number
of industrial accidents as well. A large proportion of the people
involved in such accidents are chronic alcoholics, although the
majority are apparently 'social' drinkers. </p>

<p>The intensity of the acute effects of alcohol can, to a
certain extent, be predicted from the amount of alcohol in the
blood, although the relationship between the quantity of alcohol
present and the central nervous system (CNS) response may vary
considerably from individual to individual. Recent Federal
legislation prohibits driving with blood alcohol level greater
than 0.08%. Depending on the person, this concentration may be
produced by three or four ordinary drinks, if consumed in a short
time. While certain individuals might be capable of driving
satisfactorily with this much alcohol, most persons are probably
impaired by even lower quantities. Although the <i>Breathalyzer </i>can
be used to assess acute alcohol intoxication, there are no simple
methods of detecting a 'hangover', and there are indications that
this post-inebriation phase also has severe effects on
psychomotor performance. </p>

<h3>Long-Term Effects </h3>

<p>69. Many authorities differentiate between 'low risk'
(moderate) and 'high risk' (heavy) drinking in discussing the
long-term effects of alcohol. For most otherwise normal
individuals, moderate drinking over a prolonged period of time
may produce little significant psychological or physiological
change. High risk or heavy drinking (e.g., five or six or more
drinks a day) may lead to a variety of disorders, however, many
of which are subsumed under the general term 'alcoholism'. </p>

<p>There<b> </b>is considerable disagreement among authorities as
to the proper delineation of the concept of alcoholism -
definitions may be as general as 'a family of disorders
accompanying chronic heavy drinking 'with various social and
economic complications, or may contain more restrictive
specifications of physical dependency or psychological and
physiological harm. Jellinek has described five different types
of alcoholics which differ in degree and kind of psychological,
behavioural and physiological involvement.112 In some areas of
North America, at least two per cent to five per cent of alcohol
users become alcoholics and many more would be considered problem
drinkers. </p>

<p>70. No group of drug-dependent persons presents a sorrier
picture of psychological and physiological pathology than that of
the 'skid row' derelict alcoholics. Frequently observed in these
individuals and many other alcoholics are disorders of the
digestive tract, cardiovascular system, lungs, kidney, pancreas
and the nervous system, with sleep disturbance and various kinds
of irreversible neurological damage and cerebral atrophy.
Considerable attention has been focused on liver disorders in
heavy drinkers, and it is well established that alcohol is a
major contributing or causal factor in liver cirrhosis.
Alcoholics may develop specific psychotic syndromes, permanently
impaired memory, epilepsy, chronic incoordination, sexual
impotence, loss of appetite and a variety of nutritional
disorders which may result in an increased susceptibility to
other diseases and infections.111 </p>

<p>In the past, these and numerous other disorders were thought
to be a direct result of alcohol toxicity, but now many of these
pathologies are considered to be of secondary origin - often a
function of chronic dietary deficiencies, poor personal care and
other aspects of the general life style which may accompany
alcoholism. The diet of certain alcoholics may consist of 40-50%
alcohol, with periods of weeks or even months of nothing else,
and thus may be dangerously low in proteins, vitamins, minerals
and other essential foodstuffs. Proper diet and medical care may
be able to prevent or alleviate many, but not all, of the
problems associated with chronic alcoholism.182 </p>

<p>Only a minority of alcoholics are 'down and out' derelicts,
and there are many alcohol-dependent persons in all levels of
society who function in varying degrees of effectiveness in spite
of the handicap. Psychological and physiological disorders in
these individuals vary considerably as a function of general life
style, drinking patterns and perhaps certain inherited
characteristics. Many heavy drinkers show little functional
impairment. </p>

<h3>Tolerance and Dependence </h3>

<p>71. Tolerance to most of the effects of alcohol develops with
frequent use, although it does not occur as rapidly or to the
same degree as with the opiate narcotics. The rate of acquisition
and extent of tolerance depends on the pattern of use, and
regular heavy drinkers may be able to consume two or three times
as much alcohol as a novice. In Western culture, some symbolic
masculinity frequently accompanies the development of tolerance
and the ability to 'hold one's liquor'. </p>

<p>Most intermittent or moderate drinkers show little tendency to
increase dose, although regular heavy drinkers may, in order to
obtain the desired psychological effects, ingest quantities which
lead to chronic alcohol toxicity symptoms. In addition to the
probable neurophysiological and metabolic mechanisms involved in
tolerance, learning to function under the influence of alcohol
may further reduce some of the acute behavioural effects of
intoxication in regular users. Little or no tolerance develops to
the lethal dose, however, and acute alcohol poisoning is a noted
cause of death in alcoholics, although nausea, vomiting and
unconsciousness usually prevent self-administration of a fatal
overdose. In some alcoholics, tolerance later seems to decline
and a special response or oversensitivity to certain effects of
alcohol develops. In such individuals even a single drink may
produce profound loss of control and initiate unrestricted
further indulgence. </p>

<p>72. Physical dependence on alcohol occurs in some long-term
heavy drinkers after the development of tolerance. Although
alcoholic hallucinosis, delirium tremens ('DT's), and convulsions
('rum fits') were noted and studied in the nineteenth century,
until recently there was a lack of consensus as to whether these
symptoms were essentially the direct result of acute or chronic
alcohol toxicity, secondary nutritional deficiencies, or part of
a physical dependence withdrawal syndrome. </p>

<p>Isbell <i>et al</i>108<i> </i>and Mendelson <i>et al</i>156<i>
</i>have clearly demonstrated that even when diet is controlled,
a characteristic severe abstinence syndrome can occur after only
a few weeks of continual heavy drinking. The quantities of
alcohol ingested in these studies were much greater than those
normally consumed, however, and with the usual drinking patterns,
such physiological dependence does not occur until after 3 to 15
or more years of heavy consumption. Some heavy drinkers never
become physically dependent on alcohol.112 </p>

<p>73. The overall picture of the alcohol withdrawal syndrome is
generally similar to that noted earlier for barbiturates. Nausea,
anxiety, severe agitation, confusion, tremors, and sweating are
followed by cramps, vomiting and illusions and hallucinations.
After several days, delirium tremens may develop and convulsions,
exhaustion and cardiovascular collapse may occur. The delirium
tremens stage is fatal in about 10% of cases. Major recovery in
those surviving usually occurs within a week, although certain
psychological symptoms may continue for a longer period.234 </p>

<p>Psychological dependence on alcohol seems to occur<b> </b>in
many individuals, and such dependence appears to be generally
accepted in contemporary North America. A great number of people
regularly turn to alcohol for relief or aid prior to or after
facing a stressful situation, to escape worries, troubles or
boredom, to relax and enjoy a party, or even to sleep, and many
feel they do not function as well in certain situations without a
drink or two. There would appear to be a strong psychological
component in the drinking behaviour of the developing alcoholic,
as<b> </b>is exemplified in the usually compulsive nature of his
drinking and his frequent inability to control his use of alcohol
in spite of obvious consequences. </p>

<h3>Alcohol and Other Drugs </h3>

<p>74. A certain degree of cross-tolerance and cross-dependence
occurs among the sedative drugs. Heavy alcohol users are normally
resistant to the effects of barbiturates, minor tranquillizers,
volatile solvents and anaesthetics, as well as alcohol, although
the cross-tolerance does not significantly affect the lethal
dose. Consequently, many over-dose deaths occur due to the mixing
of these drugs in chronic users. Barbiturates and minor
tranquillizers effectively block alcohol withdrawal symptoms and
are frequently used in treating alcoholics in the acute phase of
abstinence. Alcoholics are often heavy users of other sedative
drugs as well and may switch from one to another, if it<b> </b>is
convenient or necessary. The use of high toxic alcohols, such as
methyl or 'wood' alcohol, and even automobile anti-freeze, has
been reported in derelict alcoholics. In addition, persons
dependent on opiate narcotics generally have a history of heavy
alcohol consumption. </p>

<p>75. Certain drugs, such as disulfiram (Antabuse*) or
Temposil*, which may have little direct pharmacological activity
themselves, have the capacity to inhibit certain stages of
alcohol metabolism in the body and can thereby produce a highly
unpleasant toxic reaction known as the <i>acetaldehyde syndrome </i>when
used in conjunction with alcohol. Such drugs have been used in
the treatment of problem drinkers. </p>

<p>Amphetamines, caffeine and other stimulants may reduce the
drowsiness often associated with inebriation, although they can
not fully compensate for most of the effects of alcohol
intoxication. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>