
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B010-307</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp190620.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011340 text/html 31717
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:12:22 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>CDT POLICY POST No.19 -- CDT Analysis of Senate Passed CDA</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   ******    ********    *************
  ********   *********   *************
  **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST
  **         **      **       ***
  **         **      **       ***               June 20, 1995
  **         **      **       ***               Number 19
  ********   *********        ***
   ******    ********         ***

  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CDT POLICY POST Number 19                       June 20, 1995

CONTENTS: (1) CDT Analysis of Senate Passed Exon/Coats Communications 
              Decency Act
          (2) Text of the Statute With Proposed Amendment
          (3) About CDT/Contacting Us

This document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its
entirety.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) CDT Analysis of Senate Passed Exon/Coats Communications Decency Act

The United States Senate last week approved sweeping Internet censorship 
legislation which dramatically restricts the free flow of information in 
interactive media, and fails to even provide effective protection for 
children from access to inappropriate information.  The Center for 
Democracy and Technology strongly opposes the Exon/Coats Communications 
Decency Act for the following reasons:

* UNCONSTITUTIONAL BAN ON "INDECENT" MATERIAL IN MOST PARTS OF THE 
  INTERNET: The Act imposes criminal penalties of $100,000 fines or up to two 
  years in prison on anyone who "knowingly ... makes or makes available any 
  indecent communications ... to any person under 18 years of age."  This 
  restriction on indecency (a legal term which includes the "seven dirty words" 
  as well as any sexually-explicit material) amounts to a total ban on all 
  "indecent" information in public areas of the Internet, since all users of the 
  Internet know that public areas are accessible to minors.  The United States 
  Supreme Court has held over and over again that indecent material is protected 
  by the First Amendment and may only be regulated with narrowly tailored means 
  that leave adults free to communicate.  Senator Exon's bill has failed to 
  identify Constitutionally-appropriate means of regulation.  As Senator Leahy 
  pointed out during the Senate debate,  the Exon bill would force everyone on 
  the Internet to behave as if there were in "Sunday school."

* SECOND-CLASS FREE SPEECH RIGHTS FOR ALL INTERACTIVE MEDIA:  The  
  Exon/Coats amendment diminishes the First Amendment rights of those who use 
  interactive media as opposed to those who communicate through print.  The  
  indecency ban in Exon/Coats creates the paradoxical result that speech which 
  would be fully-protected in books, magazines, newspapers, or other print-based
  publications, would be subject to criminal sanction if made available 
  over the  Internet. In other words, what is legal in all of the nation's 
  bookstores would become illegal in cyberspace.  

* CRIMINALIZATION OF "ANNOYING" MESSAGES:  Annoying someone using harsh 
  (but not obscene) language over interactive media would become a crime, also
  punishable by $100,000 fines and two year jail terms.  Federal and many state
  laws already criminalize harassment, no matter what the medium, but
  prohibiting mere annoyance is clearly unconstitutional and a wasteful abuse of
  federal power.

* FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION JURISDICTION OVER CONTENT AND 
  TECHNICAL STANDARDS ON THE INTERNET:  Enforcement of the Exon/Coats bill will 
  require extensive an ongoing FCC proceedings to determine what exactly 
  constitutes "indecency" in various interactive media, and how the "safe harbor" 
  defenses in the bill will function.  Such regulation will mean that the FCC 
  intrude on the development of all current and future Internet standards for 
  services such as the World Wide Web, electronic mail, and Usenet newsgroups.  CDT 
  believes that such an FCC role will lead to unnecessary confusion and delay in 
  the growth of the Internet, as well as cast a continual chill over all speech on
  the Internet and other interactive media.

* PROVISIONS DESIGNED TO PROTECT ONLINE SERVICE PROVIDERS FROM LIABILITY ARE
  INEFFECTIVE:  The "defenses" to prosecution that are intended to 
  protect online services and Internet access providers from liability will 
  create significant risk of criminal liability for all services that provide 
  access to the Internet.  Though Senator Exon may originally promised to exempt 
  these providers from liability, his last-minute compromise with Senator 
  Coats, and failure to understand the basic operation of Internet services, left 
  all Internet access providers at risk of criminal liability for providing 
  access to Usenet newsgroups and other public information services.

* "GOOD FAITH DEFENSE" FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS MAY ENCOURAGE VIOLATIONS OF 
  USER PRIVACY:  Section (f)(4) of Act insulates online service providers 
  from any contractual liability that may arise from their efforts to restrict 
  minors' access to indecent material.  Because of the vaguaries of the 
  Electronic Communications Privacy Act regarding service provider access to 
  subscriber email for "system maintenance purposes," this provision may imunize 
  online service providers who read private messages of their users in  
  circumstances where the provider is acting within the bounds of the Exon/Coats 
  bill.

* UNDUE BURDEN ON INDIVIDUAL USERS, CONTENT PROVIDERS, AND SMALL SYSTEM
  OPERATORS:  Although Senator Exon claims that his bill is only an extension
  of the dial-a-porn law, it is actually far broader.  The dial-a-porn law
  applied only to commercial providers of 900 number services, not every
  telephone customer in the country.  Given the fact that every Internet user is
  both publisher and a receiver of information, Exon's new law, if enacted,
  would create new regulations on the speech of all those who use interactive
  media.

In simple terms, the Communications Decency Act would enshrine in 
statute a sharp distinction between the print medium and new interactive 
media.  For example, though an individual is allowed to go into a 
bookstore and buy a sexually-explicit magazine or a "lewd" work of art, 
one would not be able to access the identical information over the 
Internet.  Both the interactive media and the print media are arenas in 
which individuals and organizations exercise core First Amendment free 
speech rights.  Before Congress elects to diminish the First Amendment 
protections available in this new medium, we believe that careful, 
public consideration is required.

A.  UNCONSTITUTIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON INDECENT SPEECH ONLINE:  BANNING 
    THE"SEVEN DIRTY WORDS" ON THE NET.

If this new proposal became law, the level of discourse on the Internet 
as a whole would have to be reduced to that which is considered 
appropriate for children.  A newly added section (e) effectively makes 
it illegal to use any of the "seven dirty word" in public forums on the 
Internet.  This new subsection makes in a crime to "knowingly" make and 
transmit an indecent message to anyone under 18 years old.  This 
provision covers both private messages between two individuals and 
public postings to newsgroups that may well reach hundreds of thousands 
of people around the world.  Though the drafters may want to limit this 
crime to situations where material is provided directly to minors, that 
is simply impossible on the net.  Anyone who participates in public 
discussion groups knows that there may well be kids reading the group as 
well.  Thus, they would be violating the law simply by posting a hotly-
worded message.

Examples of Prohibited items under the new subsection (e)
    
    Rap music lyrics (both the text and the sound files)
    Lady Chatterly's Lover  
    Public declaration that you're "pissed off" or that someone is a 
   "shit."
    Calvin Klein advertisements (the ones with naked bodies)

The constitutional flaw in this section lies in the critical distinction 
between "obscenity," that which is truly hard-core pornography, and 
"indecency," sexually-explicit material which may be offensive to some 
or may be considered by some to be inappropriate for children, but which 
is protected by the First Amendment.  Under the First Amendment, 
Congress has broad power to ban obscenity, but can only regulate 
indecency in very narrow circumstances, such as in the broadcast media 
where there is a captive audience.  Pacifica Foundation v. FCC (1978) .  
Even in these narrow circumstances, such regulation may be the "least 
intrusive means" for accomplishing the government's goal of protecting 
children.  Sable Communications v. FCC.  Given the existence of software 
and hardware that enable parents to block children's access to indecent 
material the regulation here does not constitute the "least restrictive 
means" requirement set out by the Supreme Court.  

CDT believes that the Act as drafted would not survive a First Amendment 
challenge under the law of Sable because the Senate has altogether 
failed to investigate less restrictive alternatives to meeting its goal 
of protecting children.  The Senate has held no hearings and made no 
legislative findings which support its decision.  During the debate on 
the Senate floor, both Senator Leahy and Senator Feingold offered 
evidence that there are less restrictive alternatives available.  
Neither Senator Exon, Senator Coats, no any other Senator rebutted or 
responded to these assertions.  In light of the overwhelming evidence 
that users and parents can exercise control over what they and their 
children receive over the Internet, a court reviewing the 
constitutionality of the bill, would, we believe, be forced to return 
the matter to Congress for further consideration.

Furthermore, the government may not regulation indecent material in a 
way that would deny adults access to such material.  Butler v. Michigan 
(1957).  This is precisely the result that is produced by this new 
statutory proposal.  Such as result would be both unwise and 
unconstitutional.  The highly restrictive treatment proposed here for 
interactive media creates a situation in the future whereby material 
that is legally available to people of all ages in bookshops and 
libraries will be banned from the Internet.  During the Senate debate, 
Senator Feingold also pointed out that there are many kinds valuable 
information on the Internet that might be considered indecent under FCC 
definitions, such as AIDS education information, various works of art, 
etc.

B. INTRUSION OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION ON CONTENT AND 
   STANDARDS IN INTERACTIVE MEDIA

There are "defenses to prosecution" under this statute which are 
designed to limit the liability of service providers and, possibly, 
users and content creators.  (See subsection (f))  To avoid being 
prosecuted under this statute an entity can take "good faith steps" to 
restrict access to the possibly infringing communications and then hope 
that if charged with violating the Act, that the court believes you took 
sufficient steps.  A more prudent person, or a corporation with money 
and reputation at risk, would more likely wait to see what the FCC says 
are sufficient steps to restrict access and follow those regulations.  
Until the FCC acts, the defenses applicable to the dial-a-porn law are 
available, but it is not clear how they would apply to interactive 
media.

If this provision were to become law, an FCC rulemaking will be required 
to decide two issues:

1) what is indecent in interactive media?  

This could include the "seven dirty words", frontal nudity, sound files 
with heavy breathing, or many other examples. However, granting the 
Federal Communications Commission the authority to answer to this 
question would bring the Internet under a similar content regime as 
broadcast television and radio. 

2) what steps must be taken to restrict access to indecent material?

The FCC will also have to decide what techniques must be used to 
restrict access sufficiently to enable users and providers to avoid 
criminal liability. FCC intrusion in the rapidly evolving interactive 
media market promises to delay the development of new technologies, 
squelch the entrepreneurial spirit which has helped the Internet to 
grow, and chill the speech of all users and content creators.  The FCC 
took 8 years to get blocking rules settled just for 900# services, and 
that was one relatively simple technology.  Giving the FCC authority to 
set child-access standards for every piece of the Net, and all new Net 
services that develop is a disaster for the medium and will have a 
sweeping chilling effect on both the technology and free expression 
online.

As Senator Leahy noted during debate on the bill, "the Internet has 
become the tremendous success it is because it did not have Big Brother, 
the Federal Government, trying to micromanage what it does and trying to 
tell users what it could do.  If the Government had been in charge of 
figuring out how to expand the Internet or make it more available and so 
on, I guarantee it would not be one-tenth the success it is today." 
(Cong. Rec. 8344)


C. A NEW CRIME OF ONLINE ANNOYANCE

Senator Exon proposes criminal sanctions for anyone who uses "obscene, 
lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent" communications "with intent to 
annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass another person."  Federal and state 
laws already punish criminal harassment, regardless of the medium used  
to perpetrate the crime.  (See 18 USC 875(c)).  CDT believes that 
additional laws in this area are simply unnecessary.  Moreover, the 
Department has Justice has said that it has adequate prosecutorial 
powers in this new environment. (See DoJ letter June 14, 1995).

D. LIMITATIONS ON SERVICE PROVIDER LIABILITY ARE WEAK AND THREATEN TO 
   RADICALLY REDUCE THE DECENTRALIZED NATURE OF THE INTERNET

Some provisions of the Exon/Coats bill attempt to limit the liability of 
service providers where they act only as passive transmitters of 
content.  However, these provisions have been significantly weakened as 
a result of pressure from anti-pornography groups, and are subject to 
interpretation which creates great risk for both users and service 
providers.  Anti-pornography groups have been pressing to hold online 
providers responsible for all of the information accessible to minors on 
the Internet.  The earlier version of the Exon bill excused from 
criminal liability anyone who had no editorial control over the content 
of the message.  However, the bill passed by the Senate removed the 
"editorial control" defense.  Instead, service providers could limit 
their liability only if they "ha[ve] no control" over the service, or if 
they take steps to restrict access for minors.  The degree of nature or 
degree of control which could leave a provider open to liability is, 
however, not specified.  CDT believes that these weakened "defenses" 
leave access providers, and thus Internet users, in a state of great 
uncertainty as to their responsibility under this bill.  

One of the major criticisms of the original legislation introduced by 
Senator Exon in February 1995 was that it placed criminal liability on 
online service providers and Internet access providers for any content 
that traveled across their networks.  In response to these criticisms, 
Senator Exon altered his bill to assure that service providers would not 
be held responsible for content on their network unless they exercised 
editorial control.  However, in the final days before Senate action on 
the bill, Senator Exon changed the provisions again at the request of 
Senator Coats.  Now, the presumption of liability has been reversed and 
a service provider would have to show that it has no control over the 
service which carried indecent content to a particular minor.

*  THE END OF USENET NEWSGROUPS?

The major uncertainty of the defenses centers on what it means for a 
service provider to have control over indecent or obscene content.  The 
uncertainty of this defense is revealed in an analysis of an Internet 
access providers relationship and potential criminal liability for 
providing access to Internet newsgroups such as Usenet.  Most Internet 
service providers provide access to Usenet, and, generally make choices 
about which newsgroups they carry.  Some carry all newsgroups, others 
carry only some groups.  The architecture of the Internet newsgroup 
system is such that a particular Internet access provide can chose to 
exclude the "alt.sex" newsgroups, or not.  Does this ability to exercise 
control mean that the service provider is criminally liable under the 
statute?  Or, does a carrier have to actually exercise control over the 
content of individual messages?  These definitional questions are legal 
fine points, but create substantial uncertainty over the meaning of the 
Act and are likely to lead to litigation and instability in the Internet 
environment.  Until these issues are resolved, there will likely be a 
substantial chilling effect on all speech on such services. 

The bill and associated legislative history leave some doubt as to the 
meaning of control, since it is never explicitly defined.  Debate on the 
Senate floor, which is often used by courts to divine the legislative 
intent of the drafters where a statute is unclear, gives seemingly 
contradictory signals on the question of service provider liability for 
services such as Usenet newsgroups.  One the one hand Senator Exon says 
in the Congressional Record of the debate that an online provider merely 
providing access, navigational tools and incidental services "is not 
aware of the contents of the  communications and should not be 
responsible" for violation of the obscenity, indecency or harassment 
crimes in the Act.  (Cong. Rec., S8345).  On the other hand, Senator 
Coats, the co-sponsor of the bill, says that the Act "does not create a 
defense for someone who has some level of control over the material of 
the provision of the material."  (Cong. Rec. S8345).  Senator Exon also 
says in the course of this "colloquy" with Senator Coats that those 
"engaging in pornography and indecency should install 'electronic 
bouncers' at their electronic doors" to keep minors out. (Id.)

CDT believes that defenses to prosecution for online service providers 
are critical in the context of this legislation, but is concerned that 
the defenses no longer serve the function for which they were originally 
designed.  As written in the Senate-passed bill, the defenses appear to 
require Internet service providers to interfere with the content of 
messages on their networks if they have any ability to do so.  

*  CREATION OF NEW GATEKEEPERS

Forcing online services providers to exercise control as the new 
Exon/Coats bill seems to require would spell the end of the open, 
decentralized communications environment which has characterized the 
Internet until now.  As we have argued elsewhere, users and parents have 
a great degree of control over what they and their children receive in 
interactive media.  Federal policy should encourage the development of 
this user control potential, rather than return to the centralized 
control regulatory models which characterized the mass media.  As an 
open, decentralized medium, the Internet promotes the free flow of 
information and serves as a valuable political and cultural forum. If we 
rely on user control technology we can protect children without 
involving federal regulators in the censorship of constitutionally-
protected speech.

E. UNFAIR TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUAL USERS, EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND 
   OTHER NON-COMMERCIAL SERVICES: PRE-EMPTION AGAINST RESTRICTIVE STATE LAWS 
   ONLY FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICES

If enacted, this proposal would protect commercial service providers 
from additional censorship by state legislatures, but leave all non-
commercial users, including libraries, schools, community groups, and 
individuals subject to additional regulation and censorship under state 
law.  The proposal pre-empts state statutes that might censor commercial 
services beyond the scope of federal law, but leaves all other net users 
and groups exposed to any censorship that states may choose to enact.  
We find no valid public policy argument which would accord greater 
protection to commercial speech than is granted to non-commercial users 
of the net.


CONCLUSION: Failure to take full advantage of user and parental control 
features inherent in interactive media

Legislating about new interactive media requires a careful understanding 
of the unique attributes of this new medium.  First and foremost, 
interactive media enable users (including parents) to exercise choice 
over the information that they and their children have access to.  In 
sharp contrast to older media, government content regulation is simply 
not necessary in order to shield children from possibly inappropriate 
information.  Any legislative action in this are must identify ways to 
promote greater parental and user control.  As drafted, the proposal 
before us suggests possible FCC rulemaking on this issue, but is no 
guaranty that the Commission would take this course.  Instead of just 
passing this critical question off to a regulatory body, Congress must 
identify both legal and voluntary means to encourage the development of 
more and more flexible and accessible user control techniques.

Interactive media such as the Internet, commercial online services, and 
interactive television networks, are, by nature, distinctly different 
from traditional broadcast and television mass media.  Interactive media 
does not suffer from a scarcity of capacity, nor does it assault an 
audiance of captive viewers. Most importantly, interactive media offers 
users tremendous control over the content that they and their children 
receive.  The Exon/Coats proposal completely fails to account for these 
unique aspects of interactive media. As House of Representatives begins 
to consider this and other proposals to regulate content on the 
Internet, CDT will continue to fight the Exon/Coats proposal, and will 
work to find alternative prolicy solutions which preserve the First 
Amendment an the free flow of information in cyberspace.


Center for Democracy and Technology     
        Jerry Berman    <jberman@cdt.org>
        Daniel Weitzner <djw@cdt.org>

+1.202.637.9800

------------------------------------------------------------------------


(2) TEXT OF THE STATUTE WITH PROPOSED AMENDMENT 

      TITLE 47.  TELEGRAPHS, TELEPHONES, AND RADIOTELEGRAPHS  
            CHAPTER 5.  WIRE OR RADIO COMMUNICATION  
                         COMMON CARRIERS

                          47 USCS | 223 (1992)

| 223.  Obscene or harassing telephone calls in the District of Columbia 
or in interstate or foreign communications

  Strike all of current Section (a) and insert the following:

        (a) Whoever --

       (1) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign 
communications

(A) by means of telecommunications device knowingly --

                (i)  makes, creates, or solicits, and
                (ii) initiates the transmission of,

any comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, or other 
communication which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent, 
with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass another person;

(B) makes a telephone call or utilizes a telecommunications device, 
whether or not conversation or communication ensues, without disclosing 
his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any 
person at the called number or who receives the communication;

(C) makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously 
to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or

(D) makes repeated telephone calls or repeatedly initiates communication 
with a telecommunications device, during which conversation or 
communication ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number 
or who receives the communication; or

        (2) knowingly permits any telecommunications facility under his 
control to be used for any activity prohibited by paragraph (1) with the 
intent that it be used for such activity,

shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more than two 
years, or both._

         NO CHANGE TO THE DIAL-A-PORN SECTIONS (B) AND (C)

(NOTE: BILL ADDS NEW SECTIONS (D) - (J))
      
 (d) Whoever--
  
   (1) knowingly within the United States or in foreign communications 
with the United States by means of telecommunications device makes or 
makes available any obscene communication in any form including any 
comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, regardless of whether the 
maker of such communication placed the call or initiated the 
communications; or
 
  (2) knowingly permits any telecommunications facility under such 
person's control to be used for an activity prohibited by subsection 
(d)(1) with the intent that it be used for such activity;

shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more 
than two years or both.


 (e) Whoever--
       
    (1) knowingly within the United States or in foreign communications 
with the United States by means of telecommunications device makes or 
makes available any indecent comment, request, suggestion, proposal, 
image to any person under 18 years of age regardless of whether the 
maker of such communication placed the call or initiated the 
communication; or

    (2) knowingly permits any telecommunications facility under such 
person's control to be used for an activity prohibited by paragraph (1) 
with the intent that it be used for such activity,

shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more 
than two years or both.


  (f) Defenses to the subsections (a), (d), and (e), restrictions on 
access, judicial remedies respecting restrictions for persons providing 
information services and access to information services--
        
            (1) No person shall be held to have violated subsections 
     (a), (d), or (e) solely for providing access or connection to or
     from a facility, system, or network over which that person
     has no control, including related capabilities which are
     incidental to providing access or connection.  This subsection
     shall not be applicatable to an individual who is owned or
     controlled by, or a conspirator with, an entity actively
     involved in the creation, editing or knowing distribution of
     communications which violate this section.
        
            (2) No employer shall be held liable under this section for
     the actions of an employee or agent unless the employee's or
     agent's conduct is within the scope of his employment or agency
     and the employer has knowledge of, authorizes, or ratifies the
     employee's or agent's conduct.
        
            (3) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a),  
      (d)(2), or (e) that a person has taken reasonable, effective and 
appropriate actions in good faith to restrict or prevent the 
transmission of, or access to a communication specified in such 
subsections, or complied with procedures as the Commission may prescribe 
in furtherance of this section.  Until such regulations become 
effective, it is a defense to prosecution that the person has complied 
with the procedures prescribed by regulation pursuant to subsection 
(b)(3).  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to treat enhanced 
information services as common carriage.

        (4) No cause of action may be brought in any 
     court or any administrative agency against any person on account 
     of any action which in not in violation of any law punishable
     by criminal penalty, which activity the person has taken in good
     faith to implement a defense authorized under this section or \
     otherwise to restrict or prevent the transmission of, or access to,
     a communication specified in this section.

         (g) no state or local government may impose any liability 
     for commercial activities or actions by commercial entities in
     connection with an activity or action which constitutes a violation
     described in subsection (a)(2), (d)(2), or (e)(2) that is
     inconsistent with the treatment of those activities or actions
     under this section provided, however, that nothin herein shall   
     preclude any State or local government from enacting and enforcing  
     complementary oversight, liability, and regulatory systems,    
     procedures, and requirements so long as such systems, procedures, 
     and requirements govern only intrastate services and do not result
     in the imposition of inconsistent rights, duties or obligations on  
     the provision of interstate services.  Nothing in this subsection     
     shall preclude any State or local government from governing conduct 
     not covered by this section.

         
(h) Nothing in subsection (a), (d), (e), or (f) or in the
defenses to prosecution under (a), (d), or (e) shall be construed to 
affect or limit the application or enforcement of any other Federal law.

(i) The use of the term 'telecommunications device' in this section 
shall not impose new obligations on (one-way) broadcast radio or (one-
way) broadcast television operators licensed by the Commission or (one-
way) cable services registered with the Federal Communications 
Commission and covered by obscenity and indecency provisions elsewhere 
in this Act.

(j) Within two years from the date of enactment and every two
years thereafter, the Commission shall report on the effectiveness of 
this section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(3) About The Center For Democracy And Technology/Contacting Us

The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest
organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public
policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic
values in new computer and communications technologies.

Contacting us:

To subscribe to CDT's news distribution list (to receive future Policy 
Posts directly), send email to <cdt-lists@cdt.org> with a subject of 
'subscribe policy posts'.

** NOTE TO THOSE WHO HAVE ALREADY REQUESTED TO BE ADDED TO CDT's 
   DISTRIBUTION LIST:  We are still working to build our listserv -- you 
   will begin receiving Policy Posts on this list very soon. We appreciate 
   your patience!

General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to
 info@cdt.org

World-Wide-Web:

   http://www.cdt.org/

ftp:

   ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/

snail mail:

Center For Democracy and Technology
1001 G Street, NW Suite 700 East
Washington, DC 20001
voice: +1.202.637.9800
fax:   +1.202.637.9800
                                  ###
</pre>
<hr size = 2>
Return to the <a href = "http://www.cdt.org/publications/pubs.html"> publications page</a><br>
Return to the <a href = "http://www.cdt.org">CDT Home Page</a>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>