
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B11-277</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B041-275</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.005.html 130.91.195.242 19970122052127 text/html 17873
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:21:14 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 17701
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:30:47 GMT
</DOCHDR>
THE CLIPPER INITIATIVE in three parts - 1 of 3 <p>

THE CLIPPER INITIATIVE <p>

All Americans have a Right to Privacy!
                                  But Key Escrow Won't Help <p>

Stephen T. Walker1
                              Trusted Information Systems, Inc. <p>

August 31, 1993 <p>

1.     Summary <p>

On April 16, 1993, the President announced "a voluntary program
to improve the security and privacy of telephone communications
while meeting the legitimate needs of law enforcement."2  This
announcement contains the very strong statement that: <p>

"The Administration is committed to policies that protect
       all Americans' right to privacy [emphasis added] while also
       protecting them from those who break the law." <p>

The announcement describes a new encryption algorithm that is
"more powerful" than many in commercial use today while
preserving "the ability of federal, state, and local law
enforcement agencies to lawfully intercept the phone
conversations of criminals" through the use of a "key-escrow"
system. <p>

This paper summarizes my review of the information presented to
the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board (CSSPAB)
in public testimony and related publicly available information
concerning the President's "Clipper Chip" Initiative. <p>

Based on this review I have concluded that: <p>

     Key escrow technology will NOT protect Americans "from
              those who break the law." <p>

     For Administration policies to "protect all Americans'
              right to privacy," the Administration will have to
              acknowledge the worldwide availability of good quality
              cryptography and stop denying Americans the use of
              technologies that are freely available to others in the
              name of protecting us "from those who break the law." <p>

The real issue confronting us in the President's Clipper Chip
Initiative is obtaining an appropriate balance between: <p>

     legitimate law enforcement and national security
              concerns with intercepting communications that are not
              in the best interests of the U.S., and <p>

     legitimate concerns with protecting U.S. Government and
              commercial sector sensitive information and preserving
              the U.S. economic position. <p>

For too long, the law enforcement and national security interests
have controlled the dialog in this debate through their special
positioning in the Executive Branch of the Government.  Now with
advances in technology and worldwide availability of cryptography
threatening to impede the ability to easily listen to others,
these agencies are proposing potentially highly invasive measures
that have little prospect of improving law enforcement and
national security intercept capabilities, while having a
significant negative impact on U.S. commercial capabilities and
interests. <p>

Meanwhile, requirements to protect U.S. Government and commercial
sensitive information and maintain U.S. strength in the computer
industry remain restricted without a voice in the debate. <p>

While there may be a strong desire to slow the erosion in our
technical communications intercept capabilities, this paper will
show that the new key escrow approach will have little positive
impact because it will see little use beyond the government. <p>

However, if the Administration were to acknowledge today's
worldwide availability of good quality encryption capabilities,
such as the Data Encryption Standard (DES), our Government and
commercial interests in protecting U.S. sensitive data would be
vastly improved.  In so doing, our ability to intercept others
could be marginally hurt, but many feel the gains outweigh the
losses. <p>

We must have a balanced review representing both sides of this
national dilemma.  Such a debate cannot occur exclusively within
the Executive Branch of the Government because of its close
affiliation with the law enforcement and national security
communities and the absence of any effective representation for
U.S. commercial interests. <p>

The Congress is the only organization that represents all
constituencies affected by such a debate.  In the interest of
reaching a fair and timely resolution of this national issue, I
strongly encourage the Congress to act swiftly to establish a
national policy regarding the use of cryptography to resolve this
dilemma and clarify all Americans' right to privacy. <p>

2.     Background <p>

In the fall of 1992, AT&amp;T announced a telephone security device
that would provide high quality security using the DES algorithm
to protect the public's sensitive phone calls.3  Orders were
taken for delivery in early 1993.  When the devices arrived,
purchasers were told they were only "on loan" and would be
replaced by a "better" device in "April 1993." <p>

According to Dr. Clinton Brooks of NSA, AT&amp;T came to NSA asking
if they should use DES in these devices.4  NSA realized that if
it did not want DES to become widely used in such devices, it
would have to accelerate the availability of technology it
already had under development (now known as Clipper) that would
give higher security than DES but with key escrow5 capabilities
to protect the interests of the law enforcement community.
Apparently, AT&amp;T decided to go along with NSA so long as the
Clipper technology was made available on a timely basis.  On the
same day in April that the President proclaimed the Clipper
Initiative, "AT&amp;T announced it would use the new chip in all its
secure non-government telephones."6 <p>

But the chips that implement Clipper have been delayed through
manufacturing difficulties.  So in early August AT&amp;T announced
immediate availability of two new non-Clipper, non-key escrow
telephone security devices, using AT&amp;T proprietary algorithms,
one approved for export, the other not.  At the same time,
Cylink, a manufacturer of security equipment, announced a DES-
based phone security device. <p>

It would seem that in a little less than a year, we have come
full circle.  Once again there are telephone security devices
(DES and non-DES) on the market, this time in open competition
with the Government's proposed key escrow system that was
intended to replace an earlier DES-based offering. <p>

3.     What are the Real Issues with Key Escrow <p>

What impact will these new products have on the Government's
voluntary program to have key escrow systems become widely used?
Will the law abiding public prefer to buy secure phones with or
without key escrow, or just not buy them at all?  And where is
all of this headed in the computer communications world? Do we
need/want key escrow capabilities for our communications? Can we
afford the price we will have to pay for them? Before we can
answer these questions we need to examine a number of difficult
issues from practical, economic, and philosophical perspectives. <p>

Law Enforcement's Wiretap Capabilities <p>

An analysis of the prospects for the law enforcement community
being able to maintain its present level of wiretap capability is
contained in Appendix A.  Through examination of a series of
scenarios ranging from doing nothing to mandatory enforcement of
key escrow cryptography for all phones in the U.S., it becomes
clear that irreversible advances in digital telephony technology
and growing availability of encryption will make it increasingly
difficult to wiretap the communications of sophisticated criminal
elements, with or without key escrow capabilities. <p>

Conclusion: <p>

With respect to the feasibility of law enforcement's being
       able to continue present day telephone wiretaps of illegal
       activities: <p>

     Over the next few years, the law enforcement
                    community will probably lose the technical ability
                    to wiretap sophisticated criminal activities,
                    regardless of whether we install key escrow systems
                    or not, and conversely, <p>

     the law enforcement community will almost certainly
                    retain the technical ability to wiretap law abiding
                    citizens and unsophisticated criminals, regardless
                    of whether we install key escrow systems or not. <p>

Key Escrow Applied to Telephones and Computer Communications <p>

The limited available information concerning how key escrow
techniques will work for telephone and computer communications
systems is analyzed in Appendix B.  Key escrow techniques appear
relatively straight forward in simple point-to-point telephone
situations, but their application to sophisticated computer
communications environments is much more complex.  While
technically feasible, these applications will be subject to a
wide variety of software bypasses of the hardware-only key escrow
provisions that will defeat their effectiveness.  They will also
impose a unique hardware expense on the user which will be
unacceptable in most situations. <p>

Conclusion: <p>

With respect to the use of key escrow for telephone
       communications: <p>

     The emergence of the non-key escrow telephone
                    security devices (such as the new AT&amp;T and Cylink
                    devices) will confuse the market place and deprive
                    the Government of its hoped for widespread
                    voluntary use of key escrow. <p>

With respect to the use of key escrow for computer network
communications: <p>

     Significant technical and legal complications
                    confront the use of key escrow in computer
                    applications.  The Government's hardware-only
                    restrictions for key escrow systems cannot be
                    achieved in computer systems where software
                    controls the basic applications for file transfer,
                    electronic mail, and electronic commerce.  No
                    specific requirement for law enforcement wiretap of
                    computer communications has been identified.
                    Conventional search warrant procedures may be
                    adequate for obtaining computer data rather than
                    key escrowed wiretaps. <p>

International Acceptance of Key Escrow <p>

The issues of international acceptance and use of key escrow
techniques seem to have been poorly thought out in the Clipper
plan.  The sharing of escrowed keys with other governments opens
technological, political, and psychological issues that are
likely to be insurmountable.  One need only consider the feelings
of a U.S. citizen whose encryption keys were available to a
collection of foreign interests to recognize that foreign
interests will feel the same way about U.S. Government key
escrow.  While one can understand how individual governments
might see advantages in such sharing, it is difficult to see how
individual citizens anywhere will find the use of key escrow
acceptable.  In a world of growing multinational economies, key
escrow arrangements among individual governments seem sadly out
of place. <p>

The Skipjack7 Algorithm and Key Escrow Control Procedures <p>

The Government's Skipjack review team found8 that the algorithm
used in the Clipper chip is sound and not subject to easy defeat
by exhaustive key search9 or shortcut attacks.  I am fully
prepared to accept this team's findings both because of the
quality of people who performed the analysis and the belief that
NSA would not introduce a flaw in an algorithm of this type.  But
the problem with Clipper, if there is one, will not be in the
algorithm itself but with the key escrow control procedures which
the Government is developing to grant law enforcement access to
the Clipper keys. <p>

The key escrow control procedures, which are still not fully
worked out, are intended to provide law enforcement with rapid
access to keys while protecting the public from improper
disclosure to unauthorized individuals.  As described to the
CSSPAB on July 29, 1993, the procedures appear to provide very
limited protection against a government official who might be
operating in an illegal manner. <p>

Constitutional Rights Issues <p>

Many people have discussed concerns about possible violations of
the Constitutional rights of individual citizens by the use of
key escrow procedures.  I will defer such questions to others
with a legal background. <p>

I do have one concern regarding the comment in the President's
April 16 announcement that "the Administration is committed to
policies that protect all Americans' right to privacy while also
protecting them from those who break the law."  These two goals
seem impossible to achieve at the same time.  This seems to be
more a "right to privacy from everyone but the Government," which
is a long way from the Bill of Rights. <p>

Overall Conclusion: <p>

Key escrow technology will NEITHER advance the public's
       right to privacy NOR protect it "from those who break the
       law." <p>

As desirable as those goals may be to the Government, the
technical, economic, and personal privacy aspects of key escrow
techniques will limit them from playing a significant role in our
future telephone and computer communications systems. <p>

As our communication technologies continue their rapid evolution,
we must be careful not to hamstring them with restrictive
"solutions" to issues that have been overtaken by technology. <p>

4.     But what about protecting "all Americans' right to privacy"? <p>

Even if key escrow can't assure the protection of Americans "from
those who break the law," we can make progress on the other theme
of the Clipper announcement, the protection of "all Americans'
right to privacy"! <p>

There are several issues to be considered here: <p>

     Good cryptography (of the quality of DES) is already
              available worldwide and attempts to contain it in the
              U.S. are only hurting U.S. users and vendors. <p>

     Because of export restrictions, U.S. manufacturers are
              reluctant to integrate good cryptography into their
              products since they cannot sell them to the majority of
              their markets.  This has multiple negative effects,
              such as: <p>

-  denying U.S. users good quality integrated
                      encryption products even for use only in the
                      U.S., <p>

-  denying U.S. computer vendors significant
                      overseas sales which automatically go to foreign
                      vendors, and thus, <p>

-  exporting U.S. jobs in computer related
                      industries to foreign countries. <p>

An ongoing study of foreign availability of cryptography10 has in
only a few weeks found several hundred products, most of them
DES-based, that are available just about anywhere in the world.
Many of these products, being sold in the U.S., are from foreign
manufacturers since many countries' export laws, while claiming
to be similar to those of the U.S., make it quite easy to get
export licenses to the U.S.  Several German DES products are
routinely sold here through a blanket export license.  But once
here, those products cannot leave the U.S.   This situation
effectively guarantees that whatever worldwide business there
will be in  products that use cryptography will go to those
companies in those countries that can readily export their
products.  The U.S. is losing this very important and rapidly
growing market. <p>

And it's not just the sale of products that use cryptography that
we are losing.  When U.S. companies cannot supply reasonable
cryptography fully integrated into their entire product line,
they are losing the sale of major information systems, of which
the cryptographic products may be only a small portion. <p>

Mass market software is one of the few industries where the U.S.
holds a significant technological and commercial advantage.  Yet
U.S. producers are reluctant to incorporate cryptography into
their products, solely because of U.S. export uncertainty.  The
Software Publishers Association, in a major shift in U.S. export
policy in 1992, obtained blanket export permission for encryption
products using keys limited to 40-bit key lengths.  However, the
world market, which already has ready access to 56-bit key DES
products, recognizes the weakness of 40-bit keys and simply will
not accept them. <p>

Government officials11 complain that industry cannot provide an
economic analysis of how much business is being lost through the
imposition of export controls on cryptography.  They have a right
to complain, but they must understand that this is a rapidly
emerging economic environment.  Once we can document in detail
what we are losing or have lost, the situation will be so far
along that we will be out of the game and unable to recover.  We
must look at the indicators and adjust our strategy based on them
or we will lose much more than the sale of a few cryptographic
devices. <p>

DES is not in the public domain? <p>

The U.S. Department of State has declared that information about
cryptography that is not in the public domain cannot be exported.
When faced with the question, "Isn't DES in the public domain?"
they insist that it is not.  To do otherwise, of course, would be
to admit that DES could be readily exported, which they are
determined not to allow.  If exportability of good quality
encryption products were not a critical issue for the U.S.
computer industry, this U.S. Government policy would be just one
more case where policy ignores reality.  Unfortunately, it's much <p>

</DOC>