
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-125</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B008-274</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034837 text/html 13636
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:07 GMT
Content-length: 13418
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Economics of Drug Legalization</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization: US Dept. of
Justice</p>

<h2>Chapter Four: The Economics of Drug Legalization </h2>

<hr>

<p><b>Discussion</b> </p>

<p><b>1. Their Argument</b> </p>

<p>Proponents of legalization suggest that their policy will save
society money for several reasons. First, we will not have to pay
police to enforce the present criminal-justice approach to drug
usage. Second, we will be able to tax legal drugs, thereby
raising revenue. </p>

<p>II. <b>Our Argument</b> </p>

<p>It should be stated initially that most people misconceive the
amount of resources expended under the status quo for drug
control. The FY 1994 federal budget allocates $7.51 billion for
drug control (supply reduction) which includes criminal justice,
interdiction, international programs and intelligence.81 State
and local governments spend even more, $12.6 billion a year.82
Granted, this is a lot of money, but we should put these numbers
in perspective. Americans spend about four billion dollars each
summer for air conditioning.83 The citizens of Washington State
spend $1.4 billion each year on legal gambling alone.84 The
national debt numbers in the trillions of dollars. One Stealth
Bomber runs half a billion dollars. Indeed, only 1.4% of total
government spending goes for law enforcement of all types, and an
additional 1.0% for prosecution and prisons.85 Out of this small
percentage, 12% of spending for law enforcement was allocated to
drug control activities, and about 25% of correctional (prison)
spending was drug related.86 Only 1.5% of total state and local
government spending is attributed to drug control activities.87
Thus, when taken in context, it is apparent that the costs of
criminalized drugs nowhere approaches the financial obligations
of government programs such as national defense, Social Security,
or Medicare. </p>

<p>More important, if we legalized drugs on the assumption that
by taxing them we could raise large amounts of revenue, we would
be sadly mistaken. First, as discussed in Chapter Two, any such
taxation scheme would perpetuate a criminal black market.
Consequently, we would still have to spend money funding police,
courts and the like to fight this problem. Second, if alcohol is
any indication, we simply would not make that much money by
taxing drugs. The total revenue collected from alcohol taxes at
the federal, state, and local levels amounts to about $13.1
billion a year,&quot; a paltry sum compared to the social costs
associated with alcohol consumption - something in the
neighborhood of $100 billion.&quot; Third, how would we structure
a tax scheme for drugs? If we wanted to correlate higher taxes
with higher risk behavior, logically we would tax the fifth joint
more than the first (inasmuch as the fifth joint probably is more
damaging to one's health). And wouldn't it cost money to create
the governmental bureaucracy that would handle this taxation
policy? </p>

<p>Thus, we do not spend that much on the drug war in comparison
to other governmental programs, and taxation of legalized drugs
would not result in that much revenue. But by far the most
compelling economic argument against the legalization of drugs is
the social costs associated with such a policy. </p>

<p>First, treating drug addicts is enormously expensive. Take
crack babies as an example. In 1988, it cost $2.5 billion for the
intensive care needed to keep the babies alive after birth.90 But
that was just the beginning of the expenses. It is estimated that
it will cost $15 billion to prepare these children for
kindergarten,91 and will then cost between $6 billion and $12
billion for every year of special learning programs.92 Even
assuming the low-ball figure, the social costs of educating all
of the crack babies born in 1988 -<i> not all crack babies, mind
you, just those born that year</i> - will run approximately $90
billion by the time they graduate from high school. Now to the
extent that legalization will increase the drug addiction rates
enormously [see Chapter One], legalization seems like a very
expensive policy indeed. And who will foot the bill? Either
common citizens will through taxes for government aid programs,
or through increased insurance premiums.93 </p>

<p>But treatment costs are just the first way in which drug
addiction drains society. Already, drug addicts cost the country
roughly $33 billion dollars a year in lost productivity and
job-related accidents, according to a study conducted in 1987 by
the Research Triangle Institute of Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina.94 If legalized, addiction rates would increase and the
cost would rise to between $140 billion and $210 billion a
year.95 And who will pay for lost productivity and job-related
accidents? Consumers will, of course, in the final costs of the
produced goods. </p>

<p>Finally we must consider human lives in the economic calculus.
As drug abuse causes more job related accidents, more people will
be hurt or killed. Take, for example, the Conrail/Amtrak disaster
of January 4, 1987. Because an engineer and a brakeman were high
on marijuana, their train collided with another, killing sixteen
people and injuring 175.96 </p>

<p>So go back to the beginning. We spend approximately $20
billion a year on drug control activities. If drugs were
legalized, we would see an increase in addiction rates.
Consequently we would have more crack babies (the kind that
already will cost the system $90 billion), decreased productivity
(at a cost of between $140 billion and $210 billion), more
job-related accidents, and more dead people. And given the
potential black market effect, it is unlikely that we could raise
even several billion dollars in tax revenue. From a purely
economic standpoint, legalization is not cost effective. </p>

<p>81 &quot;National Drug Control Strategy: Reclaiming Our
Communities from Drugs and Violence,&quot; </p>

<p>The White House, February 1994. </p>

<p>82 &quot;State and Local Spending on Drug Control
Activities,&quot; Office of National Drug Control Policy, October
1993. </p>

<p>83 John W. Ladenburg, &quot;Should We Legalize Drugs?&quot;
Position Paper of the Pierce County Prosecuting Attorney. </p>

<p>84 Rachel A. Volberg, &quot;Gambling and Problem Gambling in
Washington State,&quot; Washington State Lottery, February 15,
1993. </p>

<p>85 &quot;Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics,
1986.&quot; Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1987. See also,
&quot;Report to the Nation on Crime and Justice,&quot; Bureau of
Justice Statistics, March 1988. </p>

<p>86<b> </b>&quot;State and Local Spending on Drug Control
Activities,&quot; Office of National Drug Control Policy, October
1993. </p>

<p>87 Id. </p>

<p>88 Morton M. Kondracke, &quot;Don't Legalize Drugs,&quot; The
New Republic, June 27, 1988. </p>

<p>89 Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of Illegal
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. </p>

<p>90 A.M. Rosenthal, &quot;How Much is a Baby Worth?&quot; New
York Times, December 15, 1989. </p>

<p>91 Id. </p>

<p>92 Id. </p>

<p>93 &quot;No Magic Bullet: A Look at Drug Legalization,&quot;
U.S. Department of Justice, Drug </p>

<p>Enforcement Administration, Demand Reduction Section. </p>

<p>94 Peter Kerr, &quot;The Unspeakable Is Debated: Should Drugs
Be Legalized?&quot; New York </p>

<p>Times, May 15,1988. </p>

<p>95 Morton M. Kondracke, &quot;Don't Legalize Drugs,&quot; The
New Republic, June 27, 1988. </p>

<p>96 Peggy Mann, &quot;Reasons To Oppose Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September
1988. </p>

<h2><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </h2>

<h2>Chapter Four Summary Sheet: The Economics of Drug
Legalization </h2>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>The drug control efforts are too expensive. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>We spend approximately $20 billion annually on drug control.
[&quot;State and Local Spending on Drug Control Activities,&quot;
Office of National, Drug Control Policy, October 1993]. </p>

<p>Americans spend roughly $4 billion every summer on air
conditioning. [John W. Wenburg, &quot;Should We Legalize
Drugs?&quot; Position Paper of the Pierce County Prosecuting
Attorney]. </p>

<p>Less than 3% of total government spending goes for police and
prisons, and only 12% of police spending and 25% of correctional
spending is drug related. [Sourcebook of Criminal Justice
Statistics 1986, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1987 and State and
Local Spending on Drug Control Activities, Office of National
Drug Control Policy, October 1993]. </p>

<p>Many programs such as national defense, Social Security, and
Medicare cost much more than what we spend on efforts to control
drugs. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>If we legalized drugs, we could raise much revenue through
taxation. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>If you try to tax legalized drugs, you will create a black
market. You will then have to allocate resources to the police
and the courts to combat this crime. (See Chapter Two]. </p>

<p>This was tried with alcohol. It Failed. Federal, state, and
local alcohol taxes combined raise approximately $13.1 billion
dollars a year, but alcohol extracts over $ 100 billion a year in
social costs such as lost productivity and health costs. [Morton
M. Kondracke, &quot;Don't Legalize Drugs,&quot; The New Republic,
June 27, 1988; Robert E. Peterson, &quot;'Stop Legalization of
Illegal Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July
1988]. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>Legalizing drugs would save money. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>Legalizing drugs<b> </b>would increase the addiction rate.
[see Chapter One]. </p>

<p>Addicts require treatment, and this is enormously expensive.
For example, in 1988 we spent $2.5 billion for intensive care of
crack babies. It will cost roughly $15 billion to prepare them
for kindergarten. Further, special learning programs will cost
between $6 billion and $12 billion a year for every year after
kindergarten. By the time they graduate from high school, this
yields a total of roughly $90 billion. [A.M. Rosenthal, &quot;How
Much Is a Baby Worth?&quot; New York Times, December 15, 1989]. </p>

<p>If we legalize drugs, it will cost society between $140
billion and $210 billion a year in lost productivity and
job-related accidents. [Morton M. Kondracke, citation above]. </p>

<p>If we legalize drugs, consumers will bear the ultimate
responsibility for the bill because of increases in insurance
premiums and higher costs of manufactured goods. [&quot;No Magic
Bullet: A Look at Drug Legalization,&quot; Drug Enforcement
Administration Publication]. </p>

<p>Legalizing drugs would increase the incidence of drug-related
accidents such as the Conrail/Amtrak train crash of January 1987
in which 16 people were killed and 175 were injured. [Peggy .
Mann, &quot;Reasons to Oppose Legalizing Illegal Drugs,&quot;
September 1988]. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>