
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B37-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B017-188</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003002 text/html 43005
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:28:04 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:13 GMT
Content-length: 42818
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev21.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 5, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1059 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1228 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENT&nbsp;ALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(378 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALE&nbsp;QUANTUM-CEP FACILITY.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(296 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1395 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HMIR HOTLINE.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1075 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGH

As the second federal government shutdown of FY 1996 entered its
third week, EPA Administrator Carol Browner announced on 2 January
that the Superfund monies for FY 1995 have been depleted, and that
about 2,400 EPA employees working under the Superfund program
nationwide will join 14,500 EPA workers who are already on
furlough. According to EPA, the furlough of the 2,400 Superfund
workers will result in the shutdown of operations at 450 to
650 hazardous waste sites nationwide--National Priorities List
(NPL) sites and non-NPL sites--and will leave a total of about
80 EPA employees to oversee any remaining operations. According to
EPA's initial estimates, the shutdown of operations at Superfund
sites also threatens the jobs of 10,000 private-sector workers, who
could be laid off because the government is not able to make timely
payments to their employers. The 10,000 private-sector workers
consist of 5,000 employees of cleanup companies working directly
under contract with EPA and another 5,000 employees working on
cleanups that, while led by potentially responsible parties (PRPs),
still require EPA oversight.

"If the program is dormant for long, private companies will be
forced to make permanent staff changes, which will seriously
undermine our work in restoring the environment," according to
Jonathan Curtis, president and chief executive officer of CDM
Federal Programs Corp. in Fairfax, Virginia. By the end of the week
of 1 January, "private companies will begin making these staffing
assessments if the shutdown is not concluded," said Curtis, who is
chairman of the Hazardous Waste Action Coalition's (HWAC's)
Government Affairs Committee. "Just as Superfund is beginning to
produce results, the plug is pulled," he added. William Epstein,
director of government affairs at Roy F. Weston, Inc. in West
Chester, Pennsylvania, lamented that the current government
shutdown will actually increase the overall costs of the Superfund
program. "We have been told by EPA officials that the mobilization
and demobilization by federal contractors will cost more than if we
continued work," Epstein noted. "This shutdown will achieve no
savings." According to an EPA source, implementing the shutdown of
the Superfund program--an operation that began on 2 January--is
expected to take at least five days.

In connection with the government shutdown, HWAC's legal counsel,
the law firm Morgan Lewis & Bockius in Washington, D.C., has issued
a white paper alerting cleanup contractors of the legal issues and
risks that they face, and their options for response, "in the event
of a lapse in the annual appropriations that fund their federal
agency customers." Contractors that do not receive payment for
their services "have the right to suspend their performance," the
white paper said, and depending on the clauses in their contracts
with EPA and other federal agencies, "they may or may not be
entitled to an equitable adjustment for the suspension period if
and when more funds are allotted to their contracts." Other
contractors that do not lose funding altogether but otherwise face
delays and disruptions because of the shutdown may not be entitled
to compensation "because the lapse in appropriations could be
deemed a sovereign, as opposed to a contractual, act of the
government," the white paper said. For a copy of the white paper,
contact: HWAC, No. 802, 1015 15th Street, N.W., Washington,
DC 20005; Tel: 202-347-7474.

The troubles of federal contractors will not end even if another
continuing resolution is approved soon. During FY 1996, which began
on 1 October 1995, two continuing resolutions have been required to
maintain operations at those federal agencies and departments,
including EPA and the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State,
whose FY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved. Those
continuing resolutions have funded operations at levels below
FY 1995 appropriations, thereby preventing agency and department
managers--many of whom are expecting dramatic cuts when their
FY 1996 appropriations are finally approved--from making reliable
spending plans for the current fiscal year. According to an HMIR
source, developing final FY 1996 budgets for as-yet-unfunded
agencies and departments could take up to two more months--
approaching the halfway point in the current fiscal year--leaving
only six or seven months for the agencies to spend their monies.
"Getting everything going again in an efficient way will be very
difficult" under those circumstances, the source told HMIR. "It's
not a good way to run a government."

The impact of the federal government shutdown on the environmental
industry is not limited to suspended EPA contracts. Key departments
involved in the promotion of environmental exports--including the
Department of Commerce (DOC), the Department of State, and the
Agency for International Development (AID)--remain unfunded, and
export-promotion projects involving those entities and private-
sector organizations are imperiled. The Environmental Export
Council (EEC) in Washington, D.C., currently has cooperative
agreements with AID and DOC to develop environmental export
programs, but without the federal funding for the programs, "we're
going to have to quit working on these projects reasonably soon,"
said John Mizroch, EEC's executive director. In addition, EEC may
have to lay off people who are working on a project with the U.S.-
Asia Environmental Partnership (USAEP) that would have involved
bringing officials of Asian nations to the United States to review
U.S. environmental technologies and products. "The government
shutdown comes at a very unfortunate time," Mizroch told HMIR,
"because it holds up these important initiatives that will help
U.S. business."

Congressional Republicans have linked the approval of any new
continuing resolution with the White House's concession on key
elements of a balanced-budget plan--notably on Congress's proposed
Medicare cuts and tax relief. On 2 January, however, Senate
Majority Leader Robert Dole (Republican-Kansas) expressed his
frustration with the impasse and, departing from other Republican
leaders, engineered passage of a continuing resolution in the
Senate. On 3 January, the House rejected the measure. At press
time, however, the House had softened its stance slightly and
indicated that it was prepared to approve a plan to put about
280,000 federal employees in several programs back to work, until
26 January in some cases and until 15 March in others. The affected
programs include Meals on Wheels, the administration of
unemployment insurance, visitor services at national parks, and Aid
to Families with Dependent Children. The House plan would not
provide money to run those federal agencies and departments whose
FY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved, including EPA,
DOC, the Department of Interior, and the Securities and Exchange
Commission.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUP

The story of the hazardous waste site that was largely responsible
for giving birth to the federal Superfund program neared conclusion
last month as the federal government and Occidental Chemical Corp.
reached an agreement resolving Occidental's cleanup liabilities at
the Love Canal site near Niagara Falls, New York. Under the terms
of a settlement that was filed on 21 December in the U.S. District
Court in Buffalo, New York, Occidental will pay the federal
government a total of $129 million, consisting of $101 million that
the government has spent on cleanup and $28 million in interest
accrued during 16 years of litigation. The settlement "should send
a message of federal persistence and tenacity," said Attorney
General Janet Reno in announcing the settlement. EPA Administrator
Carol Browner noted that "the Love Canal settlement underscores
this Administration's firm commitment to ensuring that polluters--
not the American people--pick up the tab for cleaning up toxic
waste dumps."

The settlement must still be approved by U.S. District Court Judge
John Curtin, who has presided over the 16-year-old case since the
federal government filed its initial lawsuit against Occidental in
December 1979. The lawsuit sought cleanup and related damages,
including punitive damages, under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), the River and Harbors Act, and other
environmental laws. The state of New York subsequently filed its
own lawsuit against Occidental. Both complaints were later joined
and amended to include cost-recovery claims under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA),
which was enacted in December 1980 under the shadow of the Love
Canal incident and the increasingly controversial problem of
abandoned toxic waste sites. In a settlement approved by Judge
Curtin in July 1994, Occidental agreed to pay New York a total of
nearly $100 million and to perform long-term operation and
maintenance of the remediation systems at the Love Canal site.

Occidental Chemical became involved in the Love Canal saga as a
result of its acquisition of Hooker Chemical and Plastics Corp. In
the early 1940s, Hooker leased and then acquired an uncompleted
canal in the Niagara Falls area--the so-called Love Canal. Until
1953, the company dumped about 25,000 tons of chemical waste into
the canal and nearby pits. Hooker subsequently buried the wastes
and sold the property to the Niagara Falls School Board for $1,
with the stipulation that the board would not hold Hooker legally
responsible for any subsequent problems that the buried wastes
might cause. From the 1960s through the mid-1970s, complaints by
local residents about foul odors in the area evolved into
complaints about chemicals leaking into the basements of nearby
homes and surfacing in yards, and ultimately into complaints about
health problems. Responding to the complaints, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) undertook the relocation of
239 families in the Love Canal area in 1978; President Jimmy Carter
ordered the evacuation of another 800 Love Canal families in
December 1980. FEMA--and later EPA--also took response actions at
the site, consisting of constructing a clay cap over the canal to
prevent air emissions and installing a leachate collection system
to prevent the migration of chemical wastes from the canal.

A local school and several homes were subsequently demolished, and
contaminated sewer systems and nearby creek sediments were removed
or cleaned up; the leachate collection system is still operating.
In June 1990, the Love Canal Revitalization Agency adopted a plan
for resettling homes in the area, and the first homes went up for
sale later that year. In 1992, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) agreed to provide mortgage insurance for the Love
Canal properties, thereby increasing the pace of home sales in the
area. To date, all but 32 of the 233 homes that were available have
been sold or are under contract for sale, according to the
Department of Justice (DOJ).

Under the settlement between Occidental and the federal government,
the company will pay EPA a total of $102 million covering the
agency's response costs plus interest, while the rest of the
$129 million will go to FEMA for its role in the response action.
The settlement also resolves Occidental's claims that, in addition
to Hooker, the U.S. Army dumped chemical wastes into Love Canal and
therefore should be held partially responsible for the cleanup
costs. Without admitting any guilt on behalf of the Army, the
federal government agreed to assume $8 million of the Love Canal
response costs.

In announcing the settlement, federal officials took specific aim
at Congressional proposals to provide liability relief to
potentially responsible parties (PRPs) through reimbursements or
tax credits amounting to as much as 50 percent of PRP costs
associated with the cleanup of wastes disposed of before 1980
(Senate proposal) or 1987 (House proposal). According to Lois
Schiffer, assistant attorney general for DOJ's Environment and
Natural Resources Division, such proposals could give Occidental a
tax credit for as much as $64.5 million in connection with the
company's Love Canal liabilities under CERCLA. A reimbursement
system of the type proposed by Congress "would destroy the
fundamental principle that a polluter should pay to clean up its
own mess," Schiffer noted. EPA's Browner declared that "elimination
of the retroactive liability provisions in the Superfund law--as
some have proposed--would have let this polluter off the hook."

Lois Gibbs, executive director of the Citizens Clearinghouse for
Hazardous Waste in Falls Church, Virginia, said that she was happy
with the settlement. "It has got to send a chill up the spine of
many others who pollute and pretend it is not a problem," said
Gibbs, the former Love Canal housewife whose organizing efforts
helped draw national attention to the area's contamination. A
strong proponent of the polluter-pays principal, Gibbs sharply
criticized Congressional attempts to reimburse PRPs for portions of
their cleanup liabilities. "The only way Occidental and others will
change their way of behaving will be if it costs them more to
pollute--to do harm than to do good," she told HMIR. "Instead of
cutting the costs for those who have not complied with the
Superfund law, Congress should reward those who did comply, and
those who have improved their environmental practices," she
suggested.

Beyond addressing the polluter-pays issue, the Love Canal case does
not provide much direction for efforts to reform the Superfund
program, according to Occidental attorney Steven Yablonsky, a
partner at Piper & Marbury in Baltimore, Maryland. Love Canal "is
not one of those sites that had hundreds of responsible parties,"
said Yablonsky, who noted that multi-PRP sites have presented the
most vexing liability problems under CERCLA. Yablonsky added that
a key development in the case was Judge Curtin's ruling in March
1994 that Hooker's waste disposal practices were consistent with
industry's practices at the time, and that Occidental therefore
should not be held liable for punitive damages in the Love Canal
case. "There couldn't have been a settlement without that ruling,"
Yablonsky told HMIR.

While Occidental has now settled the major CERCLA claims of the
federal government and the state of New York, the company is still
negotiating with the city of Niagara Falls and the Niagara Falls
School Board to determine the cleanup liabilities of those two
municipal entities. In addition, Occidental is still engaged in
personal-injury litigation with numerous Niagara County residents,
and it is seeking coverage of its cleanup liabilities at Love Canal
from its insurers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENT
ALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.

Far from fulfilling proponents' assurances that the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) would result in an improved
environment along the U.S.-Mexico border, trade between the U.S.
and Mexico under NAFTA has exacerbated border-area problems through
an increase in industrial activity, according to a recent report by
Public Citizen in Washington, D.C. The report concluded that
NAFTA's advocates--notably the Clinton Administration--inaccurately
predicted that NAFTA would lead to increased investment throughout
Mexico and, as a result, less concentration of "maquiladora"
facilities along the U.S.-Mexico border. Maquiladoras are Mexico-
based manufacturing facilities that are owned by foreign firms. The
Public Citizen report found that, largely as a result of the
devaluation of the Mexican peso one year ago, nationwide investment
in Mexico's infrastructure and industrial base has failed to
materialize. At the same time, the number of maquiladora facilities
in the border area has increased by 20 percent from more than
546,000 to nearly 690,000 facilities since NAFTA took effect in
January 1994, despite an economic crisis that has resulted in a net
loss of 1.6 million jobs throughout Mexico. The report noted that
the increased maquiladora activity along the U.S. Mexico border,
coupled with a lack of investment in pollution-control
infrastructure and the Mexican government's lack of support for
environmental enforcement, has resulted in increased illegal
dumping of hazardous wastes, increased air and water pollution, and
worsening health problems, including increased incidences of
hepatitis, cholera, and certain birth defects. According to the
report, the Commission on Environmental Cooperation--the panel
established under NAFTA to rule on any complaints that the NAFTA
nations are not meeting their environmental obligations--has not
yet heard a single case involving Mexico's failure to enforce its
environmental laws in the border area. "NAFTA begins its third year
sinking in a sea of broken promises relating to the environment,
public health, jobs, and wages," said Public Citizen President Joan
Claybrook in announcing the report on 2 January. "Not only is NAFTA
not meeting these promises, it has actually made conditions worse
than before it took effect two years ago," she said. For a copy of
the 110-page Public Citizen report, entitled NAFTA's Broken
Promises: The Border Betrayed, at a cost of $15, contact: Customer
Service Department, Public Citizen, 1600 20th Street, N.W.,
Washington, DC 20009; Tel: 202-588-1000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALE
QUANTUM-CEP FACILITY.

M4 Environmental L.P., a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and
Molten Metal Technology, Inc. (MMT) in Waltham, Massachusetts, has
begun operations at the first commercial-scale facility to use
MMT's Catalytic Extraction Process (CEP) for recycling hazardous
wastes. The M4 facility, which is located in Oak Ridge, Tennessee,
will use a variant of the CEP technology, known as Quantum-CEP,
that is designed to handle radioactive and mixed wastes. The
Quantum-CEP process uses a molten metal bath to break down
radioactive and mixed wastes into their constituents, recovers
various useful materials, such as metals and gases, and stabilizes
the radioactive materials for final disposal. Subsequent to the
start-up of operations at the M4 facility, MMT announced that it
has expanded its original technology license to M4 by allowing the
joint venture to process mixed wastes from commercial generators.
Previously, M4 held a license to process only mixed wastes
generated by the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of
Defense (DOD), and U.S. Enrichment Corp. In a separate
announcement, MMT said that another commercial-scale Quantum-CEP
facility in Oak Ridge--this one jointly operated by MMT and
Westinghouse subsidiary Scientific Ecology Group, Inc. (SEG)--has
received all of its required regulatory permits and is ready to
begin operations. The MMT-SEG facility is expected to process its
first wastes this month and will handle up to 130,000 cubic feet of
low-level ion exchange resins per year. "I am happy to announce
that this facility is available on schedule, and we expect
tremendous success with volume reduction and recycling of this
difficult waste," said SEG President Bud Arrowsmith in a statement
on 19 December. William Haney III, MMT's president and chief
executive officer, noted that the MMT-SEG facility "is the largest
and most sophisticated system in the world for handling this
difficult radioactive material."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS.

Allstate GeoTek, a privately held environmental services firm based
in Linden, New Jersey, has acquired Zecco, Inc. from Metcalf & Eddy
Technologies, Inc. in Wakefield, Massachusetts, for an undisclosed
amount of cash. Privately held Allstate GeoTek is a $22-million
company that provides a variety of environmental services,
including remediation and sewer inspection and cleaning, in
Delaware, New Jersey, and southeastern Pennsylvania. Zecco, which
is operating at a run rate of about $6.5 million, provides
remediation and emergency response services and operates a
hazardous waste storage and transfer facility in Northborough,
Massachusetts.

Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group, a subsidiary of McDermott
International, Inc. in New Orleans, Louisiana, has acquired the
assets of Joy Environmental Technologies, Inc. from Harnischefeger
Industries, Inc. in Brookfield, Wisconsin. The terms of the
transaction were not disclosed. Houston-based Joy Environmental
manufactures air-pollution-control equipment--such as baghouses,
ash-handling systems, electrostatic precipitators, and flue-gas
desulfurization systems--for electric utilities and industrial
companies. According to Babcock & Wilcox, Joy Environmental's line
of ash-handling systems will be transferred to Diamond Power
Specialty Co., a Babcock & Wilcox unit that specializes in
manufacturing boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment.

Barringer Laboratories, Inc. in Golden, Colorado, announced that it
has purchased 647,238 shares of its common stock from its sister
corporation Barringer Technologies, Inc. According to Barringer
Laboratories, the stock was acquired in exchange for $509,048 in
"intercompany obligations" and another $300,000 in cash. In
addition, 88,260 shares of Barringer Laboratories' common stock
were placed in an escrow account and will be returned to Barringer
Technologies if Barringer Laboratories achieves certain earnings
goals for 1996. "This transaction is the first step in a long-term
plan to grow and increase the stockholders' value in the
laboratory," said Robert Walker, chairman and chief executive
officer of Barringer Laboratories. As a result of the transaction,
"each current shareholder realizes an increase of 39.1 percent in
their stock ownership of the company," Walker noted.

Black & Veatch in Kansas City, Missouri, announced that it has
increased its revolving credit facility with a consortium of
international banks from $150 million to $175 million. According to
P.J. Adam, Black & Veatch's chairman and chief executive officer,
the expanding credit facility will allow the company to borrow
short-term funds and issue longer-term letters of credit to finance
its worldwide engineering and construction projects. "Our continued
success in obtaining international work depends on having the
necessary credit support," Adam noted. Black & Veatch's
international projects accounted for more than 50 percent of the
company's estimated $1.1 billion in revenues during 1995.

Brownfield Development Corp. (BDC) in Chicago, Illinois, and
LandBank in Denver, Colorado, have established a strategic alliance
to provide services related to the cleanup and redevelopment of so-
called "brownfields" sites--abandoned industrial properties that
face difficulties in redevelopment because of actual or perceived
contamination at the sites. Under the alliance, the two companies
will jointly identify and assess brownfields properties and make
the financing, insurance, and legal arrangements to remediate those
sites and return them to economic usefulness. BDC currently
provides those types of services in the Midwest, while LandBank
provides similar services from its offices in New York City,
Denver, and San Francisco. In addition to increasing BDC's
geographic coverage, the alliance with LandBank will "expand our
development capabilities, increase our capital reserves, and focus
on the acquisition of larger sites," according to BDC Manager
Robert Colangelo. LandBank President Bill Lynott noted that "we are
very excited about the opportunity to apply our environmental
underwriting and proprietary insurance products to BDC's focused
program in the metropolitan Chicago area," where the brownfields
redevelopment market is especially active.

Envirometrics, Inc. in Charleston, South Carolina, and Zellweger
Analytics, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Zellweger Luwa
Organization of Switzerland, have reached an agreement whereby
Zellweger Analytics will have the exclusive worldwide rights to
market Envirometrics' ACT Monitoring Card System. The ACT system
uses an electronic reader and "passive monitoring cards" to detect
the presence of hazardous chemicals in industrial environments and
to conduct analyses of air samples in real time. Zellweger
Analytics "is an international leader in safety, health, and
environmental products, and we look forward to new technology-
partnership developments and synergistic opportunities for the two
companies," said Richard Bennett, Envirometrics' president and
chief executive officer.

Environmental Technologies Corp., a provider of refrigerant
recovery and recycling services and equipment in Lakewood, New
Jersey, has acquired all of the outstanding stock of FulCircle
Recyclers, Inc. in New York, New York, a recycler of ballasts from
fluorescent lights, in exchange for 1.15-million shares of newly
issued Environmental Technologies common stock. As part of the
transaction, Brin McCagg and Mitchell Dong, two of FulCircle's
principals, have been appointed as chief executive officer and
president, respectively, of Environmental Technologies. The two men
take over those positions from George Cannan, who will remain
chairman of the company. FulCircle expects to report revenues
totaling $6 million during 1995, while Environmental Technologies
had revenues of $28.6 million during the fiscal year ending on
30 September 1995.

EnviroSource, Inc. in Stamford, Connecticut, has entered into a
new, $100-million credit agreement with NationsBank and Credit
Lyonnaise. According to EnviroSource, the new, five-year agreement
replaces an existing $60-million agreement with the two banks and
provides EnviroSource with the financing to redeem all of its
Class G, $7.25 Cumulative Preferred Stock. The Class G stock is due
15 July 1996. As a result of the new credit agreement,
"EnviroSource will have minimal debt maturities over the next six
years, which will allow us to reinvest our cash flows from
operations into the business," according to George Fuehrer,
EnviroSource's senior vice president of planning. The company plans
to focus that reinvestment on internal growth rather than on growth
through mergers and acquisitions, "although we are not ruling that
avenue out," Fuehrer told HMIR.

Heidemij NV in Arnhem, the Netherland, and Eptisa, a consulting and
engineering firm in Madrid, Spain, have agreed to merge in a
transaction under which Heidemij and Eptisa's management will each
acquire 50 percent of Eptisa's stock from the company's single
shareholder, Banco Central Hispano. As part of the transaction,
Eptisa will sell its non-core activities in the engineering and
maintenance of power stations. Eptisa, which specializes in water,
environmental, and infrastructure engineering, derived revenues
totaling $80 million from these core businesses during 1994. "We
have been working with Eptisa since 1992 in a joint venture,
Ecogest, aimed at providing environmental services to industry,"
said Heidemij chairman Frans Luttmer. "This successful venture is
now the starting point for a much larger cooperation between the
two companies." In a separate action, Heidemij's subsidiary
Geraghty & Miller has acquired Environmental Strategies Ltd., an
environmental consulting and engineering firm with offices in Leeds
and Chester, England, and has merged Environmental Standards with
G&M International, Inc. in Cambridge. According to G&M
International Manager Brian Cook, "by merging with Environmental
Strategies' staff, we will be able to expand our auditing and due-
diligence work and have a strong presence in the Northwest region
of the United Kingdom."

Philip Environmental, Inc. in Hamilton, Ontario, and Zenon
Environmental, Inc. in Burlington, Ontario, have reached an
agreement whereby Philip Environmental will acquire Zenon's
laboratory business. The terms of the transaction were not
disclosed. Zenon's laboratory operations generated an estimated
$12 million in revenues during 1995 and consist of facilities in
Burlington and in Montreal, Quebec, and Vancouver, British
Columbia. According to Philip Environmental, the addition of the
three Zenon laboratories to Philip's existing laboratory operation
in Mississauga, Ontario, will give Philip the largest network of
environmental laboratories in Canada. The acquisition of the Zenon
laboratory facilities is expected to be completed by 15 January.
Philip Environmental is currently engaged in an aggressive
acquisition campaign and recently acquired CyanoKEM and ThermalKEM
from REP Environmental Processes, which is the former American
NuKEM (HMIR, 8 Dec. 1995, p.2).

UTILX Corp., a drilling firm based in Kent, Washington, has
announced that FlowMole Environmental Services Corp., a joint
venture between UTILX and Unocal subsidiary CERT Environmental
Corp., has begun to "wind down" its remediation operations.
According to UTILX President Craig Davies, the decision to cease
the operations of FlowMole is based on Unocal's decision to
terminate all joint-venture relationships connected to
environmental work and exit the environmental business. FlowMole
was established in 1994 to market innovative remediation approaches
using CERT Environmental's remediation technologies and UTILX's
horizontal guided drilling technology.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

HMIR HOTLINE.

Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO), DOE's
Environmental Restoration Management Contractor at the former Feed
Materials Production Center near Fernald, Ohio, is requesting firms
to submit expressions of interest in supplying a vitrification
furnace to process radioactive wastes that are currently stored at
the Fernald facility. According to FERMCO, the furnace must be
capable of producing 20 to 30 tons of vitrified waste per day.
While FERMCO does not expect to issue the request for proposals
(RFP) for the vitrification project until April, it is requesting
that parties indicate by 15 January their interest in supplying the
vitrification furnace. For further information, contact: Bob May,
FERMCO, Mail Stop 52-4, P.O. Box 538704, Cincinnati, OH 45253-8704;
Tel: 513-648-4322; Fax: 513-648-4900.

VECTRA Technologies, Inc., a San Ramon, California-based provider
of radioactive waste management and other engineering services to
the energy industry, announced on 28 December that it is
temporarily suspending all construction and start-up activities
related to its EnviroGlass vitrification program. According to Ray
Fortney, VECTRA's president and chief executive officer, the
interruption in the company's progress towards developing the
EnviroGlass technology "was necessary because delays in placing our
Transportable Vitrification Unit at our lead client's site made it
impossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-
level waste that we are contracted to process." Fortney noted that
VECTRA is negotiating with the client to remove the low-level
wastes and dispose of them through a subcontractor, "but if we are
not successful in these negotiations, we may be forced to accept
contract cancellation." Fortney said that the company will continue
to pursue new projects involving the EnviroGlass technology.

CompuChem Environmental Corp. in Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, has announced that it is seeking to acquire an analytical
laboratory to merge into its facility at Research Triangle Park
(RTP). CompuChem said that it plans to transfer the laboratory
equipment and technical personnel of the acquired laboratory to its
RTP facility while maintaining any existing sales offices that the
acquired company may operate. "Our philosophy is to keep it all
under one roof, so you can have all your certifications,
sophisticated equipment, and experienced staff in one place, and
thereby better serve your customers," according to CompuChem
President Kees Verkerk. He said that the primary purpose of the
acquisition is to expand the company's business, which is currently
concentrated in the federal sector, into the industrial market.
According to Verkerk, the 55,000-square-foot RTP facility is one of
the largest laboratories in the United States, employing up to
200 people during its peak seasons. For further information,
contact: CompuChem Environmental Corp., 3306 Chapel Hill/Nelson
Highway, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709; Tel: 919-406-1601.

For further information on these brief hotline items or any article
in this issue, call the HMIR Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES

Key: * = Small business set-aside.

Sols. N47408-96-R-6305 and N47408-96-R-6309 to submit proposals to
the Navy for innovative assessment, cleanup, and pollution-control
technologies. For further information, call Rosalie Hammonds at
Tel: 805-982-5097, or contact: Commanding Officer, NAVFAC
Contracts, Naval Construction Battalion Center, Building 41, 1000
23rd Avenue, Port Hueneme, CA 93043-4301; Attn: Code 2711.
(Deadline: 2/2/96.)

Sol. DACA87-96-R-0008 to locate, identify, and dispose of ordnance
and explosives at current and former military installations
throughout the United States. For further information, call Anita
Prince at Tel: 205-895-1156, or contact: Army Engineering and
Support Center, 4820 University Square, Huntsville, AL 35816-1822;
Attn: CEHNC-CT-D. (Deadline: 2/23/96.)

Sol. F08650 to study the degradation of chemicals that the Army
must destroy under the Chemical Weapons Convention. For further
information, call John Hammerling at Tel: 407-494-7092, or contact:
45th Contracting Squadron/LGCXA, 1201 Minuteman Street, Patrick Air
Force Base, FL 32925-3237. (Deadline: 1/26/96.)

Sol. HCET009 to evaluate concrete-surface decontamination
technologies for the Hemispheric Center for Environmental
Technology at Florida International University in Miami, FL. For
further information, call M.A. Ebadian at Tel: 305-348-2569, or
contact: Hemispheric Center for Environmental Technology, Florida
International University, Room 458, ECS Building, University
Campus, Miami, FL 33199. (Deadline: 1/30/96.)

Sol. DAAL01-96-Q-3001 to provide environmental and safety
engineering services at the Army Research Laboratory located at
Fort Monmouth, NJ. For further information, call Mike Watershied at
Tel: 908-427-4936, or contact: Fort Monmouth Site Contracts Branch,
Operations Directorate, Army Research Laboratory, Fort Monmouth, NJ
07703-5601; Attn: AMSRL-OP-FM-PR(KAS). (Deadline: 1/17/96.)*

Sol. SP4400-96-R-0005 to remove hazardous materials from the
Defense Reutilization and Marketing Service (DRMS) offices in
Richmond, VA, and surrounding locations and dispose of the
materials. For further information, call Evon Boyer at Tel: 616-
961-4406, or contact: DRMS, 74 North Washington Avenue, Battle
Creek, MI 49017-3092; Attn: DRMS-PHS. (Deadline: 2/15/96.)*

Two solicitations to provide environmental services at U.S. Postal
Service facilities in Georgia, Tennessee, and other southeastern
states. Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further
information, call Quincie Naylor at Tel: 770-454-0632, or contact:
Facilities Service Office, U.S. Postal Service, Suite 300, 4000
DeKalb Technology Parkway, Atlanta, GA 30340-2799. (Deadline:
1/22/96.)

RFP 509-67-96 to pick up medical wastes at the Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Augusta, GA, and dispose of the
wastes. For further information, call Sylvia Henry at Tel: 706-731-
7175, or contact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service
(90C), Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, One Freedom
Way, Augusta, GA 30904-6285. (Deadline: 2/9/96.)

Solicitation to provide environmental services at various locations
within the Louisville District of the Army Corps of Engineers.
Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further
information, call Sharon Evans at Tel: 502-582-6208, or contact:
Army Corps of Engineers, Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline:
1/19/96.)

Sol. DE-RP65-96WA13322 to provide architectural and engineering
services, including environmental engineering services, at Western
Area Power Administration facilities in AZ, CA, CO, IA, KS, MN, MT,
ND, NE, NM, NV, SD, UT, and WY. Interested firms should submit SF
254 and 255. For further information, Dorothy Paquet at Tel: 303-
275-1529, or contact: Western Area Power Administration, P.O. Box
3402, Golden, CO 80401; Attn: A1520. (Deadline: 1/10/96.)

Sol. 554-27-96 to provide emergency response services to the
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Denver, CO. For
further information, call Jack Gregorio at Tel: 303-393-4690, or
contact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service (90C),
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1055 Clermont
Street, Denver, CO 80220. (Deadline: 2/7/96.)

Sol. F05611-96-R-0211 to provide environmental engineering services
at the U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado. Interested firms should
submit SF 254 and 255. For further information, call Shirley McCoy
at Tel: 719-472-2734, or contact: Operational Contracting Office,
Lobby Area, 8110 Industrial Drive, U.S. Air Force Academy, CO
80840-2315. (Deadline: 2/1/96.)

Sol. N68711-96-C-2079 to prepare an environmental impact statement
in connection with base-closure activities at the Naval Shipyard
Complex in Long Beach, CA. Interested firms should submit SF 254
and 255. For further information, call Kathy Luhmann at Tel: 619-
532-2721, or contact: Naval Facilities Engineering Command,
Southwest Division, 1220 Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187;
Attn: Code 0211. (Deadline: 1/22/96.)

Solicitations to prepare environmental impact statements for
various military preparedness activities at the Naval Air Weapons
Station in China Lake, CA (N68711-96-C-2089), and at the Naval Air
Warfare Center in Point Mugu, CA (N68711-96-C-20-90). For further
information, call Nancy Trent at Tel: 619-532-2853, or contact:
Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Southwest Division, 1220
Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187; Attn: Code 0211.
(Deadlines: N68711-96-C-2089, 1/30/96; N68711-96-C-2090, 1/25/96.)

Sol. F04700-96-B-0014 to perform laboratory analyses of wastewater
at Edwards Air Force Base, CA. For further information, call Tamia
True at Tel: 805-277-3900, or contact: Directorate of Contracting,
Air Force Flight Test Center/PKAB, 5 South Wolfe Avenue, Edwards
Air Force Base, CA 93524-1185. (Deadline: Not specified; analytical
laboratory must be located within 100 miles of Edwards Air Force
Base.)

Sol. DTCG88-96-B-6AL262 to install and operate a bioventing system
at a Coast Guard facility in San Diego, CA. For further
information, call William Obershaw at Tel: 510-535-7236, or
contact: Contracting Officer, Civil Engineering Unit, U.S. Coast
Guard, Suite 200, 2000 Embarcadero Road, Oakland, CA 94606-5337.
(Deadline: 2/8/96.)

Solicitation to provide environmental well drilling services at
DOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, CA. For
further information, call Robert Baker at Tel: 510-422-8449, or
contact: Procurement Department, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, L-626, P.O. Box 5012, Livermore, CA 94551. (Deadline:
1/12/96.)*

Sol. N44255-96-D-0056 to provide environmental compliance services
at various Navy locations in the Pacific Northwest. Interested
firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further information, call
Patricia Talbot at Tel: 360-396-0249, or contact: Engineering Field
Activity-Northwest, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 19917
Seventh Avenue, N.E., Poulsbo, WA 98370. (Deadline: 1/25/96.)

Sol. DACW21-96-B-0014 to remove PCB-contaminated oil and equipment
from the J. Strom Thurmond Power Plant near Augusta, GA, and
dispose of the materials. For further information, call Sharon
Godbee at Tel: 912-652-5400, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,
Savannah District, P.O. Box 899, Savannah, GA 31402-0889.
(Deadline: 2/1/96.)

Sol. DACA27-96-B-0015 to remove PCB-contaminated transformers from
a location in Columbus, OH, and dispose of the transformers for the
Army Corps of Engineers. For further information, call Diana Lewis
at Tel: 502-582-5706, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,
Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline: 1/18/96.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>