
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-69</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B049-14</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nylawyer/iif1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023418 text/html 17403
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:34:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:44:29 GMT
Content-length: 17185
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Costs of Prohibition - Threatens Public Health</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_nylawyer_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="nylawyer.htm">A
Wiser Course, Ending Drug Prohibition</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11416" -->

<h3>Part II Continued</h3>

<h1>The Costs of Prohibition</h1>

<h2>Prohibition Threatens Public Health</h2>

<h3><a name="sd">Spread of Disease</a></h3>

<h4><a name="sn">Sharing Needles</a></h4>

<p><a name="sn">Because the possession of hypodermic needles is
generally illegal, users of injectable drugs routinely share
needles and syringes with one another, often in &quot;shooting
galleries&quot; where dozens of addicts may line up to use a
single needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilized
between uses. This sharing of needles has become a </a><a
href="footnotes4.htm#126">major source of transmission</a> of
blood-borne diseases such as acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(&quot;AIDS&quot;) and hepatitis. According to a recent national
review, &quot;more than <a href="footnotes4.htm#127">33% of new
AIDS cases</a> occur among injecting drug users or people having
sexual contact with them.&quot; In New York State, the majority
of new AIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users of
injectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers for
Disease Control and the New York State Department of Health have
estimated that more than <a href="footnotes4.htm#128">75% of
pediatric AIDS cases</a> are children whose mothers either
injected drugs or were the sexual partners of persons who
injected drugs. The data suggest, at the very least, that sterile
hypodermic needles should be readily and freely available to drug
users. So long as drug use remains unlawful, however, <a
href="footnotes4.htm#129">free needle distribution</a> is not
likely to attract a substantial portion of the user population.
In response, some <a href="footnotes4.htm#130">courts have
circumscribed laws</a> dealing with the unlawful possession of
hypodermic needles by applying defenses of medical necessity.</p>

<h4><a name="tsd">Trading Sex for Drugs</a></h4>

<p><a name="tsd">Because illicit drugs are expensive, many
addicts turn to </a><a href="footnotes4.htm#131">prostitution</a>
to make money to support their habits, or exchange sexual
services directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts often do not
protect themselves from contracting <a href="footnotes4.htm#132">sexually
transmitted diseases</a> carried by their customers, and they
pass such diseases on to other customers, their lovers, and their
children. The crack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed for
the recently noted resurgence of syphilis and other sexually
transmitted diseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for Disease
Control placed the blame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>People---especially women---have high-risk sex and
    practice prostitution to support their habits. And it is
    occurring in a relatively poor population where people have a
    lot of things that prevent their access to treatment.
    Therefore, they stay infected longer and are more likely to
    pass their infections on to others. <a
    href="footnotes4.htm#133">[133]</a>. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Fewer addicts would be forced to resort to prostitution if the
current prohibitions against drugs were lifted.</p>

<h4><a name="nh">Neglect of Health</a></h4>

<p><a name="nh">Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtaining
and using drugs, and the debilitating effects of some of the
drugs themselves, many addicts are in very poor health. </a><a
href="footnotes4.htm#134">Malnutrition</a> is a frequent problem
and, in turn, contributes to many others. Addicts' poor health
makes them especially susceptible to diseases ranging from scurvy
and shingles to tuberculosis and the flu. Addicts are also more
likely to contract communicable diseases and therefore more
likely to spread them. The interrelated urban problems of
homelessness and illegal drug abuse have contributed to the
development of <a href="footnotes4.htm#135">multi-drug-resistant
strains of diseases</a> such as tuberculosis, which was once
thought to be on the verge of eradication. These more virulent
diseases know few geographical limitations and pose risks to the
general population.</p>

<h4><a name="ahcs">Avoidance of the Health-Care System</a></h4>

<p><a name="ahcs">Individuals who use illegal drugs often put off
addressing their health problems for fear of prosecution or other
</a><a href="footnotes4.htm#136">adverse consequences</a> (<i>e.g.</i>,
rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). This reluctance to seek medical
care is compounded by the fact that many drug addicts have no
private physicians and rely instead on public hospitals or
clinics for any care they might get.</p>

<p>Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drug
abusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and when
their need for care is acute, which is also when care is most
costly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natal
care, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight and
other medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seeking
treatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in the
<a href="footnotes4.htm#137">emergency room</a> and the intensive
care ward.</p>

<p>Mothers and pregnant women face the additional and justifiable
fear that any detectable drug use may be reported as a possible
indication of child abuse or neglect. In many large city
hospitals, the urine of newborn babies is tested for prohibited
drugs, and mothers whose babies test positive for pre-natal
exposure are reported to the child abuse authorities. Until
recently, in New York City, such babies were routinely kept from
their mothers pending investigations that often lasted many
months, interfering with normal bonding and necessarily adversely
affecting the infant's development and relationship with the
parent. Moreover, these women have, in some jurisdictions, been <a
href="footnotes4.htm#138">prosecuted for pre-partum distribution</a>
of prohibited drugs.</p>

<p>In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who become
infected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,
and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,
prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughout
society, particularly to the sexual partners and children of
infected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are more
likely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglect
their children after they are born, or to have their <a
href="footnotes4.htm#139">children</a> placed in foster care.</p>

<h3><a name="liqc">Lack of Information and Quality Control</a></h3>

<h4><a name="addddup">Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and
Drugs of Unknown Potency</a></h4>

<p><a name="addddup">Because drugs are manufactured and
distributed in secret, it is impossible for users to guard
against adulteration or to determine the purity and potency of
the drugs they use. The problem is compounded by drug growers,
manufacturers, and distributors who, to minimize the risks of
apprehension, develop and purvey the drug varieties that pack the
most intoxicating effect into the smallest package. According to
an experienced New York City researcher, </a></p>

<blockquote>
    <p><a name="addddup">The fact that cocaine, heroin and
    related drugs are illegal encourages the use of injection.
    Severe statutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of
    illicit substances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a
    way to economize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are
    much more concentrated than traditional forms, such as opium
    or coca tea. Injection provides an intense and economical
    effect by maximizing the amount of drug that reaches the
    brain. People who sniff or smoke drugs say that if they
    inject they need only one third of the amount of the drug to
    maintain a habit. </a></p>
    <p><a name="addddup">Because the injection forms of illicit
    drugs are concentrated, they are [also] relatively easier to
    ship. </a><a href="footnotes4.htm#140">[140]</a>. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>It has been demonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminal
penalties intensify, dealers also find other ways to economize by
inventing new drugs---so-called &quot;designer drugs&quot;---that
are not yet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers of
such drugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.
Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction of
dangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have been
used with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due to
variations in potency, and (3) the development of &quot;designer
drugs&quot; intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicants
with new chemical compositions that put them <a
href="footnotes4.htm#141">beyond the reach of current laws</a>.
Just as the prohibition against alcohol led to sales of poisonous
wood alcohol and the prohibition against abortion led to
coat-hanger abortions, the prohibition against drug manufacture,
sale, and possession results in <a href="footnotes4.htm#142">unnecessary
deaths</a> due to adulteration, variable purity, and
&quot;designer drugs.&quot; This contrasts sharply with the
government's current regulation of alcoholic beverages, which
ensures that the beverages are pure and that buyers know how
strong they are and what some of their health effects may be.
Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce drug laws
and amend them to encompass new formulations or ban precursor
substances may only <a href="footnotes4.htm#143">push dealers to
take greater risks</a>, selling ever more potentially dangerous
substances.</p>

<h4><a name="lkasu">Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use</a></h4>

<p><a name="lkasu">Because many drugs are outlawed, individuals
considering drug use rarely have access to accurate information
about the effects of drugs. While a cautious user may err on the
side of avoiding certain activities while under the use of drugs,
he or she may have no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, the
possible adverse health consequences of certain combinations of
drugs and his or her individual tolerance for particular
substances. Because of its penchant for exaggeration and
cartoonish treatment of the issues, most current education about
drugs is not taken seriously by young people. As a result, it is
far less effective than other health education (e.g., about
nutrition, fitness, and smoking cigarettes).</a></p>

<h4><a name="uatisd">Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of
&quot;Soft Drugs&quot;</a></h4>

<p><a href="footnotes4.htm#144">Alcohol and tobacco</a> are
completely legal yet do much more harm, statistically speaking,
than illegal drug use. It is also generally recognized that
alcohol, at least when used to excess, can cause <a
href="footnotes4.htm#145">aggressive, anti-social behavior</a>.
The current prohibitionist laws against marijuana, generally
considered an &quot;a-motivational&quot; drug, and other
so-called &quot;soft drugs&quot; have the effect of influencing
some people to choose alcohol over these &quot;soft drugs.&quot;
Peter Reuter, an economist at the Rand Corporation, concludes
that &quot;If marijuana is a substitute for alcohol..., alcohol
is, by definition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough <a
href="footnotes4.htm#146">marijuana enforcement must increase
drinking</a>.&quot; Similarly, Frank Chaloupka, an economist at
the University of Illinois, found through statistical analysis
&quot;that states without criminal sanctions against marijuana
possession suffered <a href="footnotes4.htm#147">fewer auto
fatalities</a>.&quot; Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate at
Harvard, found that &quot;states decriminalizing marijuana
reported <a href="footnotes4.htm#148">lower overall rates of
drug- and alcohol-related emergencies</a>.&quot; To the extent
that users are choosing alcohol rather than marijuana or other
&quot;soft drugs,&quot; the overall public health effects are
probably worse than they would be otherwise.</p>

<h3><a name="idv">Injuries Due to Violence</a></h3>

<p><a name="idv">The high prices commanded by prohibited drugs
create competition among groups and individuals willing to break
the law to supply drugs to consumers. Their competition often
becomes violent and has contributed to the build-up of arms and
the </a><a href="footnotes4.htm#149">pervasiveness of violence</a>
in many areas. Gunshot wounds and other traumas due to the
illegal drug business have become commonplace in big-city
hospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, but also law
enforcement officers and innocent bystanders are often the <a
href="footnotes4.htm#150">victims</a>. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani
recently noted:</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>The victims of the [ ] gun battles [of street-level drug
    dealers] are innocent bystanders---and often young children.
    Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot;
    of these, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. <a
    href="footnotes4.htm#151">[151]</a>. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>The cost of prohibiting drugs must be measured in terms of
lost lives and expensive medical care and include the hidden
costs of lost productivity and the psychological damage to
individuals and entire communities living in fear, helpless and
hopeless.</p>

<p>With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, <a
href="footnotes4.htm#152">drugs themselves do not generally cause
violent behavior</a>. It is, instead, turf wars for the control
of black markets and the drug users' need for money to purchase
such substances that leads to violence. Indeed, marijuana and
heroin have been shown to render their users disinclined to
violence or incapable of violence while under the influence.
These substances are <a href="footnotes4.htm#153">much less
dangerous</a> in this regard than alcohol.</p>

<h3><a name="drtp">Diversion of Resources from Treatment and
Prevention</a></h3>

<p><a href="footnotes4.htm#154">Prohibition diverts money</a>
that could otherwise be used for preventing and treating drug
abuse. Federal anti-drug legislation provides a single budget for
&quot;supply reduction&quot; and &quot;demand reduction&quot;
efforts. Law enforcement agencies have always received much more
than prevention, treatment, and research programs combined. The
ABA recently reported that &quot;[s]ince the early 1980s,
treatment has been a declining priority. In 1991, treatment
received 14% of the $10.5 billion federal drug budget compared to
25% ten years earlier.&quot; During the same period,
&quot;federal <a href="footnotes4.htm#155">spending on law
enforcement increased 737%</a>, with interdiction efforts leading
the increase.&quot; Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,
eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for drug
interdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of law
enforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and quality
of life issues.</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="IIF2.html">Forward</a></p>

<hr>

<p>A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition<br>
A Report of The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law<br>
of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York<br>
June 14, 1994 </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_nylawyer_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="nylawyer.htm">A
Wiser Course, Ending Drug Prohibition</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11416" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>