
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B35-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B013-35</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey98.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000759 text/html 38228
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:05:45 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:38 GMT
Content-length: 38041
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey98.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet <BR>
January 9, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CONTRACTORS AIM TO TRANSFER SHARE OF RISK BACK TO OPERATORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(351 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>1995 IS YEAR OF NORTHWEST EUROPEAN MARKET RECOVERY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>1995 NORTH SEA SEMI-SUBMERSIBLE MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1668 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>INCREASE IN DEMAND IN HOLLAND AND NORWAY OFFSETS UK REDUCTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1779 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NORWEGIAN SEMI SUPPLY COULD INCREASE FURTHER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(863 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>TRENT CUTBACK ILLUSTRATES UK JACK-UP MARKET FRAGILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(820 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>STATOIL SENDS MARKET SIGNAL WITH DEEPSEA TRYM FIXTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

CONTRACTORS AIM TO TRANSFER SHARE OF RISK BACK TO OPERATORS

Contractors who have shouldered an increased burden of the contractual
and insurance risks involved in the process of offshore drilling are
now seeking to take advantage of improving market conditions to reduce
their risk profile.

At the beginning of the 1980s contractors enjoyed a period of high
dayrates and were required to carry minimal risks under typical
drilling contracts with oil companies.  With the collapse of the rig
market from the mid-1980s, contractors were forced to accept lower
rates and then increasingly onerous contractual liabilities.

Responsibility for insurance and legal requirements such as third party
risk and pollution were passed to the contractor who also had to accept
"catch-all" cancellation clauses which would allow early contract
termination under virtually any eventuality and in any event at as
little as 30 days notice.

Since the beginning of 1995, led by the North Sea, the worldwide
drilling rig market, particularly for semi-submersibles, has swung
heavily in favour of the contractor.  Rising demand, notably for deep
water operations, and tightening supply as worldwide activity picks up
have transformed the market fundamentals.

Firstly dayrates began to rise and then as availability became
increasingly perceived to be a problem, contractors have been able to
negotiate long-term contracts to replace the well-to-well fixtures
which have been the standard fare for the past 10 years.

With profitable operations and a degree of employment security ensured
for the immediate foreseeable future, contractors are now turning their
attention to off-loading some of the contractual risk as contracts come
up for renewal.  While this is being resisted by some operators, there
are contractors who consider the changes are no more than ofair and
equitable.

However, contractors may find it harder to win back the contractual
ground ceded in the 1980s than to secure higher dayrates and longer
contracts.  Oil company contracts managers are familiar with the market
and accept that circumstances have changed.  However, insurance and
legal managers are perhaps less influenced by commercial factors and
may never have known a time when oil companies shouldered most of the
risk burden in a drilling contract.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

1995 IS YEAR OF NORTHWEST EUROPEAN MARKET RECOVERY

The past 12 months have been marked by a major recovery in the
Northwest European mobile drilling rig market.  This was most
pronounced in the semi-submersible sector where fleet contraction in
recent years left supply unable to cope with the increase in demand,
driving up dayrates and drawing in equipment from around the world.  In
the jack-up market the improvement was more modest and indeed it took a
recovery in Dutch and Norwegian activity to sustain the market in the
face of a fall in UK activity.

During 1995 NW European semi-submersible drilling rig demand totalled
34.6 rig years, up 23% on the 1994 total of 28.1.  In spite of this
recovery NW European semi demand is still at a relatively low level
historically.  Since 1981, annual demand has only been lower in 1987
and 1994 but activity over the past year should be viewed in the
context of a continuing recovery in demand which began towards the end
of 1994.

Further evidence of the turnaround in the NW European semi market is
signalled by a semi mobilising into the region for the first time since
1992 and 1995 was the first year since 1992 that there was a net growth
in the semi fleet which increased from 44 to 45 units.  The increase in
the number of rigs being actively marketed increased more substantially
as two cold stacked semis rejoined the active fleet during the year and
two others are being reactivated at year-end.  In addition, at the end
of the year no less than three semis are en route to the North sea and
two others are committed to follow.

Semi departures in 1995, in spite of the tightening North Sea market,
were a reflection of the growing worldwide demand for high
specification units.  Increasing deep water drilling activity in the
US, West Africa and South America created competition for rigs which
drove up rates and severely limited opportunities to mobilise rigs back
into the North Sea.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

1995 NORTH SEA SEMI-SUBMERSIBLE MARKET

While semi demand rose substantially in the UK in 1995, this was partly
offset by a fall in Norwegian demand.  However, this at least ensured
that surplus Norwegian units were able to provide some relief in an
over-heating UK market.  In the UK semi demand totalled just over 26
rig years in 1995, up 42% from the 1994 total of 18.3.  In Norway, a
reduction in development drilling cut semi demand from 9.01 rig years
in 1994 to 7.91 in 1995, a fall of over 12%.

The marked increase in UK semi activity in 1995 was entirely due an
increase in demand for development drilling.  In 1994, 9.95 rig years
of UK semi demand was absorbed by exploration and appraisal activity,
while development and re-entry requirements accounted for 8.36 rig
years.  In 1995, the exploration total was almost unchanged at 9.94 rig
years while development demand increased by 93% to 16.1.

Big increases in development drilling were posted by Agip, Amerada,
British Gas, BP, Chevron, Shell and Texaco.  It is likely that
exploration demand would have also increased in 1995 but the heavy
fleet commitment to long-term development work meant there was a
shortage of equipment for short-term exploration drilling so that
postponements were not uncommon.

In Norway, there was actually a slight increase in exploration drilling
with semis in 1995 to 4.13 rig years compared with 3.73 the previous
year.  However, reductions in development operations by Conoco, Elf,
Shell and Statoil cut demand from 5.3 to 3.8 rig years.

The reduction in domestic demand and rise in UK activity and rates
encouraged Norwegian contractors to move rigs to the UK.  West
Vanguard, Maersk Jutlander and Transocean 8 moved to the UK early in
1995 on the heals of the Sovereign Explorer and Ross Isle which made
the switch in 1994.  Having faced the mobilisation of the West Alpha
and West Delta to the Far East in 1994, Norwegian operators made early
moves in 1995 to secure rig availability for a planned increase in
development drilling activity from 1996 to the end of the decade.

Statoil negotiated an historic 10-year co-operation deal with
Transocean initially signing up four semis for long-term periods
including the return of the Ross Isle from the UK.  Norsk Hydro and BP
followed with fixtures to bring the West Vanguard and Maersk Jutlander
back from the UK.  Later in the year Esso booked the return of the West
Alpha from China in 1996 for development drilling on its Balder Field
while Statoil further imposed itself on the market by fixing the
Deepsea Trym for three years.  The rig is due back in the North Sea
from Mexico in April 1996.

The return of the Ocean Alliance, Kingsnorth Explorer, Ocean Nomad and
Ocean Princess to the UK was secured on the basis of confirmed
contracts but by the end of the year the owners of the Byford Dolphin
and Transocean Seeker were prepared to take the speculative risk of
beginning to mobilise from the Far East to the North Sea without a
contract.  This was as much a reflection of the weak floater market in
the Asia/Pacific region as the drawing power of the North Sea.

The great importance of a relatively small number of operators in
underwriting the bulk of UK demand was again emphasised in 1995.  The
top three operators of semis, Amerada, BP and Shell accounted for 55.1%
of total UK semi demand in 1995.  This was slightly down on their
market share in 1994 of 56.8% but in absolute terms these `Group 1'
operators clocked up a total of 14.34 rig years of semi demand in the
past 12 months compared with 10.4 rig years in 1994.

The next tranche of UK operators generating more than one rig year of
demand have been classed above as `Group 2'.  In 1995, there were four
operators in this group, Chevron, Mobil, Texaco and Total amassing a
total of 5.62 rig years of semi activity.  In 1994, only two operators,
Kerr-McGee and Texaco accounted for 2.45 rig years in this intermediate
category.

The remaining operators with less than one rig year of activity apiece
are classed as `Group 3'.  In 1995 there were 12 companies in this
category accounting for a total of 6.08 rig years of demand compared
with 17 companies and 5.46 rig years of demand in 1994.  The reduction
in the number of smaller operators and the below average increase in
activity by Group 3 operators is believed to be a consequence of the
tight semi market in the UK in 1995 which prevented a number of smaller
operators proceeding with short-term exploration programmes.

The forecast of UK activity split in 1996 is based on current drilling
intentions with an adjustment to allow for the postponement of some
planned work due to high rig rates, lack of availability and failure to
secure partner approval.  Any curtailment in activity resulting from
tight availability is expected to impact particularly on Group 3 plans.

An analysis of Norwegian operator activity reveals that the big three
of Statoil, Norsk Hydro and Saga actually sustained semi activity in
1995 at 6.43 rig years compared with 6.39 the previous year.  The
reduction in Norwegian activity was in fact due to a drop in demand
from other operators from 2.62 to 1.48 rig years.

Dayrates surge in 1995 on back of semi shortage

While it was November 1995 before every marketed semi in the region was
on contract and working, it was as early as February 1995 that 100% of
marketed semis had a contractual commitment.  Apart from a slight blip
at the end of the year when Rig 42 re-entered the market (although it
is not operational until April 1996) the `contracted utilisation' has
remained at 100% ever since.  Since March 1995, the North Sea Rig
Forecast Availability Index which measures rig availability in the
upcoming three month period has remained almost continually at zero.

With `contracted utilisation' at 100% and availability at zero, the
inevitable consequence was strong upward pressure on dayrates which
effectively doubled during the course of the year.  At the beginning of
the year the dayrate range for a standard short-term fixture of a third
generation rig in the UK was #20,000 ($31,200) to #36,000 ($56,000).
The fixture which set the top of the range was scheduled for an August
start while the bottom the range was fixed by a one-well fixture of a
second generation unit.  A third generation semi was fixed in January
for a 12-month period at $40,000 a day, while a similar unit was fixed
to drill a high pressure, high temperature well at #28,000 ($43,680).

As operators scrambled to secure availability for 1995 and beyond rates
rose rapidly.  As early as March a second generation semi was fixed for
three months from mid-year at $70,000 a day.  A number of operators
attempted to resist the dayrate tide, setting negotiating limits at
$60,000 and then $70,000 only to see these swept aside.  Towards the
end of the year the acceleration in rates inevitably levelled out so
that the range for short-term, standard fixtures finished the year at
#44,500 ($69,000) to #48,500 ($75,000).  The range for term fixtures
for this class of rig at the end of 1995 was #48,500 ($75,000) to
#54,800 ($85,000).

While activity in Norway fell in 1995, dayrates were buoyed by UK
demand and the rise in UK rates.  However, taking account of higher
operating costs, Norwegian sector rates generally lagged UK rates for
much of 1995, a reversal of the historical norm.  The squeeze on rig
availability in the region did ensure that at least some Norwegian
contractors were able to secure contributions from operators towards
the mandatory pipe-handling upgrades which came into force in 1995.

In January 1995, the dayrate range for a short-term fixture of a third
generation semi in Norway was $55,000 to $60,000.  By the end of the
year the range is considered to be $85,000 to $91,000.  Term fixtures
of third generation units began the year in the range $65,000 to
$72,000 and ended the year in the range $75,000 to $95,000.

While Statoil agreed standard term fixtures with Transocean for four
semis starting in 1996 at rates between $75,000 and $85,000, late in
the year an operator grouping of Conoco, Shell and Elf dropped plans to
fix a semi for two years because they were not prepared to pay in
excess of $85,000 and in some cases over $100,000 for an upgraded
second generation semi.  Shortly after,  Statoil stunned contractors by
fixing a 20-year old semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla) for three years
at $75,000 but it remains to be seen whether Statoil's message to the
market has the salutary impact that may have been intended.

No Norwegian semi fixtures broached the $100,000 barrier in 1996,
partly due to operator resistance and partly the lack of pure fourth
generation demand.  However, in the UK a number of semi fixtures were
concluded at dayrates above $100,000.  The contract which led the way
was for deepwater drilling in 1997 and 1998.  Mobil fixed the Jack
Bates for five wells in water depths up to 4,500ft west of Shetland at
a dayrate of $118,000 plus a lump sum of $12.5m to cover mobilisation
and upgrading.  A slot was assigned to Marathon for a deep water well
off Eire at a rate believed to be in the region of $144,000 including a
pro rata apportionment of the lump sum costs.

At the beginning of 1995 rates for short-term, high specification
fixtures in the UK were in the range #28,000 ($43,000)to #43,500
($68,000).  By the end of the year the range was #52,000 ($80,000) to
#71,000 ($110,000) for fixtures starting in 1996, a virtual doubling
over the course of the year.  At the end of 1995 deep water demand
remained high worldwide maintaining upward pressure on rates at the top
of the market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

INCREASE IN DEMAND IN HOLLAND AND NORWAY OFFSETS UK REDUCTION

In spite of an 8.6% fall in UK activity, demand for jack-ups offshore
Northwest Europe grew in 1995 by 8.4% compared with the previous year.
Rising demand in Holland and Norway compensated for the UK slippage.
There was also a slight reduction in Danish demand while the first well
was drilled offshore France for 10 years.

In 1995 jack-up demand in the region totalled 31.79 rig years, compared
with 29.33 the previous year.  UK activity slipped back from 17.86 to
16.33 rig years with one factor being the initial impact of the
reduction in UK gas prices arising from the continuing privatisation of
the gas supply industry.  In Holland, there was a recovery from the
very low level of activity in 1994 when there was concern about the
fiscal regime and prospectivity.  As a result demand rose in 1995 to a
total of 7.06 rig years compared with 4.88 the previous year, an
increase of almost 45%.

Norway also posted an increase in jack-up activity in 1995 as long-term
development drilling operations got underway on a number of fields in
the Southern Norwegian sector of the North Sea.  Demand totalled 4.74
rig years including time spent in the yard by two rigs which were
upgraded on contract.  This compared with a total of 2.67 rig years in
1994.

Danish activity slipped back slightly in 1995 to 3.46 rig years
compared with 3.92 the previous year but after a cutback to three
drilling units in 1994, Maersk Oil & Gas resumed a four-rig operation
in the fourth quarter of 1995.  Amerada Hess was the only other
operator to drill offshore Denmark with a jack-up in 1995 although
Statoil drilled a well at the end of the year with the semi Deepsea
Bergen.

In the UK, British Gas has lost two-thirds of its market share in the
industrial gas supply sector and now faces the loss of its domestic
monopoly from 1997, some five years earlier than previously expected.
As a result the former state utility has over-contracted and is faced
with managing a growing surplus of gas.  While the problem is a
temporary feature of the liberalisation of the supply industry it is
expected to take some years to work through the system.

As a consequence of the fall in gas prices Conoco deferred plans to
develop the Viking Fs field, where two development wells were planned,
and suspended its contract with the Neddrill 4.  Gaps opened in Shell's
drilling sequence with the jack-up Britannia as drilling to sustain
contract deliveries to British Gas was deferred.  In the second half of
the year some operators experienced problems securing partner approval
for planned exploration wells due to the weak medium term outlook for
UK gas prices.  Other early consequences such as Phillips postponement
of additional drilling on the Judy Field and Shell's delay in the start
of its planned Shearwater development had no impact on the 1995 jack-up
market.

The NW European jack-up fleet was relatively stable in 1995, starting
the year totalling 34 units and ending the year at 35.  Early in 1995
the Neddrill Trigon left for Argentina and a contract with Total.
Effectively this was the only departure of a North Sea rig during the
year although the Perro Negro 5 arrived from Italy to drill a well for
Elf in the Bay of Biscay offshore France and then left again.  Apart
from the brief visit of the Saipem jack-up there were two other
additions to the jack-up fleet.  Global Marine completed the extensive
upgrading of the former British Gas accommodation/slant drilling unit
Bay Driller which entered competitive operations as the Glomar Adriatic
XI.  Santa Fe brought its heavy-duty jack-up Monitor back from
Australia where it had been mobilised by Esso in 1994.

Looking at UK jack-up demand in terms of operator activity, just three
companies, Mobil, Phillips and Shell maintained more than two rig years
of activity during 1995.  In total these three `Group 1' companies
accounted for 7.05 rig years of activity.  There were five companies,
Amoco, Arco, BHP, BP and Conoco in the `Group 2' middle range which
each clocked-up between one and two rig years with jack-ups in the UK
accounting for a total of 6.83 rig years of demand.  The remaining
eight `Group 3' operators which generated less than one rig year of
activity apiece accounted for a total of just 2.3 rig years of activity
in 1995.

This profile of operator activity is somewhat different from 1994 when
overall UK activity was slightly higher.  Group 1 activity was less in
1994 with just two operators, Phillips and Shell amassing a total of
5.7 rig years between them.  There was more Group 2 activity with six
companies, Amoco, Arco, BP, Conoco, Elf and Mobil maintaining a total
of eight rig years of jack-up activity.  Group 3 comprised a total of
13 companies which generated a total of 4 rig years of demand.

Like the semi market the UK jack-up market in 1995 was reliant on a
smaller number of operators.  There were fewer operators drilling just
one or two wells in 1995 than in 1994.  This was a consequence of a
drop in UK jack-up exploration activity (see below) which may have been
partly due to smaller operators dropping planned wells due to reduced
gas price expectations and partly due to the generally tight North Sea
jack-up market which left few opportunities to secure a rig at short
notice.

The outlook suggests no individual operator will sustain more than two
rig years of demand during 1996, increasing the proportion of Group 2
and Group 3 operators in the market.

UK jack-up development drilling up, but exploration down

Development drilling and production related operations using jack-up
units increased in the UK in 1995 by almost 27% in spite of the slight
overall drop in UK demand.  The converse is that jack-up exploration
operations measured in terms of rig demand dropped by 47% compared with
1994.

Increases in development drilling and re-entry operations by Amoco,
Arco, Conoco, Lasmo, Mobil and Phillips lifted activity to a total of
11.9 rig years in 1995.  However, an across the board fall in
exploration drilling resulted in jack-up demand for e&a work falling
from 8.5 rig years in 1994 to 4.5 in 1995.

Partly exploration fell in 1995 because the UK upstream activity cycle
had moved into a development drilling phase, but in the second half of
the year fears about weak gas prices in the medium term had an impact
on exploration.  The tight rig market in the region also left few
opportunities for smaller operators to pick up a rig at short notice.
It is evident from the analysis above that fewer small UK operators
drilled with jack-ups in 1995.

Development drilling and production-related activity with jack-ups also
increased in the Netherlands in 1995.  In 1994, there was just 2.37 rig
years of jack-up demand on development operations but in 1995 this
increased to 4.33 as a result of additional activity by Unocal,
Wintershall, Occidental and NAM with only Elf Petroland bucking the
trend by increasing its commitment to exploration in 1995.  There was
also a slight increase in jack-up demand for exploration drilling in
Holland in 1995 with 2.67 rig years of demand generated compared with
2.52 in 1994.

Jack-up rates rise on balanced market

The Northwest European jack-up market maintained a fairly close
supply/demand balance in 1995 and while rates rose significantly at the
beginning of the year they quickly reached a plateau.  Although
utilisation levels were broadly similar to the semi market, the jack-up
market lacked both the severity of the short-term semi shortage and the
fears about medium term availability which sustained the semi rate
rise.

In 1995, utilisation of jack-ups averaged 87.2% calculated on the basis
of rigs in employment and 98.8% based on the percentage of marketed
rigs with current or future contract commitments.  This compared with
83.8% and 92.5% respectively for the same measures in 1994.

After being weak for much of 1994, jack-up availability began to
tighten at the end of the year and then all but disappeared by March
1995, at least on a short-term basis.  The North Sea Rig Forecast
Availability Index which remained in the range of 20-40% throughout
1994, fell to 18% at the end of 1994 and then quickly to zero by the
end of March 1995.

At the beginning of 1995 the dayrate range for short-term jack-up
fixtures for standard UK sector operations was $26,000 to $29,000.  By
March 1995 the range was $35,000 to $45,000 and changed relatively
little the rest of the year apart from some firming of the bottom end
of the range to a maximum of $41,000 in the fourth quarter.
In spite of the rising rates and tight short-term availability there
was no switch in the UK from short-term to long-term fixing and through
much of the year fixture volume remained low so that there was little
upward pressure on dayrates after the initial hike in the first
quarter.  The term fixtures that did take place mirrored or slightly
lagged the short-term range indicating contractors shared operators
views that medium and long-term availability was not a concern.  At the
very end of the year there were indications of the bottom-end of the
range falling away slightly due to rising first quarter availability
but this was based on evidence from the Dutch sector.

The market for heavy-duty jack-ups in the UK in 1995 was influenced
more by semi rates than the jack-up market.  Short-term rates began the
year in the range $55,000 to $65,000 and ended the year between $80,000
and $90,000.  The peak rate for this class of rig during the year was
for a long-term contract starting in the fourth quarter of 1996 which
was fixed in October 1995 at $105,000.  In the first half of the year a
term fixture was concluded for Central UK sector operations in 1996 at
$75,000.

In Norway, rates for heavy-duty jack-up fixtures ranged from a low of
$72,000 for a one-well in-fill fixture, to a high of around $106,000
for one-year plus options starting in the fourth quarter of 1996.
However, two other term fixtures in Norway were closer to the bottom
end of this range at initial rates of $75,000 and $82,000.

Dayrates in the Netherlands in 1995 were similar to those in the UK
ranging from just over $30,000 at the beginning of the year to a peak
of just under $42,000.  Two term contracts were agreed under floating
rate mechanisms linked to the market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

NORWEGIAN SEMI SUPPLY COULD INCREASE FURTHER

Statoil's fixture of the semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla) for a three-
year period from May 1995 ensures the return of yet another semi to the
Norwegian sector in 1996 although it will be nine years since the
Odfjell purchase last worked in the North Sea as the Nortrym.  The
Deepsea Trym is due to leave Mexico in February to mobilise to the
North Sea.

The Norwegian sector semi fleet currently totals nine units but  with
the confirmation of the mobilisation of the Deepsea Trym is on course
to increase to at least 12 by May.  The West Alpha left China in the
first week of 1996 to begin a three month tow back to the Norway where
it will begin a two-year contract with Esso in April.  The Maersk
Jutlander has for some time been committed to return from the UK to
Norway in May 1996 to begin a 27-month contract with BP.

While the current forecast for Norwegian activity in 1996 is based on
12 rigs in operation from May, it remains possible that the total could
be 13.  Without a 13th semi moving into Norway it will be difficult for
Amerada, Conoco, Deminex, Mobil and Shell to drill planned exploration
wells in 1996.  However, Conoco, Shell and Elf earlier abandoned a
tender to fix a semi for two years from 1996 due to high dayrates and
the low technical merit so of the rigs offered.

Now Conoco and Shell are considering the options again with a view to a
potential co-operation with Amerada, Deminex and Mobil.  Drilling rigs
under consideration are believed to include the Byford Dolphin,
currently en route speculatively from the Far East, and the Nanhai VI,
currently in China but being marketed by Stena Drilling against a
potential purchase.  Whether a contract is agreed is very much
dependent on the commercial aspects of the deal.  All the operators
also remain interested in sublet opportunities with other Norwegian
operators.  For example, it may be that Statoil could have some slots
available in its schedule with the Deepsea Trym but this is not yet
clear.

A number of other issues remain outstanding before the 1996 Norwegian
sector semi picture is finalised.  Statoil has still to fix a second
additional exploration semi contract to start during 1996.  The fourth
generation Transocean semi Ross Rig remains available from the third
quarter of 1996 and would appear to be the most flexible solution for
Statoil if commercial terms can be agreed.  Norsk Hydro, Saga and
Statoil await the outcome of the 15th Licence Round awards before
selecting a rig for anticipation deep water operations from the end of
1996 or early in 1997.  While Saga remains a proponent of the EfEx
approach of using a converted second generation unit, it is thought
Statoil may prefer a more conventional fourth generation unit.  This
might be another reason for fixing the Ross Rig for 1996 exploration
slot.

Statoil is also considering bids from Halliburton, Smedvig and
Transocean for construction and operation of a novel Swath catamaran
vessel for completion and workover operations on the Aasgard Field.
However, it is understood that tender prices are well above the level
that Statoil envisaged in its initial evaluation of the concept and it
remains to be seen whether the project can survive a higher capital
cost.

In the UK, some of Shell's plans for the latter part of 1996 remain
unclear.  The company has deferred its planned Kingfisher development
on which pre-drilling was scheduled to start in the fourth quarter of
1996.  A letter of intent had been awarded to Sonat Offshore for the
semi John Shaw to drill at least six wells.  The John Shaw is now back
in the market but Shell could still take the rig for one of two
potential outstanding requirements.

It needs a semi for four to seven wells on the Curlew development,
again from the fourth quarter of 1996 but it is not yet clear whether
Shell will operate the semi itself or will leave that to the lead
contractor for the project development as a whole.  Shell also has a
requirement for an additional semi for an exploration programme in the
UK from sometime in the second half of 1996.  If no suitable rigs are
available from Shell's Win 90s lead drilling contractors then this
programme could be deferred.  However, as well as the John Shaw from
Sonat, the Sedco Forex semi Sedco 711 is also available from the third
quarter.

Shell is also understood to have indicated an interest in taking an
assignment of the Benreoch from BP but it is not yet clear whether any
slots will be available.  BP has extended the Benreoch for 12 months
from May 1996 but as yet does not have a full programme for the rig.
Vacant slots could still be filled internally by BP but it is
understood that both Conoco and Shell have been approached as potential
sub-lessors should BP fail to fill the schedule.  Elsewhere BP
continues to await development approval for the Schiehallion Field
before making rig commitments for the drilling programme from late 1996
and early 1997.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

TRENT CUTBACK ILLUSTRATES UK JACK-UP MARKET FRAGILITY

The vulnerability of UK jack-up demand in 1996 to cutbacks was
illustrated in December by Arco's decision to terminate its contract
with the Maersk Enhancer.  Arco has decided to drill one less well on
the Trent platform so that the rig is available from early February
although the notice period for contract termination is not up until mid-
March.  Previously Arco had planned to drill on Trent until June
followed by some exploration drilling during platform installation
before returning, potentially with the Enhancer to undertake completion
tiebacks until late in the year.

Ranger's Southern UK drilling plans for 1996 have been blowing hot and
cold as the implications of the gas price outlook are digested by the
operator and its partners.  Until late in 1995, Ranger was planning
more than one well in the third quarter of 1996.  Then the whole
programme appeared in danger but now it seems to be back on the rails
though with perhaps just one well surviving.

Uncertainty also surrounds Wintershall's Windermere development in
blocks 49/9B and 49/4B.  Project go-ahead is still outstanding and the
longer it is delayed the more difficult it will be for Wintershall to
start development drilling in 1996.

In November, BP cutback its southern UK sector drilling plans and
trimmed the F G McClintock contract back from one year from November
1995 to just one well.  Now BP has firmed-up a second well for the rig
and will keep it until May 1996.  BP's Southern UK jack-up programme
still remains somewhat uncertain thereafter.  It is expected that it
will retain the Neddrill 7 in the second half of the year but is
thought likely to release the McClintock.

While some southern UK gas exploration and development drilling plans
for 1996 continue to be fragile, increasing Dutch activity continues to
take up the slack.  Allowances made for anticipated UK cutbacks and
assumptions made about Dutch activity mean that there is no net change
in the 1996 forecast of jack-up demand which remains at 34 rig years.

As expected Occidental has extended the Neddrill 3 in Holland from June
until February 1997 and is shortly due to take delivery of the Neddrill
4 for a one-year programme.  Elf Petroland has fixed the Cecil Provine
for two wells plus an option from March 1996 when the rig is due to be
released by Amoco in the UK.  However, the Arch Rowan, which in
December moved from the UK to Holland to drill a well for Amoco, is
likely to return to the UK for Amoco in the first quarter before
crossing back to Amoco in Holland in the second half of the year.

Wintershall is close to fixing a jack-up for a Netherlands programme of
two firm wells plus three optional wells from March 1996, an earlier
start than previously expected.  The Rowan California is believed to be
emerging as a front-runner for the contract.  The rig was stacked off
Great Yarmouth in the UK at the end of 1995 after being released by
Phillips Petroleum.  Conoco Netherlands is still waiting for partner
approval to drill a 21-day exploration well which is unlikely now
before the second quarter at the earliest.

The Neddrill 9 still has a two to three-month gap in its schedule from
April ahead of a well for RWE-DEA and a 300-day contract with Clyde
Netherlands which is due to start in August although a start as late as
October is still possible.

In the UK, Elf has issued tender invitations for the provision of two
jack-ups for the second phase of development drilling on the
Elgin/Franklin project, each for a firm period of 30 months plus
options for four six-month wells and six one-month completions.  One
rig is for delivery mid-1997 and the other mid-1998.  It is believed
that one of the requirements is effectively a market check against the
Galaxy I which Elf has already fixed for a minimum of 18 months from
October 1996 but this has not yet been confirmed.  Newbuildings are
expected to be bid to Elf for the 1998 commencement but this could
prove to be in competition with the Galaxy.  The earlier start date
could suit the Magellan or the Rowan Gorilla II and Gorilla IV (both in
the US) while the Rowan newbuild Rowan Gorilla V is not due to be
delivered before 1998.

It is now clear the jack-up Neddrill Trigon, currently in Argentina,
will return to the North Sea in 1996 although the arrival date is still
subject to Total options.  The earliest arrival is May and the latest
is September.  The rig is believed to be in line for a two-year
contract with Saga in Norway for a development drilling programme on
the Varg Field, although possibly not starting until late 1997.
However, Saga has yet to confirm the fixture although it is expected to
do so later in January.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

STATOIL SENDS MARKET SIGNAL WITH DEEPSEA TRYM FIXTURE

Statoil sent a strong signal on rates to Norwegian drilling contractors
when it fixed the second generation semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla)
for a firm three year period from May 1996 at a fixed dayrate of
$75,000.  The rig is currently in Mexico and it appears that Statoil
will not directly compensate mobilisation and upgrading costs likely to
be well in excess of $10m.  Odfjell Drilling purchased La Muralla
against the Statoil contract for a price believed to be in the region
of $27m.

Other Norwegian contractors have recently been bidding second
generation rigs into Norway at rates in excess of $100,000 a day.
Apart from making a significant saving over a three-year contract
Statoil may also be hoping that it can use its dominant market position
in controlling half the Norwegian sector semi fleet to put a cap on
rapidly rising rates.  It would appear to be signalling to contractors
that it is not prepared to accept any rate even if it might be dictated
by the market at large.

In the UK a term fixture of a third generation semi confirmed the
current market range at up to $85,000 while a fourth generation semi
was fixed for a deep water well west of Shetland in 1996 at a rate of
$110,000.

Rates for jack-up fixtures in Holland in December are thought to have
been coloured by the anticipation of increasing rig availability in the
first quarter of 1996.  As a result fixtures were agreed at rates
believed to be around $38,500 and $39,000 a day.  In the UK a short-
term fixture was agreed at a rate believed to be in the region of
$41,000 based on a tender round which closed at the end of October.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>