
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-80</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B035-185</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/localact.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070412 text/html 7701
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:58 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:16 GMT
Content-length: 7484
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Local Action strategies for drug policy reform</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM">Local
Action strategies </p>

<p> <b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1. Contact
your local media. Tell them about these web pages and the
information on them.<br>
</h2>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">2. Read
the newspapers and respond. </h2>

<p> Make it a point to read the largest newspapers in your area
and be alert for drug-policy related news stories. Write short,
punchy letters to the editor to make your views heard. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">3. Contact
the talk shows in your area. </h2>

<p> Most TV and radio talk shows need a steady stream of
controversial subjects to make the shows interesting. Sooner or
later, they will all do a show on drug policy. Go through your TV
listings and locate all talk and news shows. Call the stations
and ask for the producers of the show. In most cases, it will
surprise you how easy it is to get through. Tell them about the
resolution and the people supporting it. Let them know that there
are prominent people now willing to come forward and debate this
idea publicly. Producers are probably extremely busy, so keep it
short, punchy, and sweet. Have some juicy &quot;sound bites&quot;
planned to stimulate interest. Follow up with a letter and
printed material such as the things I have enclosed. Keep in
touch with them every ninety days or so, just to make sure that
they don't forget you. </p>

<p> If you get a spot on a good TV show and then don't know what
to do -- call me. We'll work something out. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">4. Develop
a constituency. </h2>

<p> Contact groups and members of groups to put on a presentation
and persuade them to support the resolution. There are all kinds
of groups which may support this resolution, each for their own
individual reasons. They include African-Americans, ministers,
doctors, medical patients, law enforcement officials, AIDS
groups, and many others. Pick groups that you think you can
persuade and then develop the issues which are most important to
them. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">5. Pick
one influential person at a time and persuade them. </h2>

<p> When you have persuaded them that it is time for a change,
and that we should at least look at other drug policy options,
get them to commit to going with you to persuade at least two
more influential people. Use this technique to &quot;move up the
ladder&quot; to more and more influential people. </p>

<p> Use the &quot;intervention group&quot; approach. Assemble a
small group of people whom your target will view as influential
and persuasive. Arrange a meeting where all can attend and have
all those people ask the person to reconsider their point of
view. Don't ask them to support legalization or
decriminalization, because it is unlikely that you could persuade
them in one meeting anyway. Just get them to admit that there is
enough of a question about the issue that it is time to
re-examine the evidence and commit to the investigation of the
possibility of change. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">6. Enlist
your friends to create a steady &quot;rain&quot; of resolutions
on the White House. </h2>

<p> Get everyone to commit to sending a resolution a week. Keep
it up until we get the commission. Let Clinton know that this
resolution is not going to go away. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">7. Develop
phone networks to get people to respond when we need them to
respond. </h2>

<p> The National Rifle Association is powerful because, at any
given time, it can bombard the President and Congress with
millions of letters and phone calls. We need the same type of
response. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">8. Put on
debates and seminars at colleges. </h2>

<p> Colleges and universities often have philosophy, public
administration, law enforcement, or political science professors
who might like to put on a public forum or debate on drug policy.
Call the local colleges and ask for the heads of these
departments, or anyone else you think might be interested.
Suggest the idea to them. </p>

<p> I have enclosed a sample speech from one of the debates I was
in. You can edit it as appropriate to your needs. I have never
had anyone make an intelligent comeback to that speech. </p>

<p> The enclosed charts can be blown up to 18 inch by 24 inch
size by places such as Kinko's Copies for about $2.50 to $5.00
each, depending upon whether you get them on ordinary paper or on
card stock. For large audiences, consider taking 35mm slide
pictures of the graphs. If you are out in the middle of the woods
and can't do either of those things, write to me and, if you pay
for it, I will have it done for you. </p>

<p> The biggest problem you may have with this tactic is that the
local gendarmes and prosecutors are becoming increasingly
reluctant to come out in public and defend the drug war. They
have been getting their butts kicked far too much lately and even
the most fervent drug warriors are now having a hard time with
their beliefs. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">9. Contact
local civic organizations. </h2>

<p> In most towns, there are various local civic organizations
that might want to have presentations on the drug war for any of
a variety of reasons. Some of them will do it just for the
entertainment value. Go through the phone book and locate the
Rotarians, the Elks, etc. and ask them if they would be
interested. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">10. Write
to and call your local Congressman. </h2>

<p> Most members of Congress are chowder-heads, but there are
some out there who are intelligent enough to read the facts and
stand up for the truth. We won't know who they are until people
like you can find them. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">11.
Produce Local Access Cable Shows. </h2>

<p> You can become a producer for local access cable channels
with as little as five hours of mostly free classes. Call your
local cable company for information. Once you become a producer
you can use their facilities to tape shows, or you can broadcast
tapes which were prepared by others. We have already done this a
few times and have a number of shows which can be made available
to anyone who is hooked in to their local access cable channels. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">12. Don't
get discouraged. </h2>

<p> It may take time to build your persuasive skills and even the
best of us don't persuade everybody the first time around. Keep
it up, despite the setbacks, and you will eventually prevail. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>