
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B26-90</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA008-000085-B047-75</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.nami.org:80/update/consumeroct.html 38.250.129.71 19970222102720 text/html 10877
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 10:25:47 GMT
Server: Apache/1.0.5
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>A Consumer Speaks Out, 30 Nov 96</title>

<meta name="keywords" content="NAMI, ">

</head>
<body    bgcolor="#ffffff"  text="#000000"  link="#0000ee" vlink="551a8b" alink="ff0000">

<center>

<H6><I>

<A HREF = "/index.html" target="_top">NAMI</A> /

<A HREF="/about.htm">About</A> /

<A HREF="/book.htm">Books</A> /

<A HREF="/confer.htm">Conferences</A> /

<A HREF="/outlook.htm">Outlook</A> /

<A HREF="/medical.htm">Medical</A> /

<A HREF="/update.htm">Updates</A>

</H6><A HREF="/index.html" target="_top">

<p align=center><img src="/graphics/blulogo3.gif" align=middle border=0> </p></a></h6>

<h6>

<A HREF = "mailto:barbara@nami.org,namiofc@aol.com">Comment</A> /

<A HREF="/help.htm">Help</A> /

<A HREF="/toc.htm">Index</A> /

<A HREF="/joinform.htm">Membership</A> /

<A HREF="/noframes.htm" TARGET="_top">Noframes</A> /

<A HREF="/search.htm">Search</A> /

<A HREF="/stats">Statistics</A>

</H6>

</I></center>
<!-- NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI -->
<!-- NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI -->
<!-- NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI NAMI -->

<hr>



<h4 align=center>A Consumer Speaks Out</h4>

<h4 align=center><font color="#000080"><b>Clozapine and pregnancy:  one woman's decision
by Martha Lautenbach Wolff</b></font></h4>

<P>
Note:  This is an individual account of the author's individual 
experience.  NAMI neither agrees nor disagrees with the author's 
decisions.
<P>
	Ten months ago I gave birth to a healthy baby boy.  I had been 
taking 200 milligrams of clozapine (Clozaril) daily for the 
previous six years.  I was worried--and so were my doctors--about 
how the medication might affect my baby and how not taking the 
medicine might affect my functioning as a pregnant woman.
	<P>
There are so many factors and considerations to take into account 
when deciding whether or not to have a baby.  Add to that having a 
condition that necessitates taking clozapine, and the decision 
becomes confusing and truly overwhelming.  In the end the decision 
is completely personal, but in this article I will share with you 
the information that I have compiled over the course of several 
years concerning becoming pregnant on clozapine.  One note, 
however:  the information I share in this article is only about 
clozapine, which is an atypical drug in its class.  It does not 
pertain to other anti-psychotic drugs.
	<P>
Before trying clozapine, I had struggled with depression for many 
years, and I finally entered a hospital.  I spent two and one-half 
harrowing years there trying every drug for what by that time was 
diagnosed as a schizo-affective disorder.  Nothing worked.
<P>
	With the help of my mother, I was able to be the first person 
to try clozapine at the New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center.  
Within about three months I was able to leave the hospital and 
function on my own.  The next five years would be a difficult 
process of getting my life back together with day hospital, school, 
and finding a job.  I met the man I would marry and--after a two-
year engagement--we were married.  I was thrilled to be able to 
continue my life in a normal, healthy way.  Having a baby was 
always part of my dream, but I didn't know if it would be possible 
on clozapine.  So, after nearly seven years of taking clozapine, I 
started researching and trying to decide.
	<P>
Because clozapine is a relatively new drug in the United States, 
there have been very few studies on pregnant women taking the drug. 
 Advice from psychiatrists was almost uniformly the same:  "Don't 
take clozapine while pregnant!  Not enough is known about the 
effects of the drug on the fetus."  One doctor advised cutting the 
dose of clozapine to a minimum during the first three months of 
pregnancy, which is the crucial time for fetal development.  
Although I did receive advice, I felt I was alone in the making of 
this decision.  I was venturing into the unknown.
	<P>
In an article titled "Psychotropic Drugs in Pregnancy and 
Lactation," authors Harold Goldberg, M.D., and Robyn Nissim, B.A., 
suggest that studies prove that the fetus is at greatest risk of 
negative effects from clozapine during the first three months of 
gestation, when organs are beginning to develop.  Clozapine is a 
"category B" drug, which means that in animal studies there were no 
adverse effects on the fetus--but there are no extensive controlled 
studies in pregnant women.  Clozapine, however, does cross the 
placenta to some extent, and the fetus absorbs more of the drug 
than the mother.  For this reason, the mother may have to increase 
her dosage of the drug to maintain its effectiveness in controlling 
the symptoms for which it was prescribed.
	<P>
The fetus and the mother exist in equilibrium, and this can pose 
problems right before and during birth.  According to Goldberg and 
Nissim, if clozapine is concentrated in the fetus right before 
birth, the baby will go through withdrawal after birth, and the 
effect could be toxic.  One possible reaction could be a sedation 
effect known as "floppy baby syndrome," which disappears as the 
clozapine metabolizes or passes through the system.  Some of the 
symptoms of this syndrome include hyperactivity, tremors, motor 
restlessness, and abnormal movements that could last for several 
months, but eventually subside.  These symptoms seem to be due to 
the baby's immature metabolism.  The authors state that there are 
two schools of thought about how to best protect a baby from the 
effects of withdrawal (even though their conclusions are 
inconclusive due to lack of studies).  The authors recommend 
discontinuing clozapine five to ten days before delivery to avoid 
the symptoms; other doctors think it is safer to let the baby 
withdraw after birth.
<P>
	I did not reduce my dosage of clozapine during my pregnancy.  
I had experimented with stopping the medication and reducing the 
dose.  I found that symptoms returned promptly and to such a degree 
of severity that reducing the dose while I was pregnant would have 
been unwise.  However, I did reduce by half the clozapine the night 
before I was scheduled to go into the hospital.  I started again 
the full dose the day after my son was born.  He did have some 
breathing difficulty, but it corrected itself quickly.  There was 
no evidence that this was a result of withdrawal.  He also did not 
exhibit any of the possible side effects such as motor 
restlessness.  
<P>
	The authors of the article mentioned above suggest that 
physicians (and patients) need to weigh controlling schizophrenia 
against the risk of the drug to the mother.
	<P>
I found several other studies done on women on clozapine who became 
pregnant.  The first appeared in the American Journal of Psychiatry 
in June 1994.  It reported on a woman with schizophrenia who had 
been in a five-year remission since taking clozapine.  In 
preparation for her pregnancy she stopped taking the drug, but was 
forced to resume taking it when her symptoms returned.  During the 
last nine weeks of her pregnancy, her medication was reduced.  She 
delivered normally, and they baby showed no adverse effects and had 
no psychomotor abnormalities at six months.  The conclusion was the 
recommendation to lower the dose of clozapine as much as possible a 
few days before birth to avoid "floppy baby syndrome."  Also, the 
authors recommend that mothers should not breastfeed their babies 
because clozapine does pass through into the infant in breast milk.
<P>
	The other study, in the January 1993 issue of the American 
Journal of Psychiatry, reported that--as of December 1990--14 women 
were known to be exposed to clozapine during their pregnancies with 
no adverse effects on the fetuses.
<P>
	The Clozaril information packet distributed by Sandoz, the 
manufacturer of the drug, backs up these findings.  Reproduction 
studies in rats and rabbits given 2.5 to 7.0 times the human dose 
showed no evidence of impaired fertility or harm to the fetus.  
Sandoz recommends that clozapine should not be administered to 
pregnant women unless clearly needed.  Their reasons include: 1) 
adequate, well-controlled studies have not been performed; 2) 
animal studies are not always transferable to humans; and 3) it is 
advisable to minimize use of all drugs during pregnancy.  Sandoz 
also agrees with the recommendation to avoid breastfeeding while on 
clozapine.
	<P>
The University of Connecticut Health Center Pregnancy Exposure 
Information Service also found that clozapine did not affect 
genetic material in bacterial or mammalian test systems.  Again, 
they said that animal studies suggest that clozapine is not a cause 
of birth defects, but a small risk does exist--but a risk no 
greater that for the general population.  Also mentioned is the 
possible agranulocytosis, which is a toxic effect on bone marrow.  
It can be fatal if not caught and reversed early enough.  It is not 
clear if this problem could occur in the fetus or newborn.  
	<P>
And there is a risk of seizures, but there is little data on 
whether the fetus or newborn might be affected, according to the 
December 1990 issue of the International Drug Therapy Newsletter.
<P>
	Some doctors warn that if you are on clozapine, you have a 
severe illness and, therefore, they don't recommend pregnancy.  
There is a potential risk of passing it on to your children.  Also, 
doctors are concerned with the parenting skills--or lack of them--
in people with serious brain disorders.
<P>
	In conclusion, this decision about pregnancy is completely 
personal.  As scared as I was, I felt there was enough positive 
research and very little negative.  I believed I could handle being 
a parent because, on the medication, I was well enough for long 
enough.  I decided that life has risks at all times, and I really 
wanted to bring a baby into this world.  I ventured into the 
unknown, but life itself is the great unknown.  
	<P>
And I hope that, with what I have written, the unknown is a little 
more known.


<hr><h6>
<p align=center><a href="/poc.htm">CONTACT</a> | <a href="/joinform.htm">MEMBERSHIP</a> | <a href="mailto:barbara@nami.org">WEBMASTER</a></p></h6>
<P><P>
<center><H6>Copyright &copy 1996 <a href="/index.html" target=_top>National Alliance for the Mentally Ill</a> - All Rights Reserved</H6>
</center></body>




























































































































































</html>

</DOC>