
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B002-126</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/mjfaq1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024641 text/html 39650
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:46:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:14 GMT
Content-length: 39432
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Answers To Frequently Asked Questions About Marijuana Use</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hemp/hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="../hemp/general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana
Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="20593" -->

<h2>ANSWERS TO FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT MARIJUANA USE </h2>

<h1>What is DEP? </h1>

<p>The Drug Education Project (DEP) is an attempt to clear up the
misinformation being propagated in the U.S. by organizations and
individuals more interested in creating works of propaganda and
fear than objective pieces of education. DEP is founded upon the
same two basic principles Andrew Weil bases his book, From
Chocolate to Morphine, upon: (1) &quot;People make decisions on
the basis of information available to them. The more accurate the
information, the better their decisions will be&quot; [68, p.
179]; and (2) &quot;There are no good or bad drugs; there are
only good and bad relationships with drugs&quot; [68, p. 27].
This leaflet is the first in a series of sixteen that will
attempt to summarize for everyone what science has to say about
drug use. The grunt work has been done for you. DEP only requests
of you an open mind and the time required to read these leaflets.
</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>What is this leaflet all about? </h2>

<p>This leaflet is intended for informational purposes only. DEP
does not encourage or discourage the use of any intoxicant.
Although we have tried to include as much information as
possible, this pamphlet may not be comprehensive because of space
constraints. To receive all of the DEP leaflets for free, send a
self-addressed stamped envelope (preferably business-sized) to
DEP, c/o Christopher B. Reeve, Box #2038, 1000 Morewood Ave.,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213. To provide DEP with suggestions and/or
comments, write to the above address or email via internet
cr39@andrew.cmu.edu. DEP urges you to photocopy, post, and
distribute this paper in an unaltered form as much as possible.
Our nation's strength is in knowledge, not fear. DEP is your
objective source of information. </p>

<p>&quot;There is an outright propaganda campaign being presented
through the informational media, and there is no challenge being
brought by those who know the facts and should be insisting on
adherence to the truth.&quot; </p>

<p>- Alexander and Ann Shulgin, PiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story, p.
442 </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h3>Health Risk Myths and Realities </h3>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Marijuana
Overdose </h4>

<p>No evidence exists that anyone has ever died of a marijuana
overdose [61, p. 53 - 54]. Tests performed on mice have shown
that the ratio of cannabinoids (the chemicals in marijuana that
make you stoned) necessary for overdose to the amount necessary
for intoxication is 40,000:1 [1]. For comparison's sake, that
ratio for alcohol is generally between 4:1 and 10:1 [61, p.
227-228]. Alcohol overdoses kill about 5,000 yearly [3] but
marijuana overdoses kill no one as far as anyone can tell. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Brain
Damage </h4>

<p>Marijuana is psychoactive because it stimulates certain brain
receptors, but it does not produce toxins that kill them [7]
(like alcohol), and it does not wear them out as other drugs may
[57]. There is no evidence that marijuana use is a cause of brain
damage. Studies by Dr. Robert Heath claimed the contrary in
experiments on monkeys [4], but Heath's work has been sharply
criticized by the Institute of Medicine and the National Academy
of Sciences on three primary counts: </p>

<ol>
    <li>its insufficient sample size (only four monkeys), </li>
    <li>its failure to control experimental bias, and </li>
    <li>its misidentification of normal monkey brain structure as
        &quot;damaged&quot; [5]. </li>
</ol>

<p>A far superior experiment by the National Center for
Toxicological Research (NCTR) involving 64 rhesus monkeys that
were exposed to daily or weekly doses of marijuana smoke for a
year found no evidence of structural or neurochemical changes in
the brains of rhesus monkeys [6, 58]. Studies performed on actual
human populations will confirm these results, even for chronic
marijuana users (up to 18 joints per day) after many years of use
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In fact, following the publication of two
1977 JAMA studies, the American Medical Association (AMA)
officially announced its support for the decriminalization of
marijuana. </p>

<p>Contrary to a 1987 television commercial sponsored by the
Partnership for a Drug-Free America (PDFA), marijuana does not
&quot;flatten&quot; brain waves either. In the commercial, a
normal human brain wave was compared to what was supposedly the
(much flatter) brain wave of a 14-year-old high on marijuana. It
was actually the brain wave of a coma patient [2]. PDFA lied
about the data, and had to pull the commercial off of the air
when researchers complained to the television networks [62, p.
74]. </p>

<p>In reality, marijuana has the effect of slightly increasing
alpha-wave activity. Alpha waves are generally associated with
meditative and relaxed states which are, in turn, often
associated with human creativity [13]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Memory
</h4>

<p>Marijuana does impair short-term memory, but only during
intoxication. Although the authoritative studies on marijuana use
seem to agree that there is no residual impairment following
intoxication [5, 6, 13], persistent impairment of short-term
memory has been noted in chronic marijuana smokers up to 6 and 12
weeks following abstinence [70]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Heart
Problems </h4>

<p>It is accepted in medical circles today that marijuana use
causes no evident long-term cardiovascular problems for normal
persons. However, marijuana-smoking does cause changes in the
heart and body's circulation characteristic of stress, which may
complicate preexisting cardiovascular problems like hypertension,
cerebrovascular disease, and coronary atherosclerosis [5, p. 72].
Marijuana's effects upon blood pressure are complex and
inconsistent [5, p. 66 - 67]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Hormones
</h4>

<p>Chronic marijuana use has not been found to alter testosterone
or other sex hormone levels, despite the conclusions of Dr. R.C.
Kolodony's 1974 study. Seven similar studies have been performed
since then, the most recent by a Dr. Robert Block at the
University of Iowa [14], and none have reproduced Kolodony's
results. In contrast, heavy alcohol use is known to lower these
same testosterone levels [65]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Reproductive
Damage </h4>

<p>No trustworthy study has ever shown that marijuana use damages
the reproductive system, or causes chromosome breakage. Dr.
Gabriel Nahas reached the opposite conclusion in his experiments
performed in the early 1980s, but did so in part using the in
vitro (i.e., in test tubes and petrii dishes) cells of rhesus
monkeys. His rather unjustified claim that these changes would
also occur in human bodies in vivo (in the body) was criticized
by his colleagues and, in 1983, he renounced his own results. </p>

<p>Studies of actual human populations have failed to demonstrate
that marijuana adversely affects the reproductive system [61, 5].
Wu et al. found in 1988 a correlation between marijuana use and
low sperm counts in human males. But this is misleading because
(1) a decrease in sperm count has not been shown to have a
negative effect on fertility, and (2) the sperm count returned to
normal levels after marijuana use had ceased [5]. </p>

<p>Claims that marijuana use may impair hormone production,
menstrual cycles, or fertility in females are both unproven and
unfounded [43]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">The
Immune System </h4>

<p>Studies in which lab rats were injected with extremely large
quantities of THC have found that marijuana (in such
unrealistically huge quantities) does have an
&quot;immunosuppressive effect&quot; in those lab rats, in that
it temporarily shuts off certain cells in the liver called
lymphocytes and macrophages. These macrophages are useful in
fighting off bacterial, not viral, infections. But this is only
for the duration of intoxication [46]. There also exists some
evidence that marijuana metabolites stay in the lungs for up to
seven months after smoking has ceased, possibly affecting the
immune system of the lungs (but not by turning the cells off)
[47]. This said, doctors and researchers are still not sure that
the immune system is actually negatively affected in realistic
situations since there are no numbers to support the idea [15].
In fact, three studies showed that THC may have actually
stimulated the immune system in the people studied [16, 17, 18]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Birth
Defects </h4>

<p>Unlike alcohol, cocaine, and tobacco, studies show that there
exists no evident link between prenatal use of marijuana and
birth defects [5, p. 99] or fetal alcohol syndrome [72] in
humans. In fact, marijuana use during the third trimester has
been found to have a positive impact on birthweight [73]. It is
known that Delta-9-THC does enter the placenta [45], so mothers
are advised against consuming large quantities. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Cancer
</h4>

<p>Smoking marijuana has the potential to cause both bronchitis
and cancer of the lungs, throat, and neck, but this is generally
no different than inhaling any other burnt carbon-containing
matter since they all increase the number of lesions (and
therefore possible infections) in your airways. There are a
couple of studies that claim on the basis of carcinogens that
smoking marijuana is worse for your body than smoking a cigarette
[44], but these are rather simplified. There are actually some
very convincing reasons to believe that smoking cigarettes is
relatively more dangerous to the body than smoking marijuana on
more than one count: (1) It is accepted by a growing number of
scientists today that all American cigarettes contain significant
levels of polonium-210 [22], the same sort of radiation given off
by the plutonium of atom bombs (ionizing alpha radiation). It
just so happens that the tobacco plant's roots and leaves are
especially good at absorbing radioactive elements from
uranium-containing phosphate fertilizers that are required by
U.S. law, and from naturally occurring radiation in the soil,
air, and water [48]. It is the opinion of C. Everette Koop that
this radioactivity, not tar, accounts for at least 90% of all
smoking-related lung cancer [29]. Other estimates that have been
made are, about 50% according to Dr. Joseph R. DiFranza of the
Univ. of Mass. Medical Center [48] and according to Dr. Edward
Martell, a radiochemist with the National Center for Atmospheric
Research, 95% [35]. Dr. R.T. Ravenholt, former director of World
Health Surveys at the Centers for Disease Control, agrees with
the risk, asserting that &quot;Americans are exposed to far more
radiation from tobacco smoke than from any other source&quot;
[49]. Supporting the radioactivity notion is the finding that (a)
Relatively high levels of polonium-210 have been found in both
cigarette smoke [59] and the lungs of both smokers and nonsmokers
alike [60]; (b) Smokers of low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes die of
lung cancer just as much as smokers of other cigarettes [39]; and
also, (c) Even the most potent carcinogen that has been found in
cigarettes, benzopyrene, is only present in quantities sufficient
to account for about 1% of the lung cancer cases that occur from
smoking[49]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Why
don't you know any of this? </h4>

<p>Because the tobacco industry is suppressing the information.
(2) Tobacco smoke is theorized to work as a kind of
&quot;magnet&quot; for airborne radioactive particles such as
radon, causing them to deposit in your lungs instead of on walls,
rugs, or draperies [48]. (3) Tobacco, unlike marijuana, contains
nicotine, which may harden arteries and cause many of the cases
of heart disease associated with tobacco use. It also breaks down
into cancer-promoting chemicals called N Nitrosamines when
burned, and perhaps even when it is inside the body [37]. (4) THC
is a bronchial dilator, which means it works like a cough drop by
opening up your lungs and therefore aiding in the clearance of
smoke and dirt. Nicotine has the exact opposite effect. (5)
Unlike the chemicals in marijuana, nicotine has a paralyzing
effect on the tiny hairs along the body's air passages. These
hairs normally work to keep foreign matter out of the lungs. This
means that carcinogenic tar from cigarette smoke is relatively
much harder to purge from your lungs than is that from marijuana.
And finally, (6) Marijuana users smoke significantly less than
cigarette smokers do because of both marijuana's psychoactive
properties (this is called &quot;auto-titration&quot;) and
nicotine's high potential for physical addiction [21]. It is
important to note that the NCTR study found no signs of lung
cancer in its autopsied rhesus monkeys who had smoked marijuana
for one year [6]. </p>

<p>Smoking cigarettes and smoking marijuana negatively affect
different areas of the body, and therefore cause different
problems. But everything considered, marijuana-only smokers who
average 3 - 4 joints per day show similar symptoms to cigarette
smokers who polish off 20 in a day [74]. Although one well-done
study tells us that frequent marijuana smokers have a 19% greater
risk of respiratory diseases than people who smoke nothing at all
[66], it seems that neck and throat cancers are much more likely
to result than lung cancer or emphysema. This is because, unlike
tobacco, marijuana does not penetrate deeply into the lung. In
order to minimize the risk of acquiring neck or throat cancer
from marijuana smoke, it is best to (1) avoid as much as possible
cigarette-smoking and heavy drinking while smoking marijuana, and
(2) eat plenty of vegetables (such as carrots, broccoli, squash,
and sprouts) or vitamin supplements of beta carotene, vitamins A,
C and E, and selenium [65]. These are believed to impede cancer's
progress. </p>

<p>In addition, there are actually things that can be done to
reduce and even entirely eliminate the bodily harm that may
potentially result from smoking marijuana. This is possible
because all of the principle psychoactive ingredients of
marijuana (THC and the cannabinoids) are neither mutagenic
(gene-mutating) nor carcinogenic (cancer-causing) [65]. </p>

<p>Legalizing marijuana would make (better) water bongs and
marijuana foods, drinks, and pills both less expensive and more
accessible. Smoking marijuana through a water-filled bong will
cool the smoke and there is reason to believe that it will filter
some of the carcinogens [69, 36]. Eating or drinking marijuana
effectively eliminates all negative effects. In addition, it is
conceivable that an aerosol contraption or vaporizer, commonly
called a tilt pipe, could easily be constructed that would
surpass joints in efficiency, match them in onset and control of
effects, and yet would be effectively harmless to the body. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Fat
Cells </h4>

<p>One of the more ridiculous myths being circulated is that
marijuana stays in your fat cells and can keep you high for
months. Even though they may have similar names, the psychoactive
THC (Delta-9-THC) is different from the metabolites (for
instance, 11-OH-THC and 11-nor) that your body breaks it down
into in that the latter will not get you stoned. It is the
metabolites that stay in your fatty cells and show up on drug
tests. Your body is depleted of Delta-9-THC only hours after
ingestion [40, 41]. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h3>Other MJ Myths and Realities </h3>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Amotivational
Syndrome </h4>

<p>Amotivational syndrome is defined as a condition in which a
person loses ambition or motivation to complete tasks that he
would normally like to have completed. Claims made in the 60's
that marijuana use resulted in amotivational syndrome were
predominantly founded on stereotypes. But more recently, the
carefully-designed NCTR study has actually confirmed these
suspicions under certain conditions. It found that marijuana use
may consistently produce something akin to amotivational syndrome
in adolescent monkeys. It did not however prove that marijuana
makes adolescents apathetic or depressed. A full recovery to
normal motivation levels was typically observed to occur between
two to three months following cessation of exposure. For unknown
reasons, one monkey was observed to never fully recover.
Surprisingly, the willingness to work appeared to be equally
affected in both the daily and weekend rhesus smokers in the
study [6]. Other studies have failed to prove amotivational
syndrome in adults [42], so there is much reason to believe that
this effect only occurs during adolescent use. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Marijuana
Potency </h4>

<p>Marijuana is not significantly more potent today than it has
been in the past [23]. It is generally agreed that this myth was
the result of bad data. The researchers making the claims used as
their baseline the THC content of marijuana seized by police in
the early 1970's, which had deteriorated since then because of
poor storage conditions [23]. In reality, it seems that domestic
marijuana's average potency probably doubled in the 70's with the
advent of sinsemilla, but has remained more or less constant
since then [65]. Scare tactics claiming that marijuana potency
has increased are rather irrelevant anyways since marijuana users
typically stop smoking when the desired effect is achieved (once
again, &quot;auto-titration&quot;). Contrary to one of DARE's
allegations [28], it is generally agreed that marijuana does not
create a tolerance, withdrawal symptoms, or physical dependence
in the user. Lester Grinspoon adds, &quot;there are many who
assert that there is nevertheless drug dependence because of
[marijuana's] capacity to generate psychic dependency. However it
is not at all clear that this type of dependency is essentially
any different from that which a man may develop with respect to
his trousers, his automobile, or his wife&quot; [61, p. 234]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Driving
</h4>

<p>Driving in any inebriated state is adding complication to what
already amounts to a constant life-threatening situation. That
said, the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration
(NHTSA) summarized all of its studies by saying that there was
&quot;no indication that marijuana by itself was a cause of fatal
accidents,&quot; and that alcohol was by far the &quot;dominant
problem&quot; in drug-related accidents [32]. The Victorian
Institute of Forensic Pathology and Monash University's
Department of Forensic Medicine in Melbourne, Australia have
found that drivers who use cannabis are actually less likely to
cause fatal accidents than drug-free drivers, and are no more
likely than other drivers to be killed or seriously injured in
road accidents [33]. One experiment tested marijuana-intoxicated
drivers on both a closed course and on a crowded city street. It
found that the elements of driving most affected were
concentration and judgment [52]. An experiment involving a
driving simulator that tested actual driving ability according to
how many mistakes are incurred by sober, drunk, and high subjects
found that marijuana, unlike alcohol, does not significantly
affect driving ability. It was found that these results hold true
for even higher doses (within reason) and inexperienced marijuana
users. In fact, the only significant difference reported by the
stoned subjects was an altered perception of time, which
effectively made them drive relatively slower [50]. A similar
study found that marijuana additionally impairs the driver's
ability to attend to peripheral stimuli [71]. One theory
attempting to explain these surprising findings states that
marijuana users, in instances requiring seriousness, are in fact
able to willingly &quot;bring themselves down,&quot; such that
they are no longer high [51]. Studies that in the past have shown
that marjuana-intoxicated drivers cause significantly more
accidents than sober drivers are typically unreliable on one or
more of the following counts: (1) They use drug tests to
determine whether or not a person is high, and drug tests in use
only indicate use over the past 30 days; (2) Some studies have
not corrected for alcohol use, or do not provide a control group;
and (3) In many studies there were relatively more stoned drivers
killed, but it was not their fault. And when the police
&quot;culpability scores&quot; were tallied and factored in,
marijuana was generally not to blame for the accidents. It must
be emphasized however that one study shows that daily marijuana
smokers tend to have a 30% higher risk of injuries than non-users
[66]. In fact, accidents resulting from intoxication are thought
to be &quot;the number one hazard of marijuana use&quot; [67]. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">The
Gateway Effect </h4>

<p>Marijuana use has not been found to act as a gateway drug to
the use of harder drugs. Studies show that when the Dutch
partially legalized marijuana in the 70's, heroin and cocaine use
substantially declined, despite a slight increase in marijuana
use [24]. If the stepping stone theory were true, use should have
gone up rather than down. In reality, it appears that marijuana
use tends to substitute for the use of relatively more dangerous
hard drugs like cocaine and heroin, rather than lead to their
use. Thus, oftentimes strict marijuana laws themselves are the
most significant factor involved in moving on to harder drugs
like cocaine. Such is the case in Nevada and Arizona, the states
toughest on marijuana use [65]. A recent study by Columbia
University's Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse attempts to
show, like many past studies have, that marijuana users are more
likely to use heroin or cocaine. But what the study actually does
show is that a large number of heroin or cocaine users have used
marijuana, not the reverse. What is not mentioned is that just as
many or even more had probably also drank alcohol, smoked
cigarettes, had sex, or eaten sandwiches prior to their hard drug
use. In fact, a National High School survey tells us that in
1990, 40.7% of all high school students had tried marijuana or
hashish at least once, whereas only 9.4% and 1.3% had ever used
cocaine and heroin, respectively [25]. Thus, at maximum, only 23%
of marijuana users go on to use cocaine, and only 3% go on to use
heroin. Thus, the stepping stone theory fails on even empirical
grounds. </p>

<h4><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22">Marijuana
and Crime </h4>

<p>DARE literature would have you believe that there exists a
strong correlation between marijuana use and juvenile and young
adult crime [28]. And a recent study attempts to present a link
between marijuana use and violence by stating that 2/3 of all
students who admit to taking a gun to school at least once had
smoked marijuana. In fact, DEA head Thomas Constantine recently
stated in a Washington Times interview that &quot;Many times
people talk about the nonviolent drug offender. That is a rare
species. There is not some sterile drug type not involved in
violence who is contributing some good to the community; that is
ridiculous. They are contributing nothing but evil.&quot; But
these allegations are unsupported by research because test
results show that changes in personality resulting from marijuana
use, even though they are not relatively significant, include
among other things a lessening of aggressive trends [34]. And
large population studies such as the La Guardia report [10] have
found that, if anything, marijuana use inhibits antisocial
activity such as violence [20]. The drug-inspired violence myth,
including a comprehensive history of its conception, is discussed
at great length in Lester Grinspoon's book, where it is shown to
be based largely on a distorted Persian story that is hundreds of
years old [61]. The problem inherent in drawing conclusions based
on correlations such as the 2/3 statistic above is that causality
cannot be inferred from correlation. In other words, there is no
way of determining whether marijuana use contributed in some way
to the existence of certain traits of marijuana users, i.e.
bringing a gun to school, or, as seems entirely more likely,
people with such traits are drawn to marijuana use. One study
found that chronic marijuana users had significantly higher WAIS
IQ scores (113.08) than both moderate users (102.15) and nonusers
(103.26) [30]. It is simply impossible to make sense of such
statistics as presented. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h2>References </h2>

<p>[1] Mikuriya, T.H. &quot;Historical Aspects of Cannabis Sativa
in Western Medicine,&quot; New Physician, 1969, p. 905. </p>

<p>[2] Cotts, Cynthia, &quot;Hard Sell in the Drug War.&quot; The
Nation. March 9, 1992. p 300 - 302. </p>

<p>[3] Nadelmann, Ethan A. &quot;Drug Prohibition in the United
States: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives,&quot; Science, Vol
245: 943, 1 September 1989. </p>

<p>[4] Heath, R.G., A.T. Fitzjarrell, C.J. Fontana, and R.E.
Garey. &quot;Cannabis sativa: Effects on brain function and
ultrastructure in Rhesus monkeys,&quot; Biological Psychiatry.
15:657-690, 1980. </p>

<p>[5] Marijuana and Health, Institute of Medicine, National
Academy of Sciences, 1982. </p>

<p>[6] Slikker, William Jr. et al. &quot;Behavioral,
Neurochemical, and Neurohistological Effects of Chronic Marijuana
Smoke Exposure in the Nonhuman Primate&quot; in &quot;Marijuana
Cannabinoids Neurobiology and Neurophysiology,'' Laura Murphy,
Andrzej Bartke ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1992. </p>

<p>[7] Matsuda, L.A., S.J. Lolait, M.J. Brownstein, A.C. Young,
and T.I. Bonner. &quot;Structure of a Cannabinoid Receptor,&quot;
Nature, 346 (issue 6824): 561-564. August, 1990. </p>

<p>[8] Co, B.T., D.W. Goodwin, M. Gado, M. Mikhael, and S.Y.
Hill. &quot;Absence of cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabis
users,&quot; Journal of the American Medical Association, 237:
1229-1230, 1977. </p>

<p>[9] Kuehnle, J., J.H. Mendelson, K.R. Davis, and P.F.J. New.
&quot;Computed topographic examination of heavy marijuana
smokers,&quot; Journal of the American Medical Association, 237:
1231-1232, 1977. </p>

<p>[10] Lancaster, Cattell. Mayor's Committee on Marijuana. The
Marijuana Problem in the City of New York. 1944. </p>

<p>[11] Freedman and Rockmore, &quot;Marihuana: A Factor in
Personality Evaluation,&quot; 7: 765-781, 1946. </p>

<p>[12] Siler et al., &quot;Marihuana Smoking in Panama,&quot;
The Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280, 1933. </p>

<p>[13] R. L. Dornbush, M.D., M. Fink, M.D., and A. M. Freedman,
M.D. &quot;Marijuana, Memory, and Perception,&quot; presented at
the 124th annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association,
May 3-7, 1971. </p>

<p>[14] Block, Robert, M.D. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 28:
121-8, 1991. </p>

<p>[15] Hollister, Leo E. &quot;Marijuana and Immunity&quot;,
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 24 (issue 2):159-164, April, June,
1992. pub. Haight-Ashbury Publications in association with the
Haight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic, San Francisco, CA. </p>

<p>[16] Kaklamani, et al. &quot;Hashish smoking and T-
lymphocytes,&quot; 1978. </p>

<p>[17] Kalofoutis et al. &quot;The significance of lymphocyte
lipid changes after smoking hashish,&quot; 1978. </p>

<p>[18] Wallace, J.M., D.P. Tashkin, J.S. Oishi, R.G. Barbers.
&quot;Peripheral Blood Lymphocyte Subpopulations and Mitogen
Responsiveness in Tobacco and Marijuana Smokers,&quot; Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 1988. </p>

<p>[20] Kaplan, John. Marijuana, The New Prohibition, New York,
World Publishing Co., 1969. </p>

<p>[21] Health Consequences of Smoking: Nicotine Addiction,
Surgeon General's Report, 1988. </p>

<p>[22] Winters, T.H., and J.R. Franza. &quot;Radioactivity in
Cigarette Smoke.&quot; New England Journal of Medicine, 1982: 306
(6): 364-365. </p>

<p>[23] Mikuriya, Tod H., M.D., and Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D.
&quot;Cannabis 1988, Old Drug New Dangers, The Potency
Question&quot; , Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. Vol. 20, Issue 1:
47-55. pub. Haight-Ashbury Publications in association with the
Haight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic San Francisco, Calif.: January
March, 1988. </p>

<p>[24] Dennis, Richard J. &quot;The Economics of Legalizing
Drugs,&quot; The Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 266, No. 5, Nov 1990, p.
130. </p>

<p>[25] Data supplied by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental
Health Administration. Revised January, 1991. For more
information contact the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and
Drug Info., P.O. Box 2345, Rockville, Maryland 20847 / (800)
729-6686. </p>

<p>[28] the name of the DARE pamphlet is &quot;Facts About
Marijuana; Marijuana: Drug of Deception&quot; </p>

<p>[29] Nationally-televised speech in 1990 </p>

<p>[30] Singer, Jerome L. &quot;Ongoing Thought: The Normative
Baseline for Alternate States of Consciousness,&quot; Alternate
States of Consciousness. </p>

<p>[32] The NHTSA report, &quot;The Incidence and Role of Drugs
in Fatally Injured Drivers,&quot; by K.W. Terhune, et al. of the
Calspan Corp. Accident Research Group in Buffalo, NY (Report #
DOT-HS-808-065) is available from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield VA 22161. </p>

<p>[33] Bruer, Mark. Age, March 23, 1994, p. 3 [Melbourne,
Australia; this report is also published in the university's </p>

<p>Business Victoria]. </p>

<p>[34] Halpern. &quot;Emotional Reactions and General
Personality Structure,&quot; The Marihuana Problem, pp. 130 -
131. </p>

<p>[35] Martell, Edward. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, Biophysics, and Biological Science, March 1983. </p>

<p>[36] Hoffmann, Dietrich, Gunter Rathkamp, and Ernest L.
Wynder. &quot;Comparison of the Yields of Several Selected
Components in the Smoke From Different Tobacco Products,&quot;
Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1963,
p. 627-635 </p>

<p>[37] Hofmann, D., J.D. Adams, K.D. Brunnemann, and D.D. Hecht.
&quot;Formation, occurrence and carcinogenesity of N-nitrosamines
in tobacco products,&quot; Am. Chem. Soc. Symp. Ser.,
174:247-273, 1981. </p>

<p>[39] Hammond, E.C., L. Garfinkel, H. Seidman, and E.A. Lew.
&quot;Some Recent findings concerning cigarette smoking,&quot;
In: Origins of Human Cancer. New York: Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, 1977. p. 101-112. </p>

<p>[40] Starks, Michael, &quot;Marijuana Chemistry Genetics,
Processing, and Potency',&quot; Ronin Inc., 1990. </p>

<p>[41] Murphy, Laura, and Andrzej Bartke. &quot;Marijuana
Cannabinoid Neurobiology and Neurophysiology,&quot; CRC Press
Boca Raton, FL, 1992. </p>

<p>[42] Mendelson, Dr. Jack H., &quot;Behavioral and Biological
Concomitants of Chronic Marijuana Use,&quot; 1974. </p>

<p>[43] &quot;Marihuana A Signal of Misunderstanding,&quot; U.S.
Government Printing Office Washington, 1972. </p>

<p>[44] Wu, Tzu Chin, Donald P. Tashkin, Behnam Djahed, and Jed
E. Rose. &quot;Pulmonary Hazards of Smoking Marijuana as Compared
with Tobacco,&quot; New England Journal of Medicine, 318 (issue
6): 347-351, 1988. </p>

<p>[45] Slikker, William Jr, H.C. Cunny, J.R. Bailey, and M.G.
Paule. &quot;Placental Transfer and Fetal Disposition of
Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) During Late Pregnancy in the
Rhesus Monkey,&quot; pp. 97-102. </p>

<p>[46] Lyman, W.D., J.R. Sonett, C.F. Brosnan, R. Elkin, and
M.B. Bornstein. &quot;Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol A Novel
Treatment for Experimental Autoimmune Encephalitis&quot; by in
Journal of Neuroimmunology, 23: 73-81. 1989. </p>

<p>[47] Cabral, Guy A., Amy L. Stinnet, John Bailey, Syed F. Ali,
Merle G. Paul, Andrew C. Scallet, and William Slikker, Jr.
&quot;Chronic Marijuana Smoke Alters Alveolar Macrophage
Morphology and Protein Expression,&quot; 1991. </p>

<p>[48] Ponte, Lowell. &quot;Radioactivity: The New-Found Danger
in Cigarettes,&quot; Reader's Digest, March 1986, pp. 123-127. </p>

<p>[49] Litwak, Mark. &quot;Would You Still Rather Fight Than
Switch?&quot; Whole Life Times, Mid-April/May, 1985, p. 11. </p>

<p>[50] Crancer, A., et al. &quot;Comparison of the Effects of
Marihuana and Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance,&quot;
Science, 164:851-854, 1969. </p>

<p>[51] Caldwell, D.F., et al. &quot;Auditory and Visual
Threshold Effects of Marihuana in Man,&quot; Perceptive and Motor
Skills, 29:758-759, 1969. </p>

<p>[52] Klonoff, H. (1974). &quot;Effects of marihuana on driving
in a restricted area and on city streets: Driving performance and
physiological changes.&quot; In L. L. Miller (Ed.), Marijuana,
Effects on human behavior (pp. 359-397). New York: Academic
Press. </p>

<p>[57] Westlake, Tracy M., Allyn C. Howlett, Syed F. Ali, Merle
G. Paule, Andrew C. Scallet, William Slikker, Jr. &quot;Chronic
Exposure to Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Fails to Irreversibly
Alter Brain Cannabinoid Receptors,&quot; Brain Research, 544:
145-149, 1991. </p>

<p>[58] Ali, Syed F., Glenn D. Newport, Andrew C. Scallet, Merle
G. Paule, John R. Bailey, William Slikker, Jr. &quot;Chronic
Marijuana Smoke Exposure in the Rhesus Monkey IV Neurochemical
Effects and Comparison to Acute and Chronic Exposure to
Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in Rats&quot; Pharmacology,
Biochemistry &amp; Behavior, 40: 677-682. 1991. </p>

<p>[59] Radford EP Jr, and V.R. Hunt. &quot;Polonium-210: a
volatile radioelement in cigarettes.&quot; Science. 1964;
143:247-9. </p>

<p>[60] Little JB, E.P. Radford Jr, H.L. McCombs, V.R. Hunt.
&quot;Distribution of polonium-210 in pulmonary tissues of
cigarette smokers.&quot; New England Journal of Medicine. 1965,
273:1343-51. </p>

<p>[66] Polen, Michael. &quot;Health Care Use by Frequent
Marijuana Smokers Who Do Not Smoke Tobacco,&quot; West J Med
1993: 158. </p>

<p>[67] Gieringer, Dale. &quot;Marijuana, Driving and Accident
Safety,&quot; Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Jan-Mar, 1988. </p>

<p>[68] Weil, Andrew, and Winifred Rosen, From Chocolate to
Morphine: Everything You Need to Know About Mind-Altering Drugs.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993. </p>

<p>[69] Cozzi, Nicholas. &quot;Effects of Water Filtration on
Marijuana Smoke: A Literature Review.&quot; MAPS Newsletter IV #2
(Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, 1993).
Reprints available from California NORML. </p>

<p>[70] &quot;Cannabis and Memory Loss,&quot; (editorial) British
Journal of Addiction, 86:249-252 (1991). </p>

<p>[71] Muskowitz, H., Hulbert, S., &amp; McGlothlin, W.H.
(1976). &quot;Marihuana: Effects on simulated driving
performance.&quot; Accident Analysis and Prevention, 8(1), p. 45
- 50. </p>

<p>[72] Astley, Susan, Dr. &quot;Analysis of Facial Shape in
Children Gestationally Exposed to Marijuana, Alcohol, and/or
Cocaine,&quot; Pediatrics, 89 #1: 67 - 77 (June 1992). </p>

<p>[73] Day, Nancy, et. al. &quot;Prenatal Marijuana Use and
Neonatal Outcome,&quot; Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 13:
329-334 (1992). </p>

<p>[74] Tashkin, Donald, et. al. &quot;Effects of Habitual Use of
Marijuana and/or Cocaine on the Lung,&quot; in C. Nora Chiang and
Richard L. Hawks, ed., Research findings on Smoking of Abused
Substances, NIDA Research Monograph 99 (US Dept of Health and
Human Services, 1990). </p>

<p>Suggested Reading </p>

<p>[61] Grinspoon, Lester. Marihuana Reconsidered. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1971. </p>

<p>[62] Herer, Jack. The Emperor Wears No Clothes. Van Nuys, CA:
Hemp Publishing, 1990. </p>

<p>[63] Hendin, Herbert. Living High: Daily Marijuana Use Among
Adults. New York: Human Sciences Press, 1987. </p>

<p>[64] Himmelstein, Jerome L. The Strange Career of Marihuana:
Politics and Ideology of Drug Control in America. Westport,
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1983. </p>

<p>[65] Dale Gieringer, Ph.D from California's NORML.
&quot;Health Tips for Marijuana Smokers,&quot; Feb. 1994 edition.
To receive this very comprehensive 32-page compilation of
reports, send a $5 donation to California NORML, 2215-R Market
St. #278, San Francisco, CA 94114 or call (415) 563-5858 and ask
for the paper by name. The packet includes detailed instructions
on how to construct a vaporizer. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hemp/hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="../hemp/general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana
Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="20593" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>