
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B12-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B044-234</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.062.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061408 text/html 8388
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:14:04 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 8217
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:47 GMT
</DOCHDR>
When You Use E-Mail at Work the Boss May Be Looking In <p>

from telecom digest <p>

When You Use E-Mail at Work the Boss May Be Looking In
By James McNair, {The Miami Herald}
Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News <p>

Jan. 30 -- AMID the sterile drudgery of office work, a computer screen
beckons your wandering mind with the chance to escape. You send a
message to a friend elsewhere in the building. It could signal a
fleeting thought: After-work plans, an interesting new employee or a
dumb decision by a boss. Or it could open up a more riveting subject:
a smear campaign against the boss, a moonlighting venture on company
time, or stealing customer lists. <p>

Whatever you drop into the electronic mailbox, it could come back to
haunt you. In many companies, what seems to be a private communications
network -- protected by passwords, no less -- is equipped with a back
door in the computer room. <p>

In other words, your plots, your off-color barbs and your work-unrelated
digressions might be camped on a computer disk somewhere, waiting to be
read. <p>

"It's pretty much on every network," said Edward Gomez, a consultant
for Byte Computers in Miami. "There are utilities that tell you what
people are doing, what files are opening up and how much time people
are spending on the computer." <p>

Sounds like an invitation to employee rebellion, but corporations
insist they restrain themselves from systematic E-mail peeping. When
they do play back the disks, it's for legitimate business reasons,
such as investigating crimes, tracing security breaches or intercepting
customer inquiries when an employee is absent. <p>

"Some people may say it's offensive and violates their privacy, but
the employer just wants to ensure that its interests are protected,"
said Mike Losey, president of the Society for Human Resource
Management. <p>

For now, employers are having their way. The 1986 Electronic
Communications Privacy Act shields E-mail messages over public
telephone lines, but not the inter-office variety. In privacy-invasion
lawsuits across the country, courts have predominantly ruled in favor
of employers. <p>

The false belief in E-mail privacy is so great that Congress is
considering a law requiring employers to post policies, spelling out
their E-mail access rights. Some South Florida companies such as
Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., Barnett Banks and First Union Corp.
have already taken this step. <p>

Nearly 27 million U.S. workers will have an E-mail password in 1994,
up from 19 million in 1993, according to WorkGroup Technologies Inc.,
a research firm in Hampton, N.H. Given how E-mail is flourishing, the
conflict between employee right to privacy and employer right to
access was inevitable. <p>

Technology gets the brunt of the blame. Ever since desktop computer
networks started popping up as a mainstream business tool ten years
ago, computers have become alarmingly more powerful. The delivery
speed of E-mail in a typical IBM-compatible or Macintosh network has
made intracompany phone calls an absurd waste of time, handwritten
memos a relic of the past. <p>

But what turned sealed letters into open books on the E-mail system is
the new breed of networking software built into or added to computers.
Professional computer installers say the network's ability to call up
employee messages is now standard equipment. <p>

"They never ask for it," said Tim White, a consultant for Technology
Solutions in Fort Lauderdale. "It's always something companies
discover after it's there." But maybe not. <p>

According to a survey of 301 companies by Macworld magazine last July,
six percent said they read employees' in-house messages. One of five
companies said electronic monitoring is a good way to verify an act of
wrongdoing. Two of three don't bother warning their employees. <p>

Alana Shoars, former E-mail manager at Epson America in Torrance,
Calif., was one of those who told employees that their messages were
secret. Then one day in 1990, she stumbled upon a supervisor's printer
cranking out every message sent on the network. She complained and was
fired. <p>

Shoars and 170 employees sued for invasion of privacy, but lost the
case. Six months after leaving Epson, Warner Bros. hired her to run a
3,500-user E- mail system in which privacy would be guaranteed. <p>

The same Los Angeles court that ruled in favor of Epson also sided
with Nissan Motor Co. in its defense of a privacy-invasion lawsuit
filed by two employees whose messages had been read by managers they
criticized. <p>

Mentor Graphics of Wilsonville, Ore., settled a similar lawsuit filed
by two employees, even though it said the E-mail trail showed that the
employees had been stealing trade secrets. <p>

Occasionally, corporations are the first to go to court. Last year,
Borland International of Scotts Valley, Calif., pressed charges
against a vice president who had been sending marketing plans and
product-release dates to the president of a cross-town rival. Both men
were indicted, but they defended themselves by accusing Borland of
violating the Electronic Communications Privacy Act ban on tapping
messages sent on commercial E-mail lines. <p>

The charges and a related lawsuit filed by Borland are still pending.
Lawsuits are repulsive ways to settle differences, but they have
served a good purpose in fomenting a spirited debate between employee
and employer rights on the E-mail network. Privacy advocates take the
side of the Bill of Rights. On the other side is a well-entrenched
business lobby fighting for the plain right to use its equipment as it
sees fit. <p>

Lewis Maltby, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's
Workplace Rights Project, said corporate E-mail systems should allow
for some, if not full privacy. <p>

As it is, he said, the issuance of passwords and their suggestion of
confidentiality gives employees a false impression of privacy. <p>

"Employers should think twice about reading messages because employees
will clam up," Maltby said. "No one's going to be candid if they know
someone's looking over their shoulder all the time." <p>

Some companies actually share employees' desire for E-mail privacy.
Among those in South Florida, IBM Corp., Motorola, Siemens and the law
firm Greenberg Traurig all say they can't read or recall employees'
messages. <p>

Companies that can tap the E-mail system say they do so with
restraint.  "Managers don't have the ability to say, 'Print me out a
report of all the E-mail communications that went out of my group last
month,"' said Ken Smalling, a spokesman for Electronic Data Systems,
which has about 300 employees at its System One airline reservations
unit in Miramar. <p>

Others ducked questions about their E-mail monitoring powers. "No
one's comfortable with saying something publicly," said Ryder System
spokeswoman Terri Kopec. "We don't want our employees reading about it
in the paper." <p>

"We'll take a pass on this one," said W.R. Grace spokesman Fred Bona.
Government E-mail users have the least privacy of all -- even in the
Oval Office. Last year, a federal judge ruled that millions of E-mail
messages stored during the Reagan and Bush years must be preserved
under the same guidelines as paper communications. <p>

In Broward County, all E-mail notes are public records. In Metro Dade,
the issue is moot because the computer system isn't capable of
recalling E- mail. <p>

While lawmakers and courts have upheld employers' full access to
E-mail content, bills winding through Congress would ensure that
employees are explicitly warned. Sponsored by Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill.,
and Rep. Pat Williams, D-Mont., it would require companies to post
E-mail policy statements in the workplace. <p>

Many companies -- partly at the urging of their attorneys -- are ahead
of the law, including First Union, Barnett Banks and Blockbuster
Entertainment.  First Union's policy, released last August, lists when
the bank can rifle through E-mail files. <p>

"We saw a need to put a policy into place so that everybody knew
exactly what we could and couldn't do," said First Union spokesman
Monty Hagler. "It's a big issue when you have 18,000 users. You don't
want to wait for trouble." <p>

</DOC>