
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-81</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA096-001029-B016-258</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/gruff72495.html 205.177.10.31 19970215015559 text/html 2935
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:54:42 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Testimony of Donnelle Gruff</title>
<body>
<pre>

I was logged on a bbs [bulletin board service] called "the zoo" and Bill 
logged on and came into the teleconference and told everyone he had a 
bbs that was free and instructed everyone to call it a gave us the 
number to call. I logged on to Bill's bbs "Beyond the Sound Barrier" and 
at this time was required to give him my name and address. After doing 
this I logged on with my usual handle "She Devil" and for the first 
couple of days he seemed really nice. He welcomed me to his bbs and tome 
me to look around at what the channel had to offer. The next day he 
asked me if I would be co-sysop and watch over the teleconference when 
more phone lines were installed. I said yes. and then after a couple of 
days he started asking me personal questions such as "do I shave besides 
my legs, "what bra size do I wear", would I go out with him", and " 
would I blow him". When I would not answer, he kept asking me so I 
logged off and went o the other bbs "the Zoo".

He followed me to that channel and logged on and kept telling me he was 
going to come to my house. After telling him 20 times not to come over 
he finally agreed and I though that was the end of it. That night at 
about 1:30 a.m., three days after I became co-sysop, he came over and I 
told him not to come back again. It said "it's late and he was going to 
have to leave" and he did as I asked. The next day he came to my house 
and sat outside for four hours and my mother was forced to call the 
police and then he left. The next day he came back and sat outside my 
house again and when I went to the front window to see what the dog was 
barking at, he saw me and left. That Saturday I went to the bowling 
alley to meet a few friends and he followed me around all night but 
didn't say anything to me.

A couple of days later when I logged on to this bbs he emulated me and 
took me to some pornographic pictures [emulate is a term that refers to 
using a computer at a remote location to act as though it were my 
computer, in so doing, the remote user can "appear" to others in the 
cyber world as though he is me. This is a procedure which, with certain 
software, can be done with out my permission, and sometimes, without my 
knowledge]. When he did that he I had no way of getting out of them and 
I turned my computer off. The next time I logged on his bbs he attempted 
to down load pornographic pictures to me but was having trouble doing 
it. He allowed me to download one to myself and I did so I could give 
one to the detective. I have not called his bbs since then.

</pre>
<hr size = 2>
Return to the <a href="724list.html">index of testimony from the 7/24 
hearing</a><br>
Return to the <a href="http://www.cdt.org/cda.html">CDT Home Page</a>

</body>
</html>

</DOC>