
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B16-176</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000321-B013-184</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/femp/minutes_jun96.html 205.168.79.27 19970114205413 text/html 40018
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 20:54:13 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 23 Dec 1996 23:08:46 GMT
Content-length: 39843
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<head>
<title>Memo of Record Interagency Energy Task Force Meeting</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF" text="#000080" link="#990033" alink="#333300"
vlink="#EE3A8C" >

<p><strong>U.S. Department of Energy</strong>
<br>
<a href="femp.html"><img border=0 alt="FEMP" align=left align=bottom img
src="graphics/fempsm.gif"></a>


<br clear=all>
<blockquote>
<br><br>
<center>
<h2>MEMO OF RECORD
<br>INTERAGENCY ENERGY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING</h2>
<B>Old Executive Office Building</B><br>
<B>Room 450</B><br>
<B>June 26, 1996</B><br>
<B>9:00 a.m. - 10:25 a.m.</B>
</center>
<p>

Christine Ervin, Assistant Secretary of Energy for Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy and Chair of the "656" Committee, opened the meeting by welcoming the
attendees and briefly running through the agenda.  She stated that the recognition
of the 1996 Federal Save Energy Showcase facilities and the awarding of plaques
would be the highlight of the meeting.<p>  

Ms. Ervin introduced Mark Ginsberg, Chairman of the Federal Interagency Energy
Management Task Force and Director of the Federal Energy Management Program.  Mr.
Ginsberg reminded the group that Executive Order 12902 called for each Federal
agency to designate at least one facility as a showcase.  He stated that lack of
information, education, and understanding have been the key barriers to energy
management success, and the showcasing of these facilities provides an opportunity
to demonstrate successes.  He explained that each Showcase would be awarded a plaque
to display at the facility.<p>  

Assistant Secretary Ervin thanked each agency for their efforts.  As a taxpayer, she
thanked the agencies for saving tax dollars and freeing up funds for other uses. 
She also expressed her thanks as a person who cares about the environment.  She
touched on the linkage between energy efficiency, renewable energy, and
environmental quality, noting that energy production produces more pollution than
any other activity.<p>

Mark Ginsberg introduced each showcase facility and awarded the plaques.  Agency
representatives had photographs taken with Assistant Secretary Christine Ervin.<p>

1996 Federal Energy Saver Showcases<p>

Department of Agriculture, Jamie L. Whitten Federal Building, Washington, D.C.<p>

This ongoing project includes a lighting retrofit to install efficient T-8 lamps,
electronic ballasts, and occupancy sensors to eliminate unnecessary illumination in
unoccupied areas of the building.  The lighting replacement project is also expected
to reduce the cooling load requirements of the office by more than 50 tons.  The
Department of Agriculture expects to receive a total of $110,000 in rebates from the
serving utility, Potomac Electric Power Company (PEPCO).<p>

Department of Agriculture, South Building, Washington, D.C.<p>

After a comprehensive energy audit, a solar heating system was designed for the
South Building, including a 1,000 square foot solar preheater to be used in the
Cafeteria/Kitchen.  A steam survey was also conducted to reduce operating costs
associated with steam usage.   Upgrades made to the steam systems will save between
$300,000 and $400,000 a year in steam costs.<p>

Department of Commerce, Herbert C. Hoover Federal Building, Washington, D.C.
This Headquarters Building received a FEMP SAVEnergy Action Plan energy audit to
identify all cost-effective energy efficiency, renewable, and water conservation
measures.  The recommendations include upgrading the HVAC and lighting controls, and
installing energy efficient motors, high-efficiency lighting, electronic ballasts,
daylighting, variable speed drives, chiller, and window replacements.  The savings
potential is estimated at $745,000 annually.  The Department of Commerce is working
with GSA and DOE to implement projects through an Energy Savings Performance
Contract with the local utility company.<p>

Department of Defense, The Pentagon, Washington, D.C.<p>

The Pentagon is the largest Federal office building and has enormous potential for
implementing energy and water conservation measures.  A state-of-the-art direct
digital control system has been installed to effectively control the building's
systems.  Training will be provided to employees to ensure appropriate operation and
maintenance.  The Pentagon effort is dedicated to improving five categories of
upgrades: energy efficient actions; building ecology actions; air, water, and
landscape actions; materials waste and resource management actions; and managerial
and human factor actions.<p>

Department of Defense - Army, Environment Center, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
Maryland<p>

This site contains over 13 million square feet of energy consuming space.  As a
result of a major conversion, 50 percent of the facility will be heated by natural
gas this coming winter.  Other projects involve lighting retrofits, construction of
ice storage media, use of energy efficient building designs, installation of
desiccant cooling systems, and conversion of many oil-fired heating plants and most
of the vehicle fleet to natural gas.  A natural gas fueling station is slated to
open in July of this year.  APG has received $500,000 in rebates from the local
utility, Baltimore Gas and Electric.  Utility costs will be reduced by $400,000 each
year.<p>

United States Army Corps of Engineers, 220 Family Housing Units, Fort Irwin,
California<p>

This group of 220 houses represents the third phase of an energy reduction project
initiated at the National Training Center in the late 1980s, and will take the
program to the leading edge of technology with ground source heat pumps.  On-site
tests have shown a 50 percent reduction in energy costs through the utilization of
ground source heat pump technology.  Other water and energy conservation
technologies will also be applied including fluorescent lighting, insulation
upgrades, xeriscape techniques, and computer controlled watering systems.<p>

United States Army Corps of Engineers, Army Reserve Training Center & Maintenance
Shop, Toledo, Ohio<p>

The Training Center and the Maintenance Shop were designed with passive solar
features to reduce the need for mechanical heating, cooling, and lighting.  The
buildings also contain an ice storage system, high efficiency electric motors with
variable speed drives, T8 electronic ballast lighting fixtures, a direct digital
control system for HVAC, and domestic hot water computer controls.  The Army Reserve
leveraged over $11,000 in rebate funds from Toledo Edison for this project.<p>

United States Army Corps of Engineers, Photovoltaic Power Station, Yuma Proving
Ground<p>

The Yuma Proving Ground features a 300 kilowatt Photovoltaic Power Station.  The
project consists of adding an additional 300 kW photovoltaic grid connected array to
the Phase I 150 kW array.  The total energy cost savings per year from this project
will be $516,952 per year.<p>

United States Army Corps of Engineers, Army Chaplain Center and School, Fort
Jackson, South Carolina<p>

This facility has many energy efficiency and water conservation features included in
the design, including the post energy monitoring and control system, daylighting
opportunities and exterior shading, the landscaping of native species, and plant
materials with low irrigation requirements.  Occupancy sensors, high efficiency
lighting, and metering lavatory faucets are to be installed.  The project is
estimated to save $7,818 annually.<p>

United States Army Corps of Engineers, Defense Information School, Fort Meade, MD<p>

The Defense Information School is a $35.8 million project currently under
construction.  Energy and water conservation features incorporated into the design
of this facility include an ice storage system, variable speed pumps, an Energy
Monitoring and Control System, fluorescent lighting, light emitting diode exit
signs, and special plumbing fixtures.  Baltimore Gas and Electric provided $200 per
on-peak kilowatt avoided as an incentive to implement the ice storage system.<p>

Department of the Army, U.S. Army Intelligence Center, Fort Huachuca, Arizona
The Center's aggressive energy efficiency, renewable energy, and water conservation
program has already resulted in saving over $617,000 in energy costs and $143,000 in
water consumption costs.  Four major projects contribute to these savings and
include: lighting fixture replacement in eight buildings; the installation of 77
energy efficient motors; insulation of walls, roofs, and hot water piping in 60
buildings; and the installation of boiler loop controls for natural gas savings.  A
solar pool heating system and a grid connected PV system have also been repaired and
rehabilitated.  Fort Huachuca also received FEMP funds to do a basewide Energy
Savings Performance Contract (ESPC) and a Renewables ESPC.<p>

Department of Defense - Navy, Naval Construction Battalion Center, Port Hueneme,
California<p>

The Naval Construction Battalion Center is partnering with local gas and electric
utility companies, taking advantages of services such as audits, assessments, and
rebates that will leverage millions of dollars in energy efficiency savings. 
Projects include:  steam plant decentralization; improved usage of energy management
control system; lighting projects; HVAC upgrades and repairs; water conservation
initiatives; consolidation and renovation of facilities; and the implementation of
alternative fuel vehicles.<p>

Department of Defense - Navy, United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland<p>

Installation of a fuel cell is planned for the lower yard of USNA's complex, along
with an upgrade of the cooling tower and the use of occupancy sensors.  The energy
efficient house will feature technologies such as a natural gas heat pump, low-flow
shower heads, high efficiency lighting and ballasts, efficient appliances, and a
programmable thermostat.<p>

Department of Education, FB6 Headquarters, Washington, D.C.<p>

Energy efficient lighting will be installed during the renovation of the building,
and will include more efficient ballasts and controls.  Existing chillers will be
retrofitted with high efficiency, non-CFC chillers, fans will be upgraded, and new
elevators will be installed.  Passive solar designs will also be included as
feasible.<p>

Department of Energy, Nevada Solar Enterprise Zone, Nevada Test Site<p>

Technologies proposed for the Nevada Test Site (NTS) are solarex thin-film
photovoltaic modules, photovoltaic technologies blended with wind, and photovoltaic
Concentrator Technology blended with Nevada Power wholesale power or wind.  The
Department of Energy/Nevada Operations Office is currently exploring the feasibility
of purchasing solar generated electric power from the Corporation for Solar
Technology and Renewable Resources (CSTRR) and integrating it into the NTS power
supply mix.<p>

Department of Energy, Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Richland, WA<p>

The EMSL project is a high-profile model of energy efficiency that will save DOE
$237,000 a year in energy costs.  The following efficiency technologies are just
some that have been incorporated in the design of the facility:  variable air
volume; variable frequency drives; high efficiency motors; fluorescent lighting; LED
exit signs;  lighting occupancy sensors; energy management system; indirect
evaporative cooling; and daylighting controls.<p>

Department of Energy, Nevada Support Facility, North Las Vegas, Nevada<p>

This facility will become the administrative headquarters of Department of Energy
Nevada Operations Office (DOE/NV).    Energy efficient technologies contained in
this facility include high efficiency water cooled chillers, variable speed pumps,
gas fired hot water boilers, variable air volume units, direct digital controls, and
interior and exterior fluorescent lighting.<p> 

Department of Energy, Atlas Facility, C-1 Building, North Las Vegas, Nevada<p>

This high-profile facility will save approximately $29,000 annually through the
installation of an Energy Management Control System.  A proposal has been submitted
to retrofit the existing lighting with high-efficiency electronic ballasts and T-8
lamps.  Other proposed technologies are renewable energy, xeriscaping, and variable
speed motors.<p>

Department of Energy, Nevada Test Site, Building 300, Cafeteria, Mercury, Nevada<p>

The lighting system in this building has been retrofitted with high-efficiency
electronic ballasts and T-8 lamps and compact fluorescent lamps.  Annual estimated
maintenance savings for this project is $10,700.  Other technologies that have been
considered include outside wall and roof insulation, high-efficiency chillers,
thermal energy storage, variable frequency drives, variable air volume (VAV)
conversion, water conservation, multi-stage evaporative cooling, and heat
recovery.<p>

Department of Energy, Nevada Test Site, Badging Office, Building 1000, Mercury,
Nevada<p>

A proposal has been submitted for DOE In-House Energy Management funding to retrofit
the existing lighting system with high-efficiency electronic ballasts and T-8 lamps. 
This project would save an estimated $4,600 in maintenance costs annually.  Other
technologies that have been considered include outside wall and roof insulation,
daylighting strategy, water conservation, high-efficiency heat pumps, and motion
sensors.<p>

Department of Energy, Feynman Computing Center, Fermilab-Batavia Area Office,
Batavia, Illinois<p>

Feynman Computing Center welcomes tens of thousands of visitors each year.  The
facility's design and construction incorporate such innovative technologies as water
source heat pumps, computer waste-heat recovery, air wheel ventilation heat
exchanger, free cooling heat exchanger, hot-gas reheat, and direct digital control
energy management systems.  Savings approximate $165,000 per year.<p>

Department of Energy, Oak Ridge Centers for Manufacturing Technology, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee<p>

The types of technologies proposed for this facility include new electronic ballasts
and energy-saving fluorescent lamps, motion sensors, LED exit signs, low-flush
commercial toilets, sensor-activated faucets, roof insulation, high-efficiency
electric motors with variable frequency drives, and high-efficiency chillers.<p>

Department of Energy, Energy Division Office Building, Oak Ridge National
Laboratories, Oak Ridge, Tennessee<p>

The Energy Division Office Building has several energy conservation features in
operation that were incorporated in the original design.  The exterior office spaces
have packaged terminal air conditioners, while the interior building zones have
direct expansion, packaged, rooftop units that provide comfort heating and cooling. 
These units are all controlled by a building Energy Management System.  In addition,
a lighting retrofit program was completed in 1994, funded by the In-House Energy
Management Program.<p>

Department of Energy, Naval Petroleum Reserves Cogeneration Plant, Tupman,
California<p>

The Naval Petroleum Reserve No. 1 (NPR-1) Cogeneration project, through the
utilization of state-of-the-art power generation processes, produces electricity
approximately 45 percent more efficiently than local utility conventional fossil
fuel power plants while freeing up PG&E capacity for other electricity users.  These
processes also produce less air pollutants than conventional methods.  Annual
revenue received from the operation of this plant exceeds $3 million.<p>

Department of Energy, HAMMER Training Center, Richland, Washington<p>

The energy efficiency features that have been incorporated into the design of the
HAMMER Training Center include high-efficiency lighting, high-efficiency motors,
daylighting controls, occupancy sensors, low E double pane windows,
self-illuminating exit signs, and wall and roof insulation.  Water conservation
features include a water collection pond and xeriscaping.  Approximately $70,000 is
saved per year.<p>

Environmental Protection Agency, Headquarters-Waterside Mall, Washington, D.C.<p>

EPA's Office of Administration developed partnerships with the building owner,
General Services Administration, Department of Energy, and a number of private
business to identify conservation-based technologies for Headquarters.  These
partnerships provided the opportunity for the building owner to finance and
implement the following energy and water conserving technologies:  advanced office
environmental, ambient weather, and mechanical monitoring; an energy management
system; energy-efficient lighting; high-efficiency chillers and cooling towers;
variable speed fans; a solar hot water system; water saving sinks and showerheads;
and a demonstration desiccant cooling system.<p>

Environmental Protection Agency, National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory, Ann
Arbor, Michigan<p>

The National Vehicle and Fuels Laboratory conducts the Federal Government's
principal program to control air pollution from motor vehicles.  The Agency is
currently looking to use an Energy Service Performance Contract to pursue innovative
and efficient solutions to the problem of energy/cost-intensive operations that
defeat the environmental goals of its mission.<p> 

Environmental Protection Agency, Region III Laboratory, Fort Meade, Maryland<p>

This showcase project will feature the demonstration of either a 100 kilowatt
prototype fuel cell power station or the first fully commercialized three megawatt
solid oxide fuel cell power station to be built on U.S. soil.  Electricity produced
by the fuel cell power station will be purchased by consortium members in the form
of a $25 million option-to-purchase power contract.  The consortium members are DOE,
Westinghouse, EPA, Baltimore Gas and Electric, the Gas Research Institute, and the
Electric Power Research Institute.<p>

General Services Administration, Denver Federal Center-Building 67, Denver,
Colorado<p>

The General Services Administration, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Department of
Energy Federal Energy Management Program, and the Environmental Protection Agency
entered into a partnership with Denver Water and several water-conservation
technology manufacturers to form a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
(CRADA) allowing water-saving emerging technologies to be installed at no cost to
the government.  Estimates show that nearly 3 million gallons, or fifty percent of
the water used, could be saved each year.<p>

General Services Administration, United States Federal Courthouse - Foley Square,
New York, New York<p>

This facility utilizes energy efficient systems and products that are the most life
cycle cost-effective available and that qualified for demand side management
payments from  Con Edison of nearly $700,000.  The technologies featured in the
project include T-8 lamps, compact fluorescent lamps, solid state ballasts, energy
efficient motors, high-efficiency motors, and high-efficiency chillers.<p>

General Services Administration, New Reno Courthouse, Reno, Nevada<p>

This project was designed and built with no additional funds for the energy
conservation components.  Some technologies featured in the project include T-8
fluorescent system and electronic ballasts, motion detectors, EMCS lighting
controls, high-efficiency chiller and cooling tower, and roof and wall insulation. 
High-efficiency motors with variable speed drives and a ventilation system with
variable air volume controls will also be installed.<p>

Health and Human Services, Hubert H. Humphrey Building, Headquarters, 
Washington, D.C.<p>

Between 1991 and 1994, energy consumption in this facility was reduced by 22
percent.  This reduction can be attributed to several activities including a major
lighting retrofit, installation of occupancy sensors, controlled operations of the
central steam supply from GSA, installation of an energy management control system,
major chiller repairs, and an installation of water saving devices on faucets. 
Additional energy efficiency projects are planned including a complete retrofit of
the central chiller plant.<p>

Health and Human Services, White River Health Center, White River, Arizona<p>

This project, currently being developed with the assistance of the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, is to obtain an energy savings performance contract in
order to refurbish and recommission an existing solar field at the Health Center. 
The solar system is used for domestic water heating, space heating during the
winter, and absorption cooling during the summer.  After the installation of the
system, fuel oil usage dropped from 300 to 500 gallons to 125 to 200 gallons per
day.<p>

Housing and Urban Development, Headquarters Building, Washington, D.C.<p>

The HUD Headquarters Building is showcasing a Chiller Upgrade Project.  The project
was developed through the General Services Administration to replace five existing
CFC Carrier centrifugal chillers with three non-CFC, energy efficient York
centrifugal chillers.  The project will result in an annual savings of $50,000. 
FEMP's design review provided recommendations for HVAC improvements and energy
efficiency measures.<p>

Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Carl Hayden Visitors Center,
Page, Arizona<p>

The Visitors Center receives approximately one million visitors each year, and
features innovative technologies including improved lighting, room and area
occupancy sensors, energy efficient windows, solar heating, and low-use water
systems.  A new heating system using energy efficient heat pumps is planned.  A FEMP
SAVEnergy Action Plan energy audit identified these energy-saving opportunities. 
Approximately $12,988 has been saved over one year.<p>

Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver Federal Center-Building
67, Denver, Colorado<p>

The General Services Administration, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Department of
Energy Federal Energy Management Program, and the Environmental Protection Agency
entered into a partnership with Denver Water and several water-conservation
technology manufacturers to form a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
(CRADA) allowing water-saving emerging technologies to be installed at no cost to
the government.  Estimates show that nearly 3 million gallons, or fifty percent of
the water used, could be saved each year.<p>

United States Fish and Wildlife Service, National Education and Training Center,
Shepherdstown, West Virginia<p>

Some key energy management features of the center include:  passive solar energy
design; HVAC with centralized controls, variable speed motors, no CFCs, and heat
pumps supplemented by electric heat;  electronic ballasts and T-8 lamps;
"superinsulation," with argon-filled, double pane windows and insulation in
ceilings, floors, walls, and foundations that exceeds code requirements; and the use
of recycled materials selected for sustainability.<p>

Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Presido Golden Gate Park, San
Francisco, California<p>

Located in San Francisco's Bay Area, eight million people visit the Presido each
year, making this an ideal showcase for Federal energy efficiency, renewable energy,
and water conservation.  The Golden Gate Club will feature the installation of
high-efficiency lighting, high-efficiency heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning, and an Energy Management System.  FEMP's design review of the Golden
Club provided recommendations for the building envelope, HVAC, lighting, and other
building systems.<p>

Department of Labor, Frances Perkins Building, Headquarters, Washington, D.C.<p>

The Francis Perkins Building is named for the first woman ever to serve as a Cabinet
member.  The scope of the project encompasses all of the building's energy consuming
systems including water heating, heating, ventilating, and cooling, lighting, and
windows.  FEMP provided technical assistance to assess the cost and performance of
installing window treatments to control solar gains and thermal losses.  The net
dollar savings of improving window treatment is estimated at $428,000.<p>

National Aeronautics and Space Administration, George C. Marshall Space Flight
Center, Project Engineering Facility Building 4203, Huntsville, Alabama<p>

Conservation measures included in the original design and construction of the
facility include energy efficient and ozone-friendly chillers, variable air volume
units, a utility control system, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, and
occupancy sensors.  An energy audit was conducted and addition energy and water
conservation practices were proposed:  installation of variable speed drives;
lighting upgrades, water conservation upgrades, and heat recovery.  By implementing
all proposed conservation measures, approximately $97,000 will be saved.<p>

Department of State, National Foreign Affairs Training Center, Arlington,
Virginia<p>

The building has in place an Energy Management System to better control energy usage
and peak demand.  The lighting project consists of installing T-8 lamps and
electronic ballasts.  Other proposed technologies include daylighting, light tube
and fiberoptic lighting combinations, absorption cooling, and a desiccant cooling
system.  The State Department has been working with FEMP to get an Energy Savings
Performance Contract in place to fund this showcase.<p>

Department of Transportation, Nassif Headquarters Building, Washington, D.C.<p>

The Headquarters Building houses approximately 1.3 million square feet of office
space.  Energy saving improvements such as an efficient T-8 lighting system,
occupancy sensors, LED exit signs, efficient window air conditioning and heating
units, and an Energy Management Control System will save the government over $1
million annually.  Pepco has provided over $587,000 in rebates, and additional
rebates of over $400,000 are anticipated for projects underway.<p>

Department of the Treasury, Headquarters, Washington, D.C.<p>

The Treasury Department staff is working with FEMP to obtain an Energy Savings
Performance Contract to fund the implementation of cost-effective, energy saving
measures.  The redesign and computerization of HVAC controls will minimize waste of
conditioned air and result in a savings of $78,000 over two years.  The installation
of high efficiency chillers will save $54,000 each year.  The lighting retrofit
project will incorporate high-efficiency light fixtures, daylighting controls, and
occupancy sensors, and will save approximately $15,000 annually.<p>

Department of the Treasury, Annex Building, Washington, D.C.<p>

The greatest savings opportunity in the Annex Building is the redesign of the light
system, which will incorporate high-efficiency light fixtures, daylighting controls,
occupancy sensors, and night lighting.  The total savings is estimated to be
approximately $7,000 per year.<p>

Department of the Treasury, Philadelphia Mint, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania<p>

The agency has undertaken a project to reduce electrical demand and costs through
the installation of capacitor banks on nine substations throughout the facility,
improving the power factor and reducing  the utility bill.  The expected savings are
approximately $400,000 annually.  The Mint will also implement the clean up and
renovation of the office HVAC and lighting systems, including the installation of
variable air volume controls and replacement of the existing lighting fixtures with
T-8 lights and electronic ballasts.<p>  

U.S. Postal Service, Processing and Distribution Center, Fort Lauderdale, Florida<p>

Through the formation of a partnership with the local utility, Florida Power and
Light, the facility has completed feasibility studies of the lighting and HVAC
systems.  The HVAC study determined that energy usage could be reduced through
better control strategies and new energy conserving equipment and designs.  The
recommended lighting retrofit measures include LED exit signs, efficient lighting
fixtures, reflectors, and high intensity discharge lighting.<p>

United States Postal Service, Processing and Distribution Center, Portland,
Oregon<p>

A Proclamation of Partnership was signed between the United States Postal Service
and Portland General electric to implement energy efficiency measures and eliminate
wasteful energy use.  The showcase project has four phases that include an audit, a
feasibility study, implementation, and commissioning and training.  Recommended
measures such as lighting redesign, HVAC controls, direct digital controls, VAV
conversion, and occupancy sensors will be implemented in four packages and will save
approximately $104,000 per year.<p>

United States Postal Service, Processing and Distribution Center, Saint Paul,
Minnesota<p>

The local utility, Northern States Power, will provide a detailed study to help the
agency identify energy conservation opportunities at this facility.  Some parts of
the study will include DOE-2 modeling, a Central Plant study, a photovoltaic study,
and an Energy Management System study.  Potential savings for the facility are
estimated at $190,000.<p>

Department of Veterans Affairs, Medical Center, Charleston, South Carolina<p>

Through a collaborative effort with the local utility, South Carolina Gas and
Electric, a thermal energy storage system was installed at the facility.  Ice is
manufactured during nighttime, off-peak hours to provide daytime cooling.  The
building will also have an energy management system to control the energy usage and
track peak demand periods.  Veterans Affairs may conduct a feasibility study to
determine if a solar water heating system is cost-effective for the Medical
Center.<p>

After all the plaques were presented to the Federal Energy Saver Showcases, Mark
Ginsberg moved to the remaining agenda items.<p>

Site vs. Source Measurement of Energy Consumption<p>

Mark Ginsberg asked the Interagency Policy Committee to endorse the following
recommendation developed by the Task Force:<p>

'Section 301 of Executive Order 12902 directs each agency to develop and implement a
program to reduce building energy consumption.  Federal agencies are encouraged to
continue to focus their response to the Executive Order by measuring and accounting
for energy use at the point of use of the facility site.  However, the Executive
Order also encourages agencies to facilitate the introduction and use of
cost-effective, energy efficient technologies into Federal facilities.  To address
this aspect of the Executive Order, all energy efficiency/conservation projects that
result in operational cost savings and reduced energy consumption, when energy is
measured at the source (as opposed to the point of use), are also encouraged'

This statement was unanimously endorsed by the Committee.<p>

Federal Green Lights Program Partnership<p>

Mark Ginsberg asked the Task Force to agree in principle to encourage and endorse
the application of the Green Lights program to the Federal sector under a proposed
Memorandum of Understanding budgeted between DOE and EPA with input from several
agencies.<p>

Christine Ervin noted that the EPA Energy Star Buildings Program will  now be
co-sponsored by EPA and DOE.  She then asked for any discussion on the Federal Green
Lights Partnership.<p>

Beth Shearer of GSA commented that they can not fully support Federal Green Lights
because of the decentralized nature of their commitment of funds beyond the
appropriation year.  Mr. Ginsberg reminded everyone that it is an agreement in
principle.<p>

The Committee unanimously agreed in principle to the Federal Green Lights Program
Partnership.<p>

Restructuring of the "656" Committee<p>

Christine Ervin stated that they are looking at making the "656" Committee more
effective.  She emphasized the issue of the non-participation of actual members of
the Committee since no designated members were present at the meeting.<p>  

Mark Ginsberg suggested that the concept of the Committee be revised and the
Committee be redesignated as a Government Energy Board of Directors with a corporate
approach.  The Board of Directors would work to oversee and reshape policy.  He
encouraged the agencies to participate in the effort of preparing a draft charter to
be reviewed by the Task Force.  He asked participants to forward their ideas to him
or to Rick Klimkos.  He suggested renaming the "656" Committee, and provided
possible alternatives such as 'Federal Energy Executives' or the 'Energy Management
Board of Directors.'  He asked that the "656" Committee continue to meet once a
year.  He stated that agency energy managers are an "endangered species," and he
would like the new Board of Directors to be advocates for energy efficiency within
the Government.  He ended his request by asserting the idea of  "good business
practice."<p>

Budget Issues<p>

Assistant Secretary Ervin asked each of the representatives to give a brief overview
of the energy management budget situation at their agencies.<p>

Department of Agriculture--The budget for the renovation of the South Headquarters
Building has been eliminated; a $20 million cut.<p>

Department of Commerce--Commerce does not have a separate budget line item for
energy management.  Their approach is to work with GSA to fund projects in delegated
buildings.  Buildings owned by the Commerce Department have only enough funding for
maintenance.<p>

Department of Defense--The Senate moved $97 million of $120 million from DOD's
energy management account to the operations and maintenance accounts of the
individual Services.  These funds are likely to be used by the Services for
mission-related activities rather than for energy efficiency projects.<p>

Environmental Protection Agency--EPA does not have a separate centralized budget
line item for energy management.<p>

General Services Administration--GSA's energy efficiency budget line item currently
stands at $50 million.<p>

Department of Health and Human Services--HHS does not have a separate budget line
item for energy management.<p>

Department of the Interior--The budget situation at Interior was described as bleak,
with the closing of the Bureau of Mines cited as one example.<p>

Department of Justice--Justice does not have a separate centralized budget line item
for energy management.  The renovation of the Justice headquarters will be
accomplished with GSA funds and will include energy efficiency elements.<p>

NASA--NASA has not had a separate centralized budget line item for energy management
since the mid 1980s.  Most energy efficiency projects are accomplished with
Construction of Facilities funding which is currently stands at $300 million.<p>

U.S. Postal Service--The Postal Service does not have a separate centralized budget
line item for energy management.  Energy management functions at USPS have been
moved to its environmental management division.<p>

Department of State--State does not have a separate centralized budget line item for
energy management. The Department's strategy for accomplishing energy efficiency
projects is to rely on energy savings performance contracts.<p>

Department of Transportation--Funding  is decentralized and at the discretion of the
bureaus and sub-agencies.<p>

Department of the Treasury--Funding  is also decentralized and at the discretion of
the bureaus.  Energy efficiency projects are funded out of facility accounts and the
Department has done well in this environment.  Many of the Treasury's historic
buildings have fared well.<p>

Department of Veterans Affairs--Funding is totally decentralized to level of
individual medical centers.<p>

Department of Labor--There has been competition between security issues and energy
efficiency for funding.  Last year, security improvements were emphasized more
heavily.<p>

Department of Energy--The Department's budget for In-House Energy Management
projects was eliminated last year.<p>

Water Working Group<p>

The Water Working Group has written water efficiency language to be inserted into
the Energy Savings Performance Contract How-To Manual.  The edits specifically
mention water efficiency, and should make it simpler for a facility manager to
understand how to implement water conservation projects in an energy savings
performance contract.  The changes should be complete for the next printing of the
Manual.<p>

A sub-team of the Water Working Group has identified several methods for developing
a water use baseline.  The methods consist of both simple formulas that can be
generally applied and more complex simulation tools that can be used to more closely
estimate a baseline.  A draft of this document is being circulated to Task Force
members for comment, and a final document should be ready by the end of the
summer.<p>

The Group is writing a Federal Register notice to explore the linkage between energy
efficiency and water conservation; to list and explain acceptable baselining methods
for water use; and to provide clarification of existing legislation that allows
facility managers to complete water projects under energy savings performance
contracts.  The notice will be published in the Fall.<p>

Procurement Challenge Update<p>

Rick Klimkos outlined Federal Procurement Challenge accomplishments and
plans:<p><ul>

<li>Procurement Challenge was signed in September 1995 by 22 agencies<br>
<li>Federal product efficiency recommendations:  DOE identifies efficient products
in the "upper 25% of the market, or greater than 10% above national standards;
coordinates EPA/DOE Energy Star, "volume purchases," third-party labels, ASHRAE,
etc.<br>
<li>Completed:  refrigerator, room and central air conditioning, heat pumps,
furnaces, gas and electric water heaters<br>
<li>Drafts:  lamps, ballasts, fixtures, exit signs, boilers, office equipment,
ice-makers, water-saving products<br>
<li>Next:  boilers, commercial HVAC, motors, windows<br>
<li>Applications:<br><ul>
     -	EE symbol in GSA and DLA catalogs<br><ul>
	     -	BOA for CFC-free chillers<br>
	     -	Future:  on-line data bases, specifications<br></ul></ul>
<li>Requesting 2 nominees per agency for Procurement Focus Groups<br>
<li>FAR draft language, DOE policies and "greening"<br>
<li>Partnering:  Procurement Collaborative, regional and local networks, possibly
international<br>
<li>Study of commercialization of new technologies.  Preparing study, public meeting
and will report to Congress</ul><p>

Renewable Working Group Implementation Plan<p>

Anne Sprunt Crawley reported that ten agencies have signed the Federal Renewable
Working Group Implementation Plan.  Those agencies signing the plan will work to
significantly increase the use of cost-effective solar and other renewable energy in
Federal facilities in accordance with Executive Order 12902, section 304.  The plan
contains three actions to be implemented by each agency within two years:  training
of staff, development of a least one renewable project, and adoption of a renewable
energy plan.  DOE's Federal Energy Management Program and the Federal Renewable
Working Group will continue to support all agencies in these actions through the
provision of training courses, a model renewable energy plan, and project
assistance.<p>

Final Comments<p>

Mark Ginsberg noted a recent meeting at the Nevada Test Site, where CSTRR is
providing a major opportunity for renewable projects by assisting in the financing
of solar power generating projects in Nevada.  All major Federal agencies in the
area intend to purchase this solar generated power.  FEMP is offering training and
efficiency audits to all agencies these customers.<p>

The meeting adjourned at 10:25 am.<p>


<P>
Please send any comments, questions, or suggestions to:<br>
<A
HREF="mailto:webmaster.femp@nrel.nrel.gov">webmaster.femp@nrel.nrel.gov</A><P>
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>