
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B10-279</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA093-000995-B029-172</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.nyspi.cpmc.columbia.edu:80/users/ethayer/clinical.htm 156.111.80.30 19970121072516 text/html 8572
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
MIME-Version: 1.0
Server: GLACI/2.01
Date: Tue Jan 21 02:29:21 1997
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 8442
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Clinical Research at NYSPI</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<p><font size=5><strong>New York State Psychiatric
Institute</strong></font></p> 

<H3><A HREF="http://www.nyspi.cpmc.columbia.edu/">Back to the 
NYSPI Home Page </A>
<BR></H3>

<blockquote> <p><font
size=4><strong>P.I. SERVING THE COMMUNITY </strong></font><br> Both
the local community and the larger community receive the benefit of
Psychiatric Institute's innovative and skillful services. Not only
does the Institute provide the most up-to-date psychiatric inpatient
and outpatient treatment to people who participate in a variety of
research projects, but it offers State-supported general psychiatric
care to the residents of northern Manhattan. The Washington Heights
Community Service is a major source of psychiatric evaluation and
treatment available to people living in northern Manhattan. The
Service consists of a 22-bed intensive care inpatient unit at
Psychiatric Institute and two outpatient clinics, the Audubon Avenue
Clinic and the Inwood Mental Health Center where outpatient therapy,
continuation day treatment and vocational rehabilitation are among the
treatment modalities provided. The staff is largely bilingual in
recognition of the large Hispanic population which lives in Washington
Heights and Inwood. <br> <br> The information needed to shape policy
regarding long-term care for aged local residents in community-based
and residential facilities is being gathered by P.I. researchers.
Scientists from the Memory Disorders Clinic and from the North
Manhattan Aging Project are establishing a registry identifying all
cases of dementia in the Washington Heights area. <br> <br> The HIV
Center for Clinical and Behavioral Studies, engaged in educating
various high risk populations on how to prevent HIV infection, has
produced four prize-winning videotapes which emphasize the need to be
active on one's own behalf in promoting safe behaviors. Useful to
community groups and agencies, these tapes have been widely
distributed locally and across the nation.<br> <br> Clinicians from
Child Psychiatry provide on-site mental health services to those
children who need clinical support while attending classes in some of
the elementary and intermediate schools in Washington Heights, West
Harlem and Inwood. A small public school is also located on the actual
premises of the Institute; every attempt is made to provide children
suffering from psychiatric problems who are enrolled in research
studies at the Institute with the same education they would receive in
regular public schools. <br> <br> Summer employment in the form of
research apprenticeship programs at the Institute is available to
several local high school students. Teachers, too, may update their
skills in modern research techniques. And, since 1972, the
State-supported Youth Opportunity Program has provided low-income high
school students with after school jobs in the Institute laboratories,
offices and library. This program has consistently encouraged these
students to go on to college and many have pursued careers in science.
<br> <br> <font size=4><strong>CLINICAL RESEARCH
UNITS</strong></font><strong><br> <br> </strong>Several special
purpose clinics, combining research and treatment, serve people from
the neighborhood and the greater metropolitan area. Among them are
the:<br> * Anxiety Disorders Clinic<br> * Child &amp; Adolescent
Depression Clinic<br> * Children's Day Program<br> * Depression
Evaluation Service<br> * Eating Disorders Clinic<br> * General
Clinical Research Unit<br> * Hispanic Anxiety &amp; Depression
Clinic<br> * HIV Center for Clinical and Behavioral Studies<br> *
Huntington's Disease Clinic<br> * Late Life Depression Clinic<br> *
Memory Disorders Clinic<br> * Sexual Behavior Clinic<br> *
Schizophrenia Research Unit<br> * Smoking Cessation Clinic<br> *
Substance Abuse Clinic</p> <p><font size=4><strong>CLINICAL
RESEARCH</strong></font><br> <br> The Schizophrenia Research Center
has a dual purpose: to clarify the origins of schizophrenia and to
develop and test the most promising treatments for that disorder.
Research ranges from epidemiological studies of prenatal risk factors,
clarification of the relative roles genes and environment play in the
illness, and assessments of patients' awareness of illness to multiple
family group therapy.<br> <br> Differentiation and treatment of
various types of depression, matching the optimum anti-depressant
medication with a specific form of depressive disorder, has
established Psychiatric Institute's Depression Evaluation Service as
arguably the best such unit in New York City. The concept of dual
diagnosis is also receiving close scrutiny because many people who
abuse alcohol or cocaine may have an underlying depression and may be
using the alcohol or drugs as a form of self-medication. Treating the
depression often resolves the addiction. <br> <br> The Late Life
Depression Clinic takes into consideration the other illnesses and
conditions which can complicate the treatment of depression in elderly
people. Depression following stroke or heart attacks may be a risk
factor possibly decreasing longevity; treating it appropriately may be
life-saving. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), widely recognized as an
effective treatment for depression, has been an option. Now
researchers are testing rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) as a possible replacement for ECT because of its focal
precision. The National Institute of Aging supports studies of
Alzheimer's Disease and other dementias within the Memory Disorders
Clinic where researchers are also looking at the cognitive changes
that occur as a result of normal aging.<br> <br> The Anxiety Disorders
Clinic works to advance the understanding of DSM-IV anxiety disorders
with particular emphasis on panic disorder and agoraphobia, social
phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress
disorder. The Clinic is also the site of the only NIMH funded study of
hypochondria, believed to be a legitimate and treatable anxiety
disorder. Treatment is available for both Spanish and English speaking
patients.<br> <br> The HIV Center for Clinical and Behavioral Studies
is dedicated to interdisciplinary studies of the prevention of
transmission of HIV, working with populations at risk: children,
adolescents, gay men and heterosexual women and men. Risk behavior and
interventions for behavior change are approached from many different
perspectives - with both genders; at different developmental points;
with individuals and with couples, at the level of the parent/child
dyad and the social network; with infected people and people at risk;
among ethnically diverse populations; among special populations such
as the mentally ill homeless; and for different sexual orientations.
<br> <br> In collaboration with Presbyterian Hospital, Mental Health
Services for the Homeless are provided to the mentally ill men housed
in the Fort Washington Shelter. Scientists from Psychiatric Institute
have tested and validated new methods of treating the homeless
mentally ill, helping them to live independently. These interventions
appear to reduce the amount of time an individual remains homeless.
Likewise, psychiatric and case management services to mentally ill
women in other New York City shelters are provided. <br> <br> Within
the Center for the Study of Childhood Mental Disorders, children are
evaluated and treated for anxiety and depression. Innovative
therapeutic interventions for adolescent suicide attempters have been
developed and tested here. A small school on the premises of
Psychiatric Institute permits children to continue to receive the same
education they would get in neighborhood public schools as they are
being observed and treated for psychiatric disorders. Researchers are
also engaged in epidemiological studies to determine the antecedents
of juvenile delinquency, illicit drug use, high risk sexual behavior,
etc. </p> </blockquote> <p><font size=1>Page created by Gerry Segal:
</font><a href="mailto:segalge@acm.org"><font
size=1>segalge@nypsych.cpmc.columbia.edu</font></a><br> </p> </body>

</html>
</DOC>