
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B031-235</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/showstop.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110335 text/html 15231
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:03:26 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:57 GMT
Content-length: 15013
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Show Stopper Questions for Your Opponent </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM">Show
Stopper Questions for Your Opponent </p>

<p> <b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p> These are the questions that drug warriors are simply unable
to answer. They stop them cold every time. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Please keep in mind with all of these questions that your
opponents will try their best to squirm out of an answer. If you
are talking to a politician, they will typically try to put out a
ten-minute smoke screen and hope no one recognizes that they
never did answer the question. If they try the smoke screen, try
the approach listed under <b>Smokescreen</b>: </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">How many
millions of people do you think we ought to put prison for drugs
to have the best results? </h3>

<p> I have asked many people this question over the years. It is
at that point that they usually fall out of the debate. No one
can answer this question with anything that makes any sense,
except zero. The first, and most obvious thing they do, is to try
to talk their way around it. This is not an essay question. </p>

<p> According to various estimates there are at least twelve
million regular users of illegal drugs, and possibly as many as
forty million. We now have about 1.5 million people in prisons
and jails across the country, and all the jail cells are already
full. It is immediately obvious to everyone that we cannot afford
to put forty million people in prison, even if it was a good
idea. In fact, we cannot afford to put twelve million people in
jail, either. </p>

<p> Most people, when asked this question, will immediately back
off of the idea that we should put drug users in prison, simply
because it is obvious that there is no way we could jail enough
of them to make a dent in the problem. &quot;Just send the drug
dealers to prison.&quot; they will say. </p>

<p> &quot;OK,&quot; I ask. &quot;How many do you suppose there
are?&quot; </p>

<p> They usually don't know, so you have to lead them a little
bit. Under the law, all drug users are technically dealers
because anyone who ever passed a joint to another person at a
rock concert is considered a &quot;drug distributor&quot;. Under
most state laws, it matters little what the context was, or
whether the person received any profit from passing the joint to
the next person. So, potentially, that would mean we would
imprison up to forty million people -- obviously impossible. </p>

<p> Therefore, we determine that we can't go by the current legal
definition of a drug dealer, but we would have to make a
requirement that we only go after those who are really in the
regular business of selling drugs, either on a part-time, or
full-time basis. If we assume that about ten percent of the users
are &quot;dealers&quot; by this definition (a fair estimate),
that would mean that there are somewhere between 1.2 million and
4 million drug dealers. In order to succeed then, we would have
to build up to four prisons and jails for every one which now
exists -- and hope that solved the problem. </p>

<p> One person, ex-DEA agent Michael Levine suggested that we
just jail the hard core drug users, a number he estimated at
about 2.7 million. I asked him if he really thought it was a good
idea to build two or three prisons for every one which now
exists, jail almost three million more people, and hope that
would solve the problem. It seemed to me obvious that it
wouldn't, since it would leave between ten and forty million
casual drug users to go about their business. </p>

<p> A few won't back off and will insist that we should jail all
forty million people, if we have to. Some have even insisted that
we should also jail another hundred million who indulge in
tobacco or alcohol. These people will look like fools in front of
the vast majority of audiences, and just cause most people to
come over to the side of reform. </p>

<h4>Their Answer </h4>

<p> Any answer to this question is bound to be wrong. If they
mention a low number, point out that we already have hundreds of
thousands of people in prison for illegal drugs and millions have
been arrested and prosecuted. That obviously did not stamp out
drugs, so a small increase in the prisoners will not have any
good effect. </p>

<p> <b>A general line of BS.</b> </p>

<p> Drug warriors will do anything they can to get out of
answering the simplest question about our drug policy. Don't let
them get away with evading a direct question. Come back to the
point until they either give you an answer or admit they don't
have a clue. We are embarked on a campaign which is based on the
belief that we can put enough people in prison to effectively
control the drug problem. The question is simple: How many
prisoners is the current plan going to take? </p>

<p> They have asked us, the taxpayers to write a blank check for
prisons. As the people writing the check for these taxes, it is
only fair for us to ask for the amount that is going to go on the
check. Just tell us how many prison cells are going to be
required. </p>

<p> <b>No one knows the answer to that question.</b> </p>

<p> Bull. It is perfectly easy to calculate the number of prison
cells needed to address criminal problems. For example, there are
approximately 25,000 homicides in the US each year which means
that we need a maximum of about 25,000 prison beds to hold the
perpetrators. A similar estimate could be drawn for the number of
robbers, rapists, etc. In all of these cases, the number of
prison cells required to hold the perpetrators is something our
country can manage. This is not the case with the drug laws. </p>

<p> <b>Your question assumes that we will imprison forty million
people.</b> </p>

<p> No, the question doesn't assume anything. I want you to tell
me how many people you think we ought to put in jail, and then
tell me your assumptions. </p>

<p> <b>As many as we have already.</b> </p>

<p> Does that mean you would be willing to end all further drug
arrests beyond the amount we have now? Once the police reach this
quota, should they stop arresting drug offenders because we know
we only have room for so many? </p>

<p> <b>Any number of million.</b> </p>

<p> If they mention five, ten, or twenty million, multiply the
number they mention by $500,000 and tell them the cost of that
approach. For example, the cost to incarcerate 1 million people
is five hundred billion dollars; 2 million is one trillion
Dollars, 10 million is five trillion dollars, and so forth. Then
crucify them for wanting to build prisons larger than the Nazi
concentration camps. </p>

<p> <b>I don't know.</b> </p>

<p> If they say they don't know, then say, &quot;That is
precisely the problem. No one, including you, has ever sat down
to figure it out. If you did, you would find out soon enough that
it is just plain impossible to solve the problem this way.&quot; </p>

<h4>Smokescreen </h4>

<p> Excuse me for interrupting, but that was not an essay
question. The question can be answered with just a simple number.
What will it take, 5 million, 10 million, 20 million? How many
millions of people will have to go to prison to solve the drug
problem this way? </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">For Drug
Enforcement Officers: What would you do if you got your fondest
wish? What would do if, tomorrow morning, you woke up and every
drug user in America was lined up outside your door with a bag of
dope in one hand and a signed confession in the other? </h3>

<p> Their Answer </p>

<p> Their immediate response is usually, &quot;I would arrest
them, of course!&quot; </p>

<p> That is a perfect opportunity to ask &quot;OK, how many do
you suppose there would be? I am just asking because I want to
help you get whatever you need to do the job right.&quot; </p>

<p> That will lead into the general discussion shown in the
previous question. </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">For Devout
Christians: What would Jesus do if we gave this problem to Him?
Would He build bigger prisons? Or would He build hospitals and
schools? </h3>

<p> I usually preface this question by saying, &quot;You are a
better Christian than I am, and you probably know more about
Jesus than I do. So you tell me . . .&quot; Give them credit for
the strength and correctness of their belief. </p>

<p> Their Answer </p>

<p> Most Christians will be stunned by the simplicity and power
of this argument. Most of them will be able to immediately see
the sense behind what we are saying. Some of the immediate
reactions I have gotten from Christians, including ministers,
are: </p>

<p> &quot;When you put it that way, the answer is obvious.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;That's pretty cut and dried, isn't it?&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;Schools and hospitals, obviously.&quot; </p>

<p> Most of the answers will be in that vein. </p>

<p> A few Christians are exceptionally bigoted people and will
insist on hell-fire and damnation for anyone who dares to
transgress their ideas of sin. They are in the definite minority
and the vast majority of people will see their reactions as
extreme. </p>

<p> On one occasion, a prominent minister told me that he thought
perhaps Jesus might build bigger prisons because of the story of
Sodom and Gomorrah. &quot;Correct me if I am wrong,&quot; I said,
&quot;but I believe the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is in the Old
Testament, not the New Testament.&quot; He got the point that the
ministry of Jesus was all about love and healing. </p>

<p> One minister told me that he thought Jesus would build a
certain number of prisons in order to keep the dangerous people
from harming others. &quot;That's probably true,&quot; I said,
&quot;but what about the prisoners -- up to two-thirds of them --
who are there purely for non-violent drug offenses?&quot; </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">I have
here a list of every major study of drug policy in the last fifty
years. Every one of them recommended decriminalization. Do you
agree that the overwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence on
drug policy supports decriminalization? </h3>

<p> Before you answer, let me remind you that there are only
three possible answers to this question. </p>

<p> The first possible answer is yes, you agree. </p>

<p> The second possible answer is no, you do not agree, in which
case you should be able to provide a list of studies of drug
policy comparable in quality and quantity to the list I have
provided. </p>

<p> The third possible answer is that you don't have a clue what
the scholarly evidence says because you have never read the most
basic research on the subject. </p>

<h4>Their Answer </h4>

<p> The answers that I have gotten to this question include: </p>

<p> <b>The scholarly evidence is not important.</b> (From Bob
Martinez, former Drug Czar) </p>

<p> Is the scholarly evidence not important in science, medicine,
and every other field of law? Or is it not important only when it
comes to drug policy? </p>

<p> <b>I don't think anyone really knows the answer.</b> </p>

<p> Can you name any major study of drug policy which supported
what we are currently doing? (They probably can't.) So we have
ten major studies, including the largest studies ever conducted
by the governments of the United States, Britain, and Canada,
which supported decriminalization and none that supported the
current policy. Wouldn't you say that is the overwhelming weight
of the evidence? </p>

<p> <b>Everyone has their list of studies which they can make up
to show anything they want.</b> </p>

<p> OK, so show me any comparable list of studies that you have
in support of the drug war. (So far, in more than six years of
debates, no opponent has ever mentioned a single major study of
drug policy which supports the current drug war.) </p>

<p> <b>I don't have a clue.</b> </p>

<p> That is precisely the problem. You want to tell us what drug
policy should be when you have not even bothered to read the most
basic research on the subject. </p>

<p> <b>Here is a list of studies . . . .</b> </p>

<p> A few people have tried to bluff their way through by citing
studies about organized crime, alcohol, or something else. They
may also cite magazine articles, books by particular authors,
editorials or other opinion pieces, etc. Examine each one
carefully. Is it really a comprehensive study of the history and
facts relating to these drug laws, or is it just one person's
view? Did it consider all evidence and all views? Was it
comprehensive, or was it a simple magazine article of a few
pages? Did the author have an axe to grind or something to gain
from the opinion expressed? Does the work contain a complete
discussion of the history of the laws? Does it consider the laws
in the context of similar facts about tobacco and alcohol? </p>

<p> People have mentioned a lot of different things in response
to this question, but none of them have met the criteria of a
serious study of drug policy. </p>

<h4>Smokescreen </h4>

<p> Excuse me for interrupting, but that was not an essay
question. That was multiple choice. What is your answer; yes, no,
or don't have a clue? </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">It costs
about half a million dollars to put a single drug user in prison,
which includes $150,000 for arrest and prosecution, about
$150,000 for a new prison cell, and about $30,000 per year times
at least five years. For the same cost we can provide treatment
or education for more than one hundred people. Which do you think
is the better deal? </h3>

<p> <b>Their Answer:</b> </p>

<p> Almost no one will attempt to argue that prison for one
person is better than education or treatment for several hundred.
Most often they will say, &quot;It's not that simple, you can't
just say that because you are not going to put one person in
prison that you automatically have the money for treatment or
education.&quot; </p>

<p> You answer: </p>

<p> It IS that simple. Right now, California and several other
states are closing schools, libraries, and medical facilities in
order to build more prisons. The money is being taken from
education and treatment to fund more prisons. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>