
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B15-74</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA027-000293-B029-209</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/13_questions.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022740 text/html 8117
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:18:40 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 7946
Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:46:43 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
   <TITLE>13_questions.html</TITLE>
   <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//SQ//DTD HTML 2.0 HoTMetaL + extensions//EN"> 
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">

<P ALIGN=CENTER><A HREF="image13.map"><IMG ISMAP SRC="image13.gif"
WIDTH=468 HEIGHT=94 BORDER=0 ALIGN=bottom></A></P>

<H1>Questions &amp; Answers</H1>

<P>The following recommendations have NOT been approved by the FDA
and are provided by Berna Products as a guide to assist physicians
and patients on certain points based upon the most recently available
data. <B>UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES, THE ATTENDING PHYSICIAN'S JUDGEMENT
SHOULD PREVAIL</B>.</P>

<P>It should be noted that a revised package insert concerning the
simultaneous use of VIVOTIF BERNA&reg; with antimalarials, gamma
globulins and other vaccines is currently being reviewed by the FDA.
Until a revised insert is approved the recommendations contained in
the current insert must take precedent.</P>

<P>Specific inquiries can be addressed to the FDA's Division of
Product Compliance, Bethesda, MD.</P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><IMG SRC="noneedle.gif" WIDTH=34 HEIGHT=36 ALIGN=middle>Storage
of vaccine outside of refrigeration</H2>

<P><B>If the vaccine has been kept OUT</B> of refrigeration</P>

<UL>
   <LI>at 80&#176;F or below,
   
   <LI><B>not</B> in a car and
   
   <LI><B>not</B> exposed to direct sunlight
</UL>

<P><B>FOR UP TO 48 HOURS, THEY MAY GO AHEAD AND USE IT</B>. This is
provided that the vaccine is used within a reasonably short period of
time (eg., within 30 days.) If the lot is within 60 days prior to
expiration, please refer to Berna Products Medical Inquiries at
1-800-533-5899</P>

<P>As stated in 2 January 1993 Lancet article:<BR>

<I>"Potency depends upon each capsule containing 2 X 10(9) or more
viable Ty2la and exposure to ambient temperatures decreases
viability, After storage for 7 days at 20-25&#176;C (68-78&#176;F),
all lots evaluated met potency requirements. Three (3) lots stored at
37&#176;F (98&#176;F) for 12 hours also maintained potency." </I>
</P>

<P>The potency of VIVOTIF BERNA&reg; is not affected if it is
accidentally frozen.</P>

<H2><IMG SRC="noneedle.gif" WIDTH=34 HEIGHT=36
ALIGN=middle>Interruption in the Vaccine dosing schedule</H2>

<P><B>IN GENERAL</B>: Only limited data is available on the effect of
a slight change in schedule. (The data from field trials reflect a
40% decrease in protection if vaccine was given at a 21 day versus
every other day schedule [with 3 dose schedule.])</P>

<P><B>IF 3 DOSES HAVE BEEN TAKEN PROPERLY:</B> a delay of up to 72
hours (3 days) in taking the 4th dose should not be expected to
markedly affect efficacy.</P>

<P><B>IF 2 DOSES HAVE BEEN TAKEN PROPERLY</B>: a delay of 24-48 hours
in taking the 3rd dose should not be expected to markedly affect
efficacy as long as the remaining doses are taken at the appropriate
intervals,</P>

<H2><IMG SRC="noneedle.gif" WIDTH=34 HEIGHT=36
ALIGN=middle>Completion of vaccine dosing schedule:</H2>

<P><B>IN ALL CASES, ALL 4 DOSES OF VACCINE SHOULD BE TAKEN</B></P>

<P><B>IF ONLY 3 DOSES ARE TAKEN</B>, protection will be less than for
4 doses--although the absolute degree of decrease protection cannot
be stated with certainty.</P>

<P><B>IF ONLY 1 OR 2 DOSES HAVE BEEN TAKEN</B>,the physician should
consider restarting the patient on a new 4-dose vaccine schedule
since 1 or 2 doses of vaccine will provide only modest (15-40%)
protection. (This assumes that the vaccine has been well tolerated by
the patient and was not the cause of the patient failing to complete
the initial regimen.)</P>

<P>When a patient is restarted on the vaccine, the physician should
instruct the patient to report any adverse event, as there is no
clinical trial data on the safety of 5-6 doses administered in a
short period of time. However, based upon prior experience including:
</P>

<UL>
   <LI>administering larger doses of vaccine (up to 10 times more
   than is currently in each capsule )
   
   <LI>European re-immunization studies where only 1-2 years had
   elapsed since primary immunization
</UL>

<P>no adverse reactions were noted.</P>

<H2><IMG SRC="noneedle.gif" WIDTH=34 HEIGHT=36 ALIGN=middle>Drug
Interactions:</H2>

<P><B>ANTIBIOTICS:</B><BR>

AS A GENERAL RULE, NO ANTIBIOTICS SHOULD BE GIVEN 7 DAYS BEFORE THE
lst DOSE OR AFTER THE 4th DOSE OF VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;</P>

<P><B>ANTIMALARIALS:</B></P>

<P><B>Chloroquine:</B><BR>

Studies in humans have shown that chloroquine, together with
pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine, administered 24 HOURS PRIOR TO THE START
OF THE VACCINATION SCHEDULE DID NOT ADVERSELY AFFECT THE RATE OF
SERO-CONVERSION as compared to a control group which took VIVOTIF
BERNA&reg; alone.</P>

<P>In addition,in vitro studies have shown that the addition of up to
200 mcg, of chloroquine/ml DID NOT NOTICEABLY AFFECT GROWTH RATE of
VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;.</P>

<P><B>DOXYCYCLINE:</B> See comments under Antibiotics</P>

<P><B>MEFLOQUINE (LARIAM&reg;): </B>In vitro studies have shown that
Mefloquine at a concentration of 10 mcg/ml can inhibit the growth of
VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;. Concentrations of 5 mcg/ml had no affect on the
growth rate.</P>

<P><I>As per the 1994 ACIP Guidelines: "Mefloquine could potentially
affect the immune response to oral live attenuated typhoid (Ty21a) if
both are taken simultaneously To minimize this effect, it may be
prudent to administer Ty2la typhoid vaccine at least 24 hours before
or after a dose of Mefloquine."</I></P>

<P><B>ADDITIONAL FACTS FOR MEDICAL PERSONNEL:</B> The half-life for
the absorption of Mefloquine into the bloodstream ranges from roughly
36 minutes to 2 hours, Therefore, within 24 hours of ingesting the
single 25O mg weekly dose, essentially all of the Mefloquine would
reasonably be expected to have been absorbed from the gut. Given the
relatively large area of the gut, it may also be reasonably expected
that the concentration of Mefloquine would be less than 5 mcg/ml and
therefore, not be expected to inhibit the growth of VIVOTIF
BERN&reg;. However, studies to determine the actual concentration of
Mefloquine in the gut 24 hours after ingestion have not been done.
</P>

<P>If the physician decides Mefloquine and VIVOTIF BERNA&reg; are to
be used simultaneously, the following schedule is suggested to
minimize the potential for adverse effect on efficacy:</P>

<UL>
   <LI><B>Day 1:</B> Administration of Mefloquine
   
   <LI><B>Day 2:</B> Administration of VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;
   
   <LI><B>Day 8:</B> Administration of Mefloquine EARLY IN THE
   MORNING
</UL>

<P>Administration of VIVOTIF BERNA&reg; LATE IN THE EVENING.</P>

<P>If it's not possible to start Mefloquine 1 day before VIVOTIF
BERNA&reg;, instructions for Day 1 should be the same as for Day 8.
</P>

<P><B>IMMUNE GLOBULINS:</B> As per the 1994 ACIP Guidelines,
concurrent administration of immune globulins and VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;
is possible without affecting the immune response.</P>

<P><B>ORAL POLIO VACCINE: </B>As per the 1994 ACIP Guidelines, oral
polio vaccine can be administered BEFORE, SIMULTANEOUSLY or AFTER
VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;.</P>

<P><B>OTHER TRAVEL-RELATED VACCINES:</B>There is no evidence that
simultaneous administration of tetanus, diphtheria, rabies, measles,
cholera, yellow fever or meningococcal vaccines interfere with the
efficacy of VIVOTIF BERNA&reg;.</P>

<H2><IMG SRC="noneedle.gif" WIDTH=34 HEIGHT=36
ALIGN=middle>Administration of Vaccine</H2>

<P><B>DO NOT DRINK ALCOHOL WITHIN ( 1 ) HOUR OF TAKING VIVOTIF
BERNA&reg;</B>. Alcohol will break the enteric coated capsule and,
therefore the capsule will dissolve in the stomach and not in the gut
(intestinal tract). In addition, testing has confirmed that alcohol
will kill the live bacteria in the vaccine.</P>

<P>The capsule should<B> NEVER BE OPENED</B> and the contents
administered in foods or liquids.</P>

<P><B>For futher information or other question's call Berna Products
Medical Inquires at 1-(800)-533-5899</B></P>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>