
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B02-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B001-333</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/appa.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024337 text/html 26050
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:29 GMT
Content-length: 25832
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:
HISTORIC </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> <b>APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> The United States has always been a drug-using country. In
colonial days, people drank more alcohol than they do today, with
estimates ranging from three to as many as seven times more
alcohol per year (13) While public drunkenness was a criminal
offense, it was generally considered a personal indiscretion.
(1). The temperance movement began in earnest after the
Revolution, when heavy drinking was revealed to be a problem, and
religious figures became committed to temperance. (1). Since
then, the American experience with both licit and illicit drugs
can be viewed as a series of reactions to the public's shifting
tolerance toward their use (9). </p>

<p> THE EARLY 1900s: NARCOTICS AND COCAINE </p>

<p> In the late 19th century it was possible to buy, in a store
or through mail order, many pseudomedical preparations,
containing morphine, cocaine, and even heroin (9). The ubiquitous
soft drink Coca-Cola used to contain cocaine until 1903, when it
was replaced with caffeine (9). Pharmacies sold cocaine in pure
form, as well as a number of opium-derived drugs, such as
morphine and heroin, the latter of which became well-known when
it was marketed by the Bayer Co. beginning in 1898 (10).
Physician prescriptions of these drugs increased from 1 percent
of all prescriptions in 1874 to between 20 to 25 percent in 1902;
they were not only available but they were widely used, without
major concerns about negative health consequences (14). </p>

<p> Cocaine and narcotic preparations were taken off the market
for various reasons. Increasing awareness of the hazards of drug
use and adulterated food led to such regulations as the Pure Food
and Drug Act of 1906 that required that fraudulent claims be
removed from patent medicines, as well as disclosure of
habit-forming substances. The passage of several antinarcotic and
pharmaceutical labeling laws was spurred on by these health
concerns, a growing temperance movement, the development of safe
pain relievers (such as aspirin), a broader range of medical
treatments, and the growing immigrant population thought to be
associated with specific drug-using practices. However, these
laws did not make patent remedies, cocaine, and opium illegal.
Some individual states imposed tighter restrictions on their
availability, but there was no uniformity among state laws. It
was United States involvement with international narcotics
concern that led there (9,10,14). </p>

<p> In 1909, the International Opium Commission called by the
United States, met in Shanghai, to begin an international
discussion concerning the problems of narcotics and the narcotics
trade. Twelve nations, in addition to the United States, were
present to discuss problems relating to opium. At that time the
perception in the United States was that Chinese immigrants were
to blame for the opium smoking problems. This angered the
Chinese, who had instituted strict campaigns against the sale and
use of opium within their own country. The Chinese were seeking
U.S. assurances for help in ending Western opium trafficking into
China. The State Department not only wanted to support China's
drug control efforts, but thought that international drug control
measures would help stanch the flow of drugs into the United
States, and thus the nonmedical consumption of these drugs. It
would not be until two years later, in the Hague, that a treaty
would be signed stating that all the signatories would enact
domestic legislation controlling narcotics trade, specifically
limiting the use of narcotics for medicinal purposes (9,10). </p>

<p> Hamilton Wright, the State Department's opium commissioner,
attempted to draft legislation but met opposition from the
States, the medical profession, pharmacists and pharmaceutical
companies. After nearly three years of debate, Congress passed
the Harrison Act in December 1914 (named for Representative
Francis Burton Harrison, who introduced the initial form of the
bill for the Administration). The bill provided for strict
control of opium and coca and their derivatives: both their entry
into the country and their dispersion to patients. Maintenance of
addicts by physicians was allowed until 1919. Opposition to the
Harrison Act came mainly from pharmaceutical companies and
pharmacists, who objected to what they called the Act's confusing
and complex record keeping requirements (9). </p>

<p> Passage of the Harrison Act reflected, in part, growing
public sentiment that opium and cocaine were medicines to be
taken only in times of illness (and then only when prescribed by
a physician) and that these substances could cause insanity and
crime, particularly in foreigners and minorities. Smoking opium
was associated with Chinese immigrants; popular belief also held
that cocaine would affect blacks more forcefully than whites and
incite them to violence. Marijuana was believed to have been
brought into the country and promoted by Mexican immigrants and
then picked up by black jazz musicians. These beliefs played a
part in the 1937 Marijuana Tax Act, which attempted to control
the drug's use (9). As early as 1910, many people argued against
any nonmedical use of narcotics. </p>

<p> PROHIBITION AND BEYOND </p>

<p> Focus on Alcohol </p>

<p> Ratification in 1919 of the 18th amendment prohibited the
manufacture, sale, transportation, importation, and exportation
of alcohol and shifted the Nation's focus for more than a decade
from the dangers of narcotics to the Nation's alcohol problems.
Prohibition had its roots in the Temperance Movement, which began
shortly after the Revolution. In 1784, Benjamin Rush, a physician
and signer of the Declaration of Independence, published a
pamphlet entitled, &quot;An Inquiry Into the Effects of Ardent
Spirits on the Mind and Body,&quot; which was widely disseminated
among Temperance leaders. In it he described a &quot;disease
model&quot; of excessive drinking, which characterized
drunkenness and alcohol addiction as a &quot;disease of the
will,&quot; in addition to causing many physical diseases. By the
mid-19th century, the American middle class had become more aware
of the dangers of alcohol to the family, the nation, and the
factory (1). By the late 19th century and early 20th century, the
Temperance Movement came to be associated almost exclusively with
American Protestantism as a political mechanism to control the
growing numbers of non-Protestant immigrants. This political and
social strength helped, in 1919, to ratify the 18th amendment
which forbade the sale of alcoholic beverages, and to implement
it by means of the Volstead Act in 1920 (1). </p>

<p> The shifting tolerance of Americans toward substance use is
evidenced by the successes and failures of the Prohibition era.
In 1919, many were optimistic that the prohibition of alcohol
would solve many of the country's social problems. If alcohol
contributed to the crime and unemployment associated with the
cities, then removing it from the market might help solve those
problems. However, despite evidence that consumption declined
(based on declining rates of death due to cirrhosis and of
alcoholic psychosis in State mental hospitals), there is also
evidence that widespread dishonesty existed in the enforcement of
dry laws. Jobs to enforce Prohibition were doled out as political
favors, which may have contributed to graft, corruption, and the
surge in underworld crime (9,17). In addition to the perceived
rise in corruption, the passage of progressively stricter laws
regarding violations of the Volstead Act also contributed to
waning public support of prohibition (17). The 1933 repeal of
Prohibition signaled that public sentiment had once again become
favorable toward alcohol, and alcohol and its related problems
returned to private, rather than public, arenas. </p>

<p> The scientific literature of the 1930s and early 1940s
concentrated mainly on captive alcoholic populations in jails,
mental hospitals, and skid row, allowing many Americans to
distance themselves from alcoholism (1). During this same period,
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) was founded, but lacked mainstream
recognition until the 1950s and 1960s when the scientists lent
support to the disease model of alcoholism, which has always been
the central tenet of AA (1,11). </p>

<p> Focus on Narcotics </p>

<p> While alcohol experienced a transition period in respect to
public tolerance, negative attitudes toward narcotics and other
drugs remained constant, or became even more severe. During the
1920s, the Federal government expanded its antidrug efforts
through new Treasury Department regulations (8). In 1930,
President Hoover created the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and
appointed Harry Anslinger as the Commissioner of Narcotics, a
position Anslinger held from 1930 to 1962, a precursor, perhaps,
to the modern day drug czar. For more than three decades,
Anslinger oversaw all aspects of drug control, from interdiction
to domestic supply, to public relations. He effectively used
religious and other antidrug groups to maintain a high antidrug
sentiment in the country. He also controlled the flow of legal
drug supplies, by keeping watch over doctors who might prescribe
unusually large amounts of narcotics. Anslinger was opposed to
the medical treatment of addiction, and addicts, like alcoholics,
were seen as deviants (9,15). </p>

<p> Prior to the mid-1960s, marijuana use in the United States
was mostly confined to various subgroups such as Mexican
laborers, jazz musicians, and beatniks. Although portrayed as a
killer weed and a menace by antimarijuana reformers, there is
little evidence that it was either at this time. In 1937, the
Marihuana Tax Act (the Federal government then spelled marijuana
with an &quot;h&quot;), became law, making the use and sale of
marijuana without a tax stamp Federal offenses. Some companies
were permitted to apply for a license to use cannabis products
(e.g., for birdseed, paint and rope), and doctors could still
prescribe marijuana in limited circumstances. However, starting
in 1937, recreational use was punished with greater severity
(15). Some speculated that the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act
resulted from strong anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwest and
the political power of Anslinger (5). </p>

<p> Intolerance toward drug use was very strong in the 1930s and
40s. Federal laws concerning the sale and use of drugs got
progressively stricter, culminating in the introduction of the
death penalty for the sale of heroin to anyone under 18 years old
by anyone older than 18 (10). Illicit drug use during these
decades was low in the mainstream population. This
marginalization of narcotics (or at least, of the people who used
them) may have played a part in the resurfacing of these drugs
after the 1930s. There was a concern during World War II that
American soldiers in Asia would succumb to drug supplies
available in those countries and return home with drug habits.
The Bureau of Narcotics received no budget increases, since
Congress apparently believed it was well equipped to deal with
the current drug levels (9). </p>

<p> In the 1950s, however, heroin was brought into the country in
larger quantities than at any time since it was outlawed. Dealers
learned that poor quality heroin could be sold at inflated
prices, and this higher cost pushed users into criminal
lifestyles heretofore not seen on such a wide scale (12). A
nationwide scare that drug use would spread from the urban poor
(mostly minorities) to the rest of the country erupted. The fact
that young people appeared to be the biggest users of heroin was
particularly alarming. This fear was reflected in the passage of
the Narcotic Control Act of 1956, which increased penalties for
the sale and possession of marijuana and heroin (15). </p>

<p> The reaction to this rise in drug use was not entirely
fearful, however. Scientific and technological advances offered
alternative answers to coping with the drug problem a switch from
the past tactics of law enforcement. Even though the
stereotypical heroin user was still a poor minority, new ideas
for treating and helping these people emerged as part of
increasing acceptance of the medical model of addiction. In the
1960s, methadone maintenance pilot programs were launched. By
using the long-acting opioid methadone for treatment of addiction
to the short- acting opiate heroin, these programs offer a way
for heroin addicts to control their addiction (6). </p>

<p> 1960s-PRESENT </p>

<p> In the 1960s, white middle-class youths, who were more
visible than their minority counterparts, began experimenting
with drugs, including marijuana and heroin, causing wide public
concern and demand for more treatment approaches and additional
law enforcement (17). Some of this new interest in drug use may
be attributed to the intolerance toward it in the preceding
decades. Marijuana had never been widely used, and after the
1930s its use was not a widespread concern. It was rediscovered
by young people in the 1960s, who had grown up with parents who
used alcohol. Some of the drug consumption may also be linked to
an increase in consumption generally during the late 1960s and
early 1970s, the Vietnam War protest movement, and the rapid
changes in American society that occurred in those years
(9,10,17). </p>

<p> Despite the image of the sixties as a time of widespread
experimentation, the increase of drug use activated many who had
been quiet on the issue. Marijuana, the drug of choice among many
young people, was seen by some researchers as the gateway to more
dangerous drug use. Richard Nixon was elected President in 1968
on a law and order platform, and it is said that no other
President has campaigned as hard against drug abuse (9). As
during World War II, concern rose that soldiers serving in
Southeast Asia would develop drug habits while there. In this
case, the fears were well- founded, as many servicemen did avail
themselves of cheap supplies of heroin and marijuana. However,
even among those who became addicted, many stopped their drug use
upon returning to the United States. During the 1960s, the old
linkages between corruption, Asians, and opium surfaced once
again in public opinion, leading to more stringent measures to
stop the flow of drugs into the United States from both Asia and
Latin America (8). </p>

<p> Public support of law enforcement against drugs was high
during the late 1960s and early 1970s, and President Nixon spoke
of mounting &quot;a frontal assault on our number one public
enemy [drugs],&quot; but long mandatory minimum sentences for
possession of small amounts of marijuana disturbed many
Americans, even those who did not approve of marijuana use. The
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970
lessened penalties for possession of marijuana. It also
established a system for classifying drugs into five schedules,
which is still used today. Drugs are placed in each schedule
based on their potential for abuse, their known harmfulness, and
medical value. Marijuana and heroin are listed in schedule
1--drugs with high potential for addiction and no recognized
medical value. There have been, however, limited experimental
programs approved by the DEA and FDA for the use of marijuana in
treatment of nausea due to chemotherapy and of ocular pressure
due to glaucoma. Cocaine is listed in schedule 2--drugs with
potential for addiction for acceptable for some medical
applications. Subsequent to the establishment of this system,
drug policies and laws for individual drugs have been based on
the drug's schedule (3,16). </p>

<p> In 1972, the President's National Commission on Marijuana and
Drug Abuse recommended that the laws against the use of marijuana
be relaxed, since the enforcement of these laws was becoming too
burdensome to police in some areas, and was considered intrusive
on individual privacy in others. The drug was increasingly
thought to be innocuous in its effects, both by scientists and
others (4). Several States passed decriminalization laws, which
allowed possession or use of small amounts of marijuana and
imposed fines instead of prison sentences for transgressions of
minor possession laws (10). The Commission remained strict on
cocaine, which was also seeing a surge in use, but few experts
thought it was physically addictive or should be classified in
the same category as other narcotics. </p>

<p> Despite President Nixon's emphasis on &quot;law and
order&quot; responses to drug use, his drug budget favored
prevention, education, and treatment. The National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA) was created as the lead agency for demand
reduction, directing Federal prevention and treatment services
and research. The Drug Enforcement Administration was created as
the lead agency for supply reduction, and single state agencies
were created to guide Federal funds into state and local antidrug
programs (3). </p>

<p> From the mid-sixties to the late seventies, the composition
of drug users changed substantially. While drug use was still
associated primarily with minorities and the lower classes, drug
use by middle-class whites became a widespread and more accepted
phenomenon. As in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, when middle class whites haphazardly used narcotic
preparations, this new group of drug users down-played or ignored
the dangerous effects of drugs, and extolled their virtues as
agents of nonconformity and mind-expansion. Cocaine was an
expensive and high-status drug, used mainly for recreation by
upper- and middle-class whites. </p>

<p> From the drug experiences of this cohort, which were by no
means entirely positive, the public of the late seventies was
better educated about the effects of drugs, and public
disapproval of drug use began once again to increase. Drug use,
however, particularly of cocaine and marijuana remained high. The
Ford Administration (1974-1977) focused on the drugs it thought
posed the greatest danger--heroin, amphetamines, and
barbiturates. Some even thought that drugs such as cocaine and
marijuana should be legalized, &quot;so as to end the enormous
government expenditures of money and time on a problem that only
seemed to bring profits to drug dealers and elicit contempt for
the law from an ever-growing body of drug users&quot; (9). </p>

<p> During the Carter Administration (1977- 1981), Peter Bourne,
a special assistant for health issues, argued for Federal
decriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana,
while focusing interdiction efforts on heroin. But Bourne
resigned over a scandal involving criticisms over his prescribing
practices. His resignation forced President Carter to take a
harder position on drugs, and Federal decriminalization never
occurred. There were still States in which marijuana was
decriminalized, but these decreased in numbers through 1990, when
the last State--Alaska--to have decriminalization repealed those
laws. </p>

<p> The departure of Bourne coincided with the emergence of
several parents' groups concerned about drug use by their preteen
children. One group in particular, in Atlanta, Georgia, became
enraged when they found that in addition to drug use at parties,
their children were able to buy drug paraphernalia and prodrug
literature in local stores. The group formed the Parent Resources
Institute on Drug Education, National Families in Action, and the
National Federation of Parents. These groups were instrumental in
prodding NIDA to publicize more widely the dangers of marijuana
and other drugs once thought of as harmless. </p>

<p> The Administration of Ronald Reagan (1981-1989) favored a
strict approach to drug use and increased law enforcement. First
Lady Nancy Reagan actively campaigned against drug use, urging
school children to &quot;Just Say No.&quot; At the same time,
funding for research and treatment decreased, while the
availability of cocaine, heroin, and marijuana remained the same
(9). The budget for antidrug related activities rose from $1.5
billion in 1981 (split nearly equally between supply reduction
(domestic law enforcement and international/border law
enforcement) and demand reduction (research, prevention and
treatment) to $4.2 billion by the end of President Reagan's
second term. Two-thirds of the funds were now allocated for law
enforcement activities, with the remaining third allocated for
demand reduction (2). In 1984, the Crime Control Act increased
dramatically Federal mandatory minimum sentencing provisions for
drug- related crime, including the manufacture, distribution, or
possession of controlled substances. It also expanded the
criminal and civil asset forfeiture laws to penalize drug
traffickers and increased Federal criminal penalties for
drug-related offenses (3). This trend continued through the
remainder of the Reagan administration as well as that of
President Bush. </p>

<p> The 1980s saw significant shifts in patterns of cocaine use.
The negative effects of cocaine use, especially long-termuse, had
previously been masked, but middle-class users with drug-related
problems suddenly were more common. Concurrently, cocaine
smuggling escalated, resulting in increased availability, lower
prices, and higher quality. Low-income, minority communities
began experiencing major drug problems, first with powdered
cocaine, then in the mid- eighties especially with the new form
of cocaine--crack. Commonly called an epidemic, the spread of
this smokable cocaine inspired both President Reagan and antidrug
groups to heightened drug intervention efforts. Crack appeared to
be highly addictive, as well as affordable, and fear of its
consequences forced many lawmakers into action. The Anti- Drug
Abuse Act of 1986 authorized more funds than ever before for the
war on drugs, most of which was designated for international
interdiction activities (9), and the establishment of the Office
of Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP). The AIDS epidemic has also
affected patterns of drug use, since some intravenous (IV) drug
users may have switched to smoking crack in order to avoid
exposure to the AIDS virus. Other IV drug users, however, have
continued to inject, and comprise a large percentage of the
AIDS-infected population. </p>

<p> While the main focus of drug control policy in the 1980s was
interdiction of illicit drugs, significant policy initiatives
concerning alcohol were also implemented. For example, the goal
of the national minimum drinking age of 21 was stated in 1984 and
achieved by 1988. Warning labels were required on all retail
containers of alcoholic beverages beginning in 1989 (7). </p>

<p> When George Bush was elected President in 1988 the climate
within the country was highly intolerant to the use of illicit
drugs. President Bush echoed President Nixon when he declared
that the drug epidemic was &quot;public enemy number one&quot;
(16). The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 mandated the creation of
the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), to be headed
by a director, sometimes called the drug czar, who would
coordinate U.S. drug control and abuse policy, resources, and
operations (Public Law 100-690). The first director was William
Bennett, former Secretary for Education under President Reagan.
He was followed by Robert Martinez, former Governor of Florida.
The director, in conjunction with the President and Cabinet
Secretaries, sets Administration policy on drug control. However,
ONCDP lacks budgetary authority, and under President Bush the
director of ONDCP was not a Cabinet position. During the Bush
Administration, additional funds were authorized for the war on
drugs, including increased funds for treatment and prevention.
However, most of the funds were designated for law enforcement
activities. Spending for antidrug-related activities rose from
the high of $4.2 billion under President Reagan, to a proposed
$12.7 billion in the last year of President Bush's term. Again,
the monetary split was roughly two-thirds for law enforcement and
international interdiction activities and one-third for demand
reduction (2). </p>

<p> While &quot;The War on Drugs&quot; has remained part of the
political lexicon, President Clinton, after taking office in
1993, cut the Office of National Drug Control Policy from 146
positions to 25. He elevated the director of ONDCP to cabinet
status, and Lee P. Brown, former Police Commissioner of New York
City was appointed to this position. During his campaign for the
presidency, Clinton advocated drug treatment on demand, and the
addition of 100,000 new police officers to the streets. _ <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>