
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B15-63</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA027-000293-B027-272</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/09_aboutberna.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021752 text/html 8281
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:08:57 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 8110
Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:46:16 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
   <TITLE>09_aboutberna.ht</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF" background="pill%2Flightest">

<P ALIGN=CENTER><A HREF="image3.map"><IMG ISMAP SRC="image3.gif"
WIDTH=468 HEIGHT=94 BORDER=0 ALIGN=middle></A></P>

<H1 ALIGN=CENTER>About the Company</H1>

<P><B>The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne</B>, founded in
1898, came into being following the amalgation of the 'Institut
Vaccinal Suisse', which began manufacturing smallpox vaccine at Lancy
near Geneva in 1883, and Haefliger, Vogt &amp; Co., which started
producing anti-diphtheria serum after its foundation in 1894.</P>

<P>Approximately 100 years after the first batch of smallpox vaccine
was produced in Geneva, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced
the worldwide eradication of the disease. In developing and producing
an effective and stable smallpox vaccine, The Swiss Serum and Vaccine
Institute (SS &amp; VIB) contributed significantly to this proud
achievement of preventative medicine</P>

<H2>Berna Products, Corp.</H2>

<P>is the North American subsidiary of The Swiss Serum and Vaccine
Institute Berne (SS &amp; VIB). As one of 3 SS &amp; VIB subsidiaries
located around the world, it was established to provide immediate
access to SS &amp; VIB vaccines and biologicals for health care
professionals in the US and Canada. Together with the manufacturing
facilities in Switzerland, Italy and Spain and the world-wide network
of Regional Offices located in Latin America and in the Near, Middle
and Far East.</P>

<P><B>The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne</B> enjoys a global
reputation as one of the <B>leading European manufacturers of
biologics</B></P>

<H2>Berna Worldwide</H2>

<P>Regardless of the language spoken, the name BERNA is a familiar
one to physicians the world over.<BR>

<B>BERNA PRODUCTS</B> is the trademark by which the products of the
Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne are known in 120 countries
around the world. In addition, BERNA vaccines have been supplied to
more than 40 developing countries as a part of the WHO/UNICEF
sponsored Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI).</P>

<P>The distribution of BERNA vaccines on a worldwide basis
necessitates a level of expertise beyond that required for
pharmaceutical products in general. For example, due to the limited
shelf-life of vaccines, it is essential the the "cold chain" of door
to door refrigeration be insured, BERNA PRODUCTS are delivered
throughout the US and Canada exclusively by Federal Express&amp;reg.
Not only does Federal Express&#174 quality service maintain this
cold-chain guarantee, but it makes it possible to constantly track
each shipment until it is delivered to into the hands of the health
professional.</P>

<P>And other example of the specialized expertise of the BERNA
network is the vast language requirements of labeling and
distribution for global distribution. While any pharmaceutical
product must obviously be prepared with the proper language labeling,
frequently <A HREF="#anchor311616">BERNA vaccines</A> are needed
under emergency situations. To meet these needs, an in-house printing
department guarantees rapid, high quality packaging and labeling of
its products. The capability exists so that in emergencies, more than
500,000 doses of vaccine can be packaged, labeled and shipped within
48 hours regardless of whether the labeling must be in Chinese,
Arabic or any other language.</P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor311616"></A><I>Berna Products</I> Product Line
</H2>

<P>Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute specializes in the production of
vaccines and biologic products for both adult and pediatric use. Our
products marketed in North America and selected other countries
include:</P>

<UL>
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor352506">Adult &amp; Travel Vaccines</A>
   
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor418961">Public Health &amp; Pediatric
   Vaccines</A>
   
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor425067">Diagnostic &amp; Therapeutic
   Products</A>
   
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor440620">Products for Laboratory Use</A>
</UL>

<P><A HREF="02_conshmpg.html">Return To Berna Home Page</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor352506"></A>Adult &amp; Travel Vaccines</H2>

<P><B>CVD-103HgR</B>--Oral vaccine for active immunization against
cholera</P>

<P><B>Lyssavac N Berna&#174</B>--vaccine providing protective
antibody titres for both pre- and post- rabies exposure</P>

<P><A NAME="anchor836484"></A><B>Te Anatoxal Berna&#174</B>--adsorbed
vaccine for active immunization against tetanus</P>

<P><B>Vivotif Berna&#174--</B>Oral vaccine for active immunization
against typhoid fever</P>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P><A HREF="#anchor311616">Return to <I>Berna Products</I> Product
Line</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor418961"></A>Public Health &amp; Pediatric Vaccines
</H2>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>BCG sec Berna&#174</B>--live vaccine for intracutaneous
vaccination against tuberculosis that have reacted negatively to the
usual tuberulin tests</P>

<P><B>Biviraten Berna&#174</B>;--live vaccine for active
immunization against measles (Edmonston Zagreb strain) and mumps
(Rubini strain)</P>

<P><B>Buccapol Berna&#174</B>--live vaccine against poliomyelitis,
obtained from Sabin stains</P>

<P><B>Di Anatoxal Berna&#174</B>--Adsorbed diphtheria vaccine for
active immunization of children up to the age of 12</P>

<P><B>DiTe Anatoxal Berna&#174</B> Adults/Children--Adsorbed
diphtheria-tetanus vaccine for active immunization of adults/children
up to the age of 12</P>

<P><B>DiTePer Anatoxal Berna&#174</B>--Adsorbed
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine for active immunization of
children up to 2 years of age</P>

<P><B>DiTePerPol Anatoxal Berna&#174</B>--Adsorbed
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis-poliomylitis vaccine for active
immunization of children up to 2 years of age</P>

<P><B>Inflexal Berna&#174</B>--vaccine against influenza</P>

<P><B>Moraten Berna&#174</B>--live vaccine for active immunization
against measles (Edmonston Zagreb strain)</P>

<P><B>MoRu-Viraten Berna&#174---live vaccine for active immunization
against measles (Edmonstoin Zagreb strain), and rubella (Wistar
RA27/3 strain)</B></P>

<P><B>Mumaten Bernat&#174</B>--live vaccine for active immunization
against mumps (Rubini strain)</P>

<P><B>Pertussis Vaccine Berna&#174</B>--vaccine for active
immunization against pertussis of children upto 2 years of age</P>

<P><B>Poliomyelitis Vaccine Berna&#174</B>--vaccine for active
immunization against poliomyelitis (Salk)</P>

<P><B>Rubeaten Berna&#174</B>--live vaccine for active immunization
against rubella (Wistar RA27/3 strain)</P>

<P><B>Triviraten Berna&#174</B>--live vaccine for active immunization
against measles (Edmonstoin Zagreb strain), mumps (Rubini strain) and
rubella (Wistar RA27/3 strain)</P>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P><A HREF="#anchor311616">Return to <I>Berna Products</I> Product
Line</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor425067"></A>Diagnostic &amp; Therpeutic Products
</H2>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>Annexine Berna&#174</B>--vaccine therapy of inflammatory
diseases of the adnex</P>

<P><B>Asthmatic Vaccine Berna&#174</B>--therapy of bceril asthma,
asthmatic bronchitis and chroic bronchitis</P>

<P><B>Broncasma Berna&#174</B>--therapy of chronic bronchitis and its
complications, treatment of bronchial asthma of bacterial origin</P>

<P><B>Buccaline Berna&#174</B>--oral antibacterial prohylaxis of
colds</P>

<P><B>Staphypan Berna&#174</B>--vaccine for prophylaxis of
staphylococcal infections especially before surgical operation</P>

<P><A HREF="#anchor311616">Return to <I>Berna Products</I> Product
Line</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor440620"></A>Products for Laboratory Use</H2>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P>Pertussis toxin</P>

<P>Pseudomonas aeruginosa Toxin A</P>

<P>Escherichia coli LT</P>

<P>Diphtheria toxin</P>

<P>Cholera toxin</P>

<P>Cholerangeoid</P>

<P>Coryebac</P>

<P>teruim diphtheriae CRM 197</P>

<P><A HREF="#anchor311616">Return to <I>Berna Products</I> Product
Line</A></P>

<P ALIGN=CENTER><A HREF="02_conshmpg.html"><IMG SRC="image33.gif"
WIDTH=36 HEIGHT=36 BORDER=0 ALIGN=middle>Return to Berna Home
Page</A></P>
</BODY>
</HTML>

</DOC>