
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-66</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B005-137</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/shrthist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033332 text/html 12615
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:33:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:15 GMT
Content-length: 12397
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>A Short History of the Drug Laws </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>A Short History of the Drug Laws </h1>

<p> <b>by the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug
Information </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> ------begin quote------- </p>

<p> The history of nonmedical drug use, and the development of
policies in response to drug use, also extends back to the early
settlement of the country. Like alcohol, the classification of
certain drugs as legal, or illegal, has changed over time. These
changes sometimes had racial and class overtones. </p>

<p> According to Mosher and Yanagisako, for example, Prohibition
was in part a response to the drinking practices of European
immigrants, who became the new lower class. Cocaine and opium
were legal during the 19th century, and were favored drugs among
the middle and upper classes. Cocaine became illegal after it
became associated with African Americans following
Reconstruction. Opium was first restricted in California in 1875
when it became associated with Chinese immigrant workers.
Marijuana was legal until the 1930s when it became associated
with Mexicans. LSD, legal in the 1950s, became illegal in 1967
when it became associated with the counterculture. </p>

<p> ------begin quote------- </p>

<p> ------begin full text---------- </p>

<p> Historical Overview of Prevention </p>

<p> Alcoholic beverages have been a part of the Nation's past
since the landing of the Pilgrims. According to Alcohol and
Public Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition, a publication
commissioned by NIAAA and prepared by the National Academy of
Sciences, the colonists brought with them from Europe a high
regard for alcoholic beverages, which were considered an
important part of their diet. Drinking was pervasive because
alcohol was regarded primarily as a healthy substance with
preventive and curative powers, not as an intoxicant. Alcohol was
also believed to be conducive to social as well as personal
health. It played an essential role in rituals of conviviality
and collective activity, such as barn raisings. While drunkenness
was condemned and punished, it was viewed only as an abuse of a
God-given gift. </p>

<p> The first temperance movement began in the early 1800s in
response to dramatic increases in production and consumption of
alcoholic beverages, which also coincided with rapid demographic
changes. Agitation against ardent spirits and the public disorder
they spawned gradually increased during the 1820s. In addition,
inspired by the writings of Benjamin Rush, the concept that
alcohol was addicting, and that this addiction was capable of
corrupting the mind and the body, took hold. The American Society
of Temperance, created in 1826 by clergymen, spread the
anti-drinking gospel. By 1835, out of a total population of 13
million citizens, 1.5 million had taken the pledge to refrain
from distilled spirits. The first wave of the temperance movement
(1825 to 1855) resulted in dramatic reductions in the consumption
of distilled spirits, although beer drinking increased sharply
after 1850. </p>

<p> The second wave of the temperance movement occurred in the
late 1800s with the emergence of the Women's Christian Temperance
Movement, which, unlike the first wave, embraced the concept of
prohibition. It was marked both by the recruitment of women into
the movement and the mobilization of crusades to close down
saloons. The movement set out to remove the destructive
substance, and the industries that promoted its use, from the
country. The movement held that while some drinkers may escape
problems of alcohol use, even moderate drinkers flirted with
danger. </p>

<p> The culmination of this second wave was the passage of the
18th Amendment and the Volstead Act, which took effect in 1920.
While Prohibition was successful in reducing per capita
consumption and some problems related to drinking, its social
turmoil resulted in its repeal in 1933. </p>

<p> Since the repeal of Prohibition, the dominant view of alcohol
problems has been that alcoholism is the principal problem. With
its focus on treatment, the rise of the alcoholism movement
depoliticized alcohol problems as the object of attention, as the
alcoholic was considered a deviant from the predominant styles of
life of either abstinence or &quot;normal&quot; drinking. The
alcoholism movement is based on the belief that chronic or
addictive drinking is limited to a few, highly susceptible
individuals suffering from the disease of alcoholism. The disease
concept of alcoholism focuses on individual vulnerability, be it
genetic, biochemical, psychological, or social/cultural in
nature. Under this view if the collective problems of each
alcoholic are solved, it follows that society's alcohol problem
will be solved. </p>

<p> Nevertheless, the pre-Prohibition view of alcohol as a
special commodity has persisted in American society and is an
accepted legacy of alcohol control policies. Following Repeal,
all States restricted the sale of alcoholic beverages in one way
or another in order to prevent or reduce certain alcohol
problems. In general, however, alcohol control policies
disappeared from the public agenda as both the alcoholism
movement and the alcoholic beverage industry embraced the view,
&quot;the fault is in the man and not in the bottle.&quot; </p>

<p> This view of alcoholism problems has also been the dominant
force in contemporary alcohol problem prevention. Until recently
the principal prevention strategies focused on education and
early treatment. Within this view education is intended to inform
society about the disease and to teach people about the early
warning signs so that they can initiate treatment as soon as
possible. Efforts focus on &quot;high risk&quot; populations and
attempt to correct a suspect process or flaw in the individual,
such as low self esteem or lack of social skills. The belief is
that the success of education and treatment efforts in solving
each alcoholic's problem will solve society's alcohol problem as
well. </p>

<p> Contemporary alcohol problem prevention began in the 1970s as
new information on the nature, magnitude, and incidence of
alcohol problems raised public awareness that alcohol can be
problematic when used by any drinker, depending upon the
situation. There was a renewed emphasis on the diverse
consequences of alcohol use--particularly trauma associated with
drinking driving, fires, and violence, as well as long term
health consequences. </p>

<p> The history of nonmedical drug use, and the development of
policies in response to drug use, also extends back to the early
settlement of the country. Like alcohol, the classification of
certain drugs as legal, or illegal, has changed over time. These
changes sometimes had racial and class overtones. According to
Mosher and Yanagisako, for example, Prohibition was in part a
response to the drinking practices of European immigrants, who
became the new lower class. Cocaine and opium were legal during
the 19th century, and were favored drugs among the middle and
upper classes. Cocaine became illegal after it became associated
with African Americans following Reconstruction. Opium was first
restricted in California in 1875 when it became associated with
Chinese immigrant workers. Marijuana was legal until the 1930s
when it became associated with Mexicans. LSD, legal in the 1950s,
became illegal in 1967 when it became associated with the
counterculture. </p>

<p> By the end of the 19th century concern had grown over the
indiscriminate use of these drugs, especially the addicting
patent medicines. Cocaine, opium, and morphine were common
ingredients in various potions sold over the counter. Until 1903,
cocaine was an ingredient of Coca-Cola(R). Heroin, which was
isolated in 1868, was hailed as a nonaddicting treatment for
morphine addiction and alcoholism. States began to enact control
and prescription laws and, in 1906, Congress passed the Pure Food
and Drug Act. It was designed to control opiate addiction by
requiring labels on the amount of drugs contained in products,
including opium, morphine, and heroin. It also required accurate
labeling of products containing alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine. </p>

<p> The Harrison Act (1914) imposed a system of taxes on opium
and coca products with registration and record-keeping
requirements in an effort to control their sale or distribution.
However, it did not prohibit the legal supply of certain drugs,
especially opiates. </p>

<p> Current drug laws are rooted in the 1970 Controlled
Substances Act. Under this measure drugs are classified according
to their medical use, their potential for abuse, and their
likelihood of producing dependence. The Act contains provisions
for adding drugs to the schedule, and rescheduling drugs. It also
establishes maximum penalties for the criminal manufacture or
distribution of scheduled drugs. </p>

<p> Increases in per capita alcohol consumption as well as
increased use of illegal drugs during the 1960s raised public
concern regarding alcohol and other drug problems. Prevention
issues gained prominence on the national level with the creation
of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)
in 1971 and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) in 1974.
In addition to mandates for research and the management of
national programs for treatment, both Institutes included
prevention components. </p>

<p> To further prevention initiatives at the Federal level, the
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 created the U.S. Office for Substance
Abuse Prevention (OSAP), which consolidated alcohol and other
drug prevention activities under the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and
Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA). The ADAMHA block grant
mandate called for States to set aside 21 percent of the alcohol
and drug funds for prevention. In a 1992 reorganization, OSAP was
changed to the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP), part
of the new SAMHSA, retaining its major program areas, while the
research institutes of NIAAA and NIDA transferred to NIH. </p>

<p> The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) was
established by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. Its primary
objective was to develop a drug control policy that included
roles for the public and private sector to &quot;restore order
and security to American neighborhoods, to dismantle drug
trafficking organizations, to help people break the habit of drug
use, and to prevent those who have never used illegal drugs from
starting.&quot; In early 1992 underage alcohol use was included
among the drugs to be addressed by ONDCP. </p>

<p> While Federal, State, and local governments play a
substantial role in promoting prevention agendas, much of the
activity takes place at grass roots community levels. In addition
to funding from CSAP's &quot;Community Partnerships&quot; grant
program, groups receive support from private sources, such as The
Robert Wood Johnson &quot;Fighting Back&quot; program. </p>

<p> While alcohol and other drug problems continue to plague the
Nation at intolerably high levels, progress is being made.
National surveys document a decline in illicit drug use and a
leveling off of alcohol consumption. And indicators of problem
levels, such as alcohol-involved traffic crashes, show
significant declines. </p>

<p> <b>References</b> </p>

<p> A Promising Future: Alcohol and Other Drug Problem Prevention
Services Improvement. CSAP Prevention Monograph 10 (1992) BK191 </p>

<p> National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Main Findings 1990
(1991) BKD67 </p>

<p> Mosher, J.F. and Yanagisako, K.L. &quot;Public Health, Not
Social Warfare: A Public Health Approach to Illegal Drug
Policy,&quot; Journal of Public Health Policy 12(3):278-322, 1991
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>