
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B039-327</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130025 text/html 13680
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:00:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:25 GMT
Content-length: 13462
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Claim VII: Alcohol has caused significant health, social,
and criminal problems</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<h2>CLAIM VII: ALCOHOL HAS CAUSED SIGNIFICANT HEALTH, SOCIAL AND
CRIME PROBLEMS IN THIS COUNTRY, AND LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD ONLY
MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE </h2>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Many legalization advocates are fond of comparing the use of
alcohol with the use of drugs, yet draw faulty conclusions from
the comparison. People often consume small amounts of wine or
beer as a beverage and do not necessarily drink to the point of
mental impairment. This is not true of drug use, where the whole
point of use is intoxication. A more accurate analogy would be to
compare drug use to drunkenness. Yet even that analogy is weak,
because drugs are far more addictive than alcohol, and have no
cultural or social value. Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal points out, for
example, that only 10 percent of drinkers become alcoholics,
while up to 75 percent of regular illicit drug users become
addicted. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The point of use of alcohol is intoxication, just as it is for
the illegal drugs. Even small amounts of alcohol will relax a
person or change their mood. This is intoxication, it is just a
mild intoxication. If you don't want the intoxication, there is
very little reason to drink alcoholic wine or beer instead of
their non-alcoholic versions. The alcoholic versions are the
major sellers so it is a fair assumption that most alcohol
drinkers want the mild intoxication which comes from a couple of
beers. </p>

<p>Most users of most drugs want a relatively mild intoxication
from their drug of choice. That is one of the main reasons that
wine and beer outsell the harder beverages, and why most illegal
drug use is the use of marijuana. </p>

<p>This argument is a distortion in itself because it lumps all
illicit drugs together, as if they had the same capacity to
addict. Clearly, there are major differences between drugs such
as heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, and Dr. Rosenthal is
irresponsible not to point them out. </p>

<p>Dr. Rosenthal's figures could not possibly be true, based on
the DEA's own evidence shown above in their chart showing the
supposed drop in drug use. The DEA's own figures shows the number
of regular drug users is far higher than the number of addicts
and always has been. By the DEA's own figures at least 85 percent
are not addicted, and at least 70 percent are gainfully employed.
</p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Proponents of legalization note--correctly--that alcohol kills
many more Americans than do illegal drugs and currently exact
social and financial costs that are higher as well. Advocates
claim that many people do not use alcohol, and that many
Americans may also choose to forego drugs. Like treatment
programs available for alcohol addicted people, treatment for
drug addicts should be more widely available. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The DEA admits that alcohol causes far more damage than the
illegal drugs but they don't seem to propose that we bring back
alcohol Prohibition. </p>

<p>What the DEA does not say is the degree to which alcohol and
tobacco cause more damage than illegal drugs. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>The experts assembled at the AntiLegalization Forum pointed to
already overburdened health care and social systems that are
unable to address all the problems associated with alcohol use.
Instead of compounding these problems, and acknowledging the
crime problems made worse by alcohol use, the group stated that
legalizing drugs would create undue burdens on the criminal,
health and social service systems. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The group points out that the &quot;already overburdened
health care and social systems . . . are unable to address all
the problems associated with alcohol use&quot;, yet no one
proposes that we bring back alcohol Prohibition as the best
approach to the problem. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Alcohol use in this country has taken a tremendous physical
toll on Americans, not to mention the social problems that have
resulted from its use. Legalization proponents would have us
compound our problems by creating a new class of drug addicted
Americans. Again, how much are we willing to tolerate? To pay
for? </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>Should we bring back alcohol Prohibition as a means of dealing
with alcohol problems? Clearly not. The message of Prohibition is
clear: Alcohol is bad, but Prohibition is worse. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>Look at the problems that alcohol abuse has wrought. In the
1920s those advocating the repeal of Prohibition argued that
crime and other social ills would be alleviated if alcohol were
legal. Has that happened? We now have approximately 11 million
alcoholics or problem drinkers in this country whose behavior has
contributed to lost productivity in the workplace, fetal defects,
traffic fatalities, domestic violence and other crime. If drugs
were made legal, the numbers and the problems would swell. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>Is the DEA arguing that the best approach to the alcohol
problems is to bring back Prohibition? Why not? </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>The simple fact is that if drugs are made legal, more people
will use drugs. There will be higher health and social costs;
there will be more crime. Some facts which help to confirm the
observations of the forum participants may be used in debates: </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The Wickersham Commission, which was originally formed to
improve alcohol Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in the
first year of Prohibition but rose every year thereafter. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· In a May, 1993 report titled &quot;Survey of State Prison
Inmates,&quot; the Bureau of Justice Statistics states that 32%
of inmates committed their offense under the influence of
alcohol. Slightly more than twofifths of inmates convicted of
homicide or assault committed their current offense under the
influence of alcohol or of alcohol with drugs. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>This is another curious argument. It is clear that the biggest
problem here is alcohol, as the DEA itself states. If the DEA was
really consistent in their position, they would advocate the
return of alcohol prohibition. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· According to the 1993 National Household Survey on Drug
Abuse, about 11 million Americans were heavy drinkers in 1993
(drinking five or more drinks per occasion on five or more days
in the past 30 days). Heavy alcohol use has changed little since
1985, when there were 12 million heavy drinkers. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>Assuming the figures are accurate, it would obviously not be a
sensible approach to the problem to attempt throw all these
people in prison. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>The same report indicates that &quot;of the 11 million heavy
drinkers in 1993, 26 percent (3 million) were also current
illicit drug users.&quot; The report goes on to say that
&quot;Current smokers are more likely to be heavy drinkers and
illicit drug users. Among smokers in 1993, 11 percent were heavy
drinkers and 12 percent were illicit drug users.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>The DEA seems to be trying to make the discredited argument
about &quot;gateway drugs&quot;. That is, they used to contend
that some drugs, by some as-yet-unexplained process, naturally
created a craving for totally unrelated drugs in people who had
never used drugs before. This was a holdover from their earlier,
plainer and even more easily discredited argument that marijuana
leads to heroin. (Which, by the way, was in direct contradiction
to Harry Anslinger's testimony before Congress when marijuana was
outlawed.) </p>

<p>People who engage in one form of risky behavior often engage
in other risky behaviors. That is the only thing that these kinds
of statistics could show. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· In a 1993 report by Brandeis University, it was estimated
that the United States spent $10.5 billion on health care related
to alcohol use. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best way
to deal with the problem? </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· Alcohol is blamed for between $140 and $210 billion per
year in lost productivity. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best way
to deal with the problem? </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· 17,461 people were killed in alcohol related traffic
incidents in 1993. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>That is almost as many people as the American Medical
Association estimates were killed by all illegal drugs from all
causes combined. Clearly, if the DEA wanted to do something about
the real drug problem, it would be of more benefit to concentrate
their enforcement efforts on alcohol. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </h2>

<p><b>DEA Statement</b> </p>

<p>· Michigan's Director of the Office of Drug Control Policy,
Robert Peterson, states that &quot;It is estimated that alcohol
abuse costs the nation $100 billion per year and over 300 lives
per day, an amount that the $18 billion in state and federal
excise tax revenue does not begin to cover.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"><b>The Facts</b> </p>

<p>And yet no one contends that throwing wine and beer drinkers
in prison is a sensible approach to this problem. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>