
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B37-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B017-361</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003256 text/html 45196
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:31:01 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:15 GMT
Content-length: 45009
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 4, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS AND TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(377 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLION&nbsp;TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(662 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPER&nbsp;THAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(724 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISV&nbsp;PROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALD&nbsp;LLW VITRIFICATION TESTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(429 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>SDMP&nbsp;NRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47&nbsp;SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(492 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFERED&nbsp;FOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(542 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>D&D&nbsp;NRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'S&nbsp;TROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(278 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>NEWS BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DOE COMPLEX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1805 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SLANTS AND TRENDS


NO CIGAR: None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commission
staff scenarios for the future (or non-future) of the
commission's low-level radioactive waste (LLW) program are
satisfactory, NRC's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste
(ACNW) concluded Dec. 29. Facing severe federal budget cuts,
the July staff report looked at three scenarios: continue
the current program, reduce the program by eliminating or
cutting back various parts, or terminate all parts of the
LLW program. The staff concluded the present program could
not continue at present budgetary levels, but the entire
program could not be abolished because it requires major
changes in a number of pieces of federal legislation. The
only viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reduced
program (NWN, Oct. 26, 1995, p. 413).

   The major failing of the staff report, "is the failure to
address the question of what the LLW program ought to be in
order to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW Chairman Paul
Pomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley Ann
Jackson. The budgetary focus of the report fails to address
NRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health and
safety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be made
in accordance with priorities set with reference to the
underlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.

   Necessary elements in the rescaled LLW program are: a
staff that includes experts in each of the technologies
critical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,
operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program that
provides technical assistance to those preparing license
applications for LLW disposal facilities; a program that
maintains NRC's capability for processing license
applications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposal
facilities; and a program that identifies and supports
limited research activities in priority areas and assures
that the information value is maintained from studies that
are terminated or transferred to other programs.

   Some areas targeted for termination or limited support in
the staff report need re-evaluation. These include review of
topical reports and the quality of Agreement-State programs
and NRC representation of the U.S. LLW policy.

   % Pomeroy's letter to Jackson, 8 pp., is available for
purchase through BPI DocuDial, No. 48-1111, as is the July
31 report to the commission from the NRC staff, 29 pp., No.
48-1112.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLION
TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILES


by Gordon Feller

   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little has
been awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the former
Soviet republic of Belarus solve nuclear waste, safety and
other environmental problems related to its former Strategic
Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.

   The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense Nuclear
Agency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction
(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugar
legislation. The program was set up to assist the countries
of the former Soviet Union in elimination of weapons of mass
destruction and prevention of their proliferation.

   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel to
assess radiation and conventional environmental damage at
sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles were based,
transported, operated or maintained, and will help the
country restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,
at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-
25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclear
state and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.

   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number of
different technical resources within the program to provide
training and technical assistance to the Belarus officials
and experts. The consultants will work with the Belarus
personnel to analyze the environmental problems at one
missile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee the
Belarus technicians as they do environmental restoration
work at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transfer
enough knowledge to Belarus so that it can complete the
environmental restoration work at the remaining sites.

   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal and
low-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,
spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around the
sites' perimeters containing unexploded ordnances.

   As part of the effort to transfer environmental
restoration expertise, Arthur D. Little will conduct
international conferences co-sponsored by DNA and the
Belarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the world
will be invited to Belarus to discuss environmental
restoration experiences, technologies, and management
issues.

   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed in
l993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarus
to assist in development of the Environmental Restoration
Project. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugar
include assistance in defense conversion, export control
systems and training, government-to-government
communications links, and emergency response equipment and
training.

   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has an
especially high water table and active ground water
movement, which can exacerbate ground water pollution.

   Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little on the
Environmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps of
Engineers' Waterways Experiment Station, Los Alamos
Technical Associates, Technology Management Co., the
Environmental Chemical Corp., Environmental Hazards
Specialists International, Environmental Careers
Organizations, the World Environment Center, and Clean Sites
Inc.

   Arthur D. Little, which managed the largest environmental
impact assessment ever conducted in the Former Soviet Union
by a Western company, has handled more than 3,000
environmental audits and assessments in 30 countries
throughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered in
Cambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around the
world. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,
health, and safety consulting; management consulting; and
technology and product development.

RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia's minister
of nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclear smuggling
should be the top item on the agenda for the April G-7
summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted to
nuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" for
dealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control over
nuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65
billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution to
Russia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much less
than the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.
However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russian
civilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have a
questionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt on
Mikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boosted
to $2 billion by 1998.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPER
THAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS


   Using existing facilities at DOE's Savannah River Site
(SRS), Aiken, S.C., to reprocess civilian spent fuel (SF)
would be considerably cheaper than continuing with the
current repository program, concluded a report prepared by
Westinghouse Savannah River Co. for DOE at the request of
Rep Charles Norwood (R-Ga.).

   The report, delivered to DOE Aug. 21, is unclassified,
but has not been officially released by DOE or Norwood's
office.(% Available through BPI DocuDial, 28 pp., No. 48-
1110.)

   Questions about using SRS to reprocess spent civilian
fuel and the impact on the civilian waste program prompted
Norwood to make the request, an aide said. Reprocessing
operations could provide an economic boon to the region
around SRS.

   The report, Chemical Stabilization of Defense Related and
Commercial Spent Nuclear Fuel at the Savannah River Site,
said a repository is required, even with reprocessing. But
"technical uncertainty would be significantly lessened by
the 20-fold volume reduction, and the conversion of the
waste to a single form containing only short-lived, non-
fissile products."

Billions To Be Saved?

   Westinghouse estimates the annual cost of reprocessing
civilian spent fuel at $350 million a year and the cost for
dealing with the current inventory of spent civilian fuel at
$8 billion, including estimated repository fees. "Chemical
stabilization is almost certainly less costly than direct
disposition technology, maybe by several billion dollars,"
the report said.

   "These facilities could consolidate and stabilize nuclear
wastes into manageable and ultimately disposable forms,
thereby providing a bridge to the future when decisions will
have to be made as to the long-term approach to energy
production, defense needs and nuclear waste management in
this country," the report said.

   Besides costs savings, reprocessing civilian SF at SRS
solves on-site storage problems at commercial nuclear
powerplants and allows DOE to comply with the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act by accepting SF by 1998, the report said.

   Under the plan spelled out in the Westinghouse report, SF
now stored at SRS would be reprocessed and then the facility
could provide "ongoing treatment services for a wide variety
of defense and commercial spent fuels." Radioactive waste
produced from the reprocessing operation would be vitrified
in borosilicate glass logs. DOE could either sell
reprocessed civilian fuel back to powerplants or dispose of
it in a repository.

Upgrade Costs Omitted

   In estimating the cost of reprocessing civilian SF at
SRS, the report does not include the costs of upgrades
needed for the F- and H- canyons. John Duane, a Westinghouse
manager who helped prepare the report, said the upgrades
could be anywhere from minor to major, depending on what
types of fuel will be reprocessed. It was an oversight that
upgrade costs were omitted; they should be in the report, he
said.

   A standard shear/leach process would be used to process
commercial SF. The report estimates these upgrades would
cost $100 million. After that, only normal capital upgrades
would be needed, Duane said. Brian Costner, of the Energy
Research Foundation, an SRS watchdog group, disputes those
figures. When SRS reprocessing operations stopped in 1992,
major upgrades to the facility were never completed.
Completing the upgrades is expensive, Costner said. Duane,
however, said about three-quarters of the planned upgrades
were completed before the shutdown. The buildings are 40
years old, but the reprocessing equipment is fairly new, he
added.

   Costner thinks the purpose of the report is to build
political support for commercial reprocessing. He expects
reprocessing supporters to use it to press for a change in
U.S. policy, which now prohibits civilian SF reprocessing.
Reprocessing, however, is gaining support in Congress.

   Norwood's office had no comment on whether the
representative would propose legislation to open SRS for
civilian reprocessing. At press time Jan. 4, Norwood was
touring SRS and would make a decision based on what he
learned during the tour, an aide said.

   Using a U.S. defense facility to reprocess civilian SF is
a new idea and sets a dangerous precedent, said Arjun
Makhijani, president of the Institute for Energy and
Environmental Research. The report is "a clear waste of
taxpayers dollars and a dangerous waste of taxpayer
dollars," he said.

   No other Congress members contacted by NWN had seen the
report. Nuclear-industry representatives also were
unfamiliar with it or any plans to reprocess civilian fuel
at SRS.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISV
PROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA


   An in-situ vitrification (ISV) system developed for DOE
by Battelle is receiving international attention. The
Australians tested the process for treating contaminated
areas of the Maralinga test range in South Australia. The
tests, carried out by Geosafe, a Battelle subsidiary, ended
in October 1995.

   The British used Maralinga as a  nuclear test site in the
1950s and subsequently contaminated several kilometers of
desert. Most of the contamination is plutonium, and includes
21 pits containing equipment contaminated with transuranics.
The Australians expect the cleanup of Maralinga to cost
about $100 million Australian, equal to $75 million U.S.
(NWN, June 6, 1995, p. 243).

   The Australians hope to use in-situ treatment to deal
with the pits. The Geosafe tests involved 13 test melts over
six-months. Initial tests used a surrogate for the nuclear
materials, but the final two tests used actual
radionuclides. One five-ton test melt used soil and debris
containing a kilogram of uranium as well as hazardous metals
and large quantities of scrap metals.

   Another test melt used not only uranium-contaminated
soil, but also a steel plate contaminated with about two
grams of plutonium. The Australian Nuclear Science and
Technology Organization is analyzing the radioactive
samples.

   The Australians are looking at radionuclide distribution
within the vitrified material and at the strength of the
material. They also will conduct leach testing of the
vitrified material. Test results should be available early
this year, Geosafe said.

   Test results show the in-situ vitrification process can
be used to treat the 21 contaminated pits, Geosafe said.
"Most notably, the radioactive testing did not result in
contamination of the off-gas hood or piping, indicating very
high uranium and plutonium retention efficiencies in the
vitrified product," according to a Geosafe test report.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALD
LLW VITRIFICATION TESTS


   Design problems will delay the start-up of a pilot low-
level radioactive waste vitrification plant at DOE's
Fernald, Ohio, site by 17 months. But the problems will not
delay completion of the 10-year cleanup plan for the
facility, Fernald officials say.

   The $21-million vitrification plant, built by GTS Duratek
of Columbia, Md., was scheduled for surrogate testing in
July 1995, but DOE moved the start date of testing with a
uranium substitute to March 1996, said Perry Richardson, a
Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO)
spokesman.

   DOE initially had problems getting bids on a melter for
the pilot plant. Originally, DOE requested a melter capable
of operating at temperatures of 1,450 degrees C and able to
process five tons of material per day. DOE revised its
specification, requesting a melter capable of handling only
one ton of material per day.

   Superfund deadlines forced parallel design of portions of
the plant that should have been designed in sequence,
officials said. The delays do not surprise Richardson. "This
is the closest thing to research and development we have at
Fernald," he said. A few "bumps" in the process should be
expected, he added.

'We Were Overly Optimistic'

   Fernald also overestimated the amount of time the pilot
plant could operate. Initial plans were to operate the
facility continuously, but FERMCO decided that was not
realistic. "We were overly optimistic," Richardson said.

   For planning purposes, Fernald officials are assuming the
melter will operate 30 percent of the time, although
Richardson said he thinks the actual operational operating
time will be better.

   DOE eventually will vitrify 9,700 tons of uranium mill
tailings now stored on site at Fernald. Information gathered
from the pilot plant operation will be used to design a $200
million full-scale vitrification plant, capable of
processing 30 tons of material per day.

   DOE plans to vitrify all the mill tailings at Fernald and
send the vitrified waste to a disposal facility on the
Nevada Test Site before 2005, Richardson said.

DAVIS BESSE: Toledo Edison Co. Dec. 26 began transferring
spent fuel from the fuel storage pool at its Davis Besse
nuclear power plant to three dry storage casks at an
independent spent fuel storage facility on the plant site.
The three casks will hold 72 fuel assemblies. The plant
needed to free space in the storage pool to receive new fuel
and to unload the full reactor core during a refueling
outage in April. Inspectors from the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission's Region III office, Lisle, Ill., are monitoring
the fuel transfer.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SDMP
NRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47
SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY


   The latest version of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's
Site Decommissioning Management Plan (SDMP) list, released
Dec. 26, shows 47 sites that still must be either evaluated
or remediated under the SDMP program. These sites are a
mixed bag of possibly contaminated sites where remediation
was in danger of falling through the cracks in NRC's
licensing system.

   SDMP sites vary in the degree of radiological hazard,
decommissioning complexity and cost. Some sites comprise
tens of acres that require assessment for radiological
contamination; others have contamination known to be limited
to individual buildings or discrete piles of waste or
contaminated soil. Some sites still have active NRC nuclear
materials licenses.

   Some sites already are almost completely cleaned; others
have had little or no remediation.

   NRC has removed nine sites from the SDMP list since the
program began in 1990. Some of these sites have been
successfully cleaned; others are cases where NRC deferred
oversight to other agencies or determined the site was not
subject to NRC licensing.

   Sites are added to the list if they satisfy one or more
of the following criteria:

Problems with the viability of the responsible organization,
e.g. inability to pay for or unwillingness to perform
decommissioning.

Presence of large amounts difficult-to-dispose material such
as soil contamination, unused settling ponds or waste in
burial grounds.

Long-term presence of contaminated, unused facility
buildings.

Previously terminated license.

Contamination or potential contamination of the ground water
from on-site wastes.

   The 47 sites on the new list are:

   Indiana (1): Jefferson Proving Ground;

   Maryland (2): Anne Arundel County Curtis Bay site;
Aberdeen Proving Ground;

   Massachusetts (6): Engelhard Corp., Plainville; Nuclear
Metals Inc., Concord; Texas Instruments Inc., Attleboro;
Watertown Arsenal, Watertown; Watertown GSA, Watertown;
Wyman-Gordon Co., North Grafton, Mass.

   Michigan (4): Brooks & Perkins, Detroit and Livonia; Dow
Chemical Co., Bay City and Midland;

   Minnesota (1): 3M Co., Pine County;

   Missouri (1): Lake City Army Ammunition Plant,
Independence;

   New Jersey (3): Heritage Minerals, Lakehurst, N.J.; RTI
Inc., Rockaway, N.J.; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,
Newfield, N.J.

   Ohio (11): Advanced Medical Systems Inc., Cleveland;
Alcoa, Cleveland; BP Chemicals America Inc., Lima; Chemetron
Corp., Cleveland, Ohio, two sites; Clevite, Cleveland; Elkem
Metals Inc., Marietta; Horizons Inc., Cleveland; Northeast
Ohio Regional Sewer District Southerly Plant, Cleveland; RMI
Titanium Co., Ashtabula; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,
Cambridge;

   Oklahoma (5): Fansteel Inc., Muskogee, Okla.; Kaiser
Aluminum, Tulsa, Okla.; Kerr-McGee, Cimarron and Cushing,
Okla.; Sequoyah Fuels Corp., Gore, Okla.;

   Pennsylvania (13): Babcock & Wilcox, Apollo, and Parks
Township; Cabot Corp., Boyerton, Reading and Revere;
Molycorp Inc., Washington and York; Permagrain Products,
Media; Pesses Co., METCOA Site, Pulaski; Safety Light Corp.,
Bloomsburg; Schott Glass Technologies, Duryea; Westinghouse
Electric Corp., Waltz Mill; and Whittaker Corp., Greenville.

   Contact: David Fauver Sr., Project Manager, Low-Level
Waste and Decommissioning Projects Branch, Division of Waste
Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Mail Stop
T7F27, Washington, DC 20555; (301) 415-6625.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFERED
FOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH


   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,
Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites at
the laboratory for collaborative ground water research. Past
disposal of radioactive and mixed radioactive hazardous
waste at Oak Ridge has led to concerns about ground water
contamination that require a better understanding of the
complex subsurface heterogeneous fractured media. Past
research has focused on water and contaminant movement.

   Sites the laboratory is making available for
collaborative research include:

   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:
These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)
are particularly suitable for studies of subsurface
transport processes. Each has a trench excavated across its
outflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, and
contain six pans pressed against the face of the trench to
collect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracer
distribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects of
solution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are located
throughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipment
is interfaced for computerized data collection.

   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site was
developed for investigating new ground water tracer
techniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and has
been instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some of
them multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels and
temperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals for
two years. During the last three years, three principal
tests have been conducted at this field site:

A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neon
to test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport.

A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-size
tracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,
to measure fracture-flow velocities.

A test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers of
fracture flow.

   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has been
used for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methods
in fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil and
saprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.
The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20
m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20
m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling ports
installed close to the pairs of wells. Many data are
available from the site, including six pumping tests,
natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfur
hexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,
bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,
mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemical
analyses.

   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium were
released in an open borehole in fractured shale. Tritium was
monitored in the injection well and in five monitoring wells
for the first five years, with an additional sampling after
16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium by pumping
were unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium was still
present after 16 years. Results of this test have been
interpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-
treat methods.

   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and Engineering
Sciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, (423) 576-0567, fax (423) 576-3989, e-
mail gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the World
Wide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/
facilities/hydrology/.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

D&D
NRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'S
TROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN


   The Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff intends to
approve Portland General Electric (PGE) Co.'s proposed
decommissioning plan for the Trojan Nuclear Power Plant near
Ranier, Ore.

   The plant was closed down in 1993 and all spent fuel has
been removed from the reactor and placed in the spent fuel
pool. The pressurizer and the four steam generators have
been removed from reactor containment and shipped to a low-
level radioactive waste disposal facility.

   NRC's latest proposed action would allow PGE to complete
decommissioning according to its proposed plan, submitted
Jan. 25, 1995. PGE intends to dismantle the plant using the
DECON alternative after a five-year transition period.

Transition Period

   During the transition period, which began with the
January 1993 shutdown date, PGE intends to remove and
dispose of selected large components; license and construct
an independent spent fuel storage installation (ISFSI); and
transfer fuel to the ISFSI. The utility also would assess
environmental impacts associated with construction and
operation of the ISFSI.

   The DECON phase will consist of the major disassembly and
dismantlement of radioactive structures, systems and
components. Low-level radioactive waste resulting from
dismantling the plant will be sent to a licensed waste
disposal site for burial.

   At the end of the DECON phase, the site, except for the
ISFSI, will be released for unrestricted use.

   Requests for a hearing on NRC's proposed approval of
PGE's decommissioning plan (Docket No. 50-344) must be
forwarded to the commission by Jan. 22. See the Federal
Register, Dec. 22, for details and instructions for
petitioning for a hearing. % Copies also are available for
purchase through BPI DocuDial, 3 pp., No. 48-1105.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

NEWS BRIEFS


California and DOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
have agreed to work together to evaluate new environmental
technologies for certification under the state's
Environmental Technology Certification Program (ETCP). The
California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal/EPA) and
Livermore signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) giving
the state access to skilled laboratory personnel and
laboratory facilities to evaluate new technologies in
radioactive and hazardous waste management, site cleanup,
waste minimization and pollution prevention. In 1993, the
state set up the California Environmental Technology
Partnership (CETP) to promote research, development,
commercialization and export of California-based
environmental technology, goods and services. ETCP was
established by CalEPA's Department of Toxic Substances
Control in response to a CETP study of the state's $18
billion environmental technology industry that found a need
for a simpler, less cumbersome evaluation and permit
process. The program provides one-stop scientific and
engineering evaluation of new technologies to encourage
development and speed their acceptance. Contact: Dan
Pellissier, CalEPA, (916) 324-9670.

NCSL: The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)
has introduced a new version of LEGISNET, NCSL's intelligent
information retrieval system that includes the
Transportation Legislative Database (TLDB). TLDB is an on-
line information service containing summaries of federal,
state and certain local government statutes and regulations
relating to the transportation of radioactive materials in
the United States. TLDB is operated by NCSL under a
cooperative agreement with DOE's Office of Civilian
Radioactive Waste Management. Contact: Bob Frohling, NCSL,
1560 Broadway, Suite 700, Denver, Colo. 80202; (303) 830-
2200; fax: (303) 863-8003; e-mail: bob.frohling@ncsl.org.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

DOE COMPLEX


DEAR: DOE has revised its Department of Energy Acquisition
Regulation (DEAR) to codify the department's technology
transfer mission for the national laboratories and weapons
production facilities operated by management and operating
(M&O) contractors. Details of the revised regulation appear
in the Dec. 22 Federal Register or % can be purchased
through BPI DocuDial, 7 pp., No. 48-1106.

Hanford: DOE and the Washington State Department of Ecology
seek public comments on DOE's proposal to amend the Hanford
Tri-Party Agreement to make it compatible with DOE's
proposal to privatization cleanup of Hanford's radioactive
waste tanks. Under the proposal, private companies will
contract with DOE to treat the wastes and return a treated
product to DOE. The department anticipates awarding multiple
contracts to encourage innovation and competition among
contractors. Selected contractors will invest private funds
to design, construct and operate the facilities needed to
meet the needs of the Tank Waste Remediation Systems. DOE
will define and monitor the requirements to be met by
selected contractors in order for treated tank waste to be
returned to DOE control after treatment. DOE will offer
incentives to contractors to reduce immobilized waste
volumes and optimize waste loading. The first phase of the
privatization strategy will demonstrate the technical and
business viability of using privatized facilities to treat
and immobilize the waste. The Phase One treatment facility
will be capable of treating six to 13 percent of the low-
activity tank wastes. In Phase Two, a full-scale production
facility would be capable of processing and immobilizing the
remaining waste on a schedule that would accommodate
removing waste from the single-shell tanks by 2018. Comments
are due Feb. 15. Public meetings are scheduled tentatively
for Jan. 30 in Portland, Ore., and Feb. 1 in Richland, Wash.
For more information, contact: Toby Michelena, Washington
Department of Ecology, (360) 407-7144; Carolyn Haass, DOE,
(509) 372-2731; or the Hanford Cleanup Hotline, (800) 321-
2008.

INEL: The Environmental Management Site-Specific Advisory
Board (SSAB) for Idaho National Engineering Laboratory will
meet Jan. 16-17 in Boise, Idaho. The purpose of the meeting
is to continue discussions of DOE's prioritizations of
environmental management (EM) funds for fiscal year 1998.
Other topics include the environmental restoration scoping
process, prioritization of the INEL SSAB's own activities
for the remainder of FY '96 and participation in an
educational activity highlighting research and development
capabilities at INEL. Contact: Idaho National Engineering
Laboratory, (800) 708-2680, or Marsha Hardy, Jason
Associates Corp., staff support, (208) 522-1662.

Los Alamos: The Environmental Management Site-Specific
Advisory Board for Los Alamos National Laboratory will meet
Jan. 9 in Mora, N.M. Contact: Lisa Roybal, EM SSAB, Los
Alamos National Laboratory, Northern New Mexico Community
College, 1002 Onate St., Espanola, NM 87352; (800) 753-8970
or (505) 753-8970.

Oak Ridge: The Environmental Management Site-Specific
Advisory Board will meet Jan. 17 and Jan. 24 in Oak Ridge,
Tenn. The Jan. 24 meeting was called solely to discuss the
proposed by-laws for the board. The Jan. 17 meeting will
discuss not only the by-laws, but a report on an
administrative session held in Denver in November and a
technical presentation on results of the aerial remote-
sensing survey of the Oak Ridge Reservation. Contact: Sandy
Perkins, Site-Specific Advisory Board Coordinator, DOE, Oak
Ridge Operations Office, 105 Broadway, Oak Ridge, TN 37830;
(423) 576-1590.

UMTRA: DOE has completed cleanup of uranium mill tailings
and contaminated materials from the 61-acre abandoned
uranium processing site southwest of Gunnison, Colo., under
the Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action Project (UMTRA).
Some 750,000 cubic yards of contaminated material was hauled
by truck to a disposal site seven miles east of the old
processing site. DOE and the state of Colorado jointly began
cleanup of the site in 1991 with demolition of the mill
buildings. The disposal cell was excavated in 1992 and
transportation of contaminated material to the cell began in
1993. Cleanup activities at the mill site ended in November,
and the cleaned areas were backfilled with clean soil to a
level comparable with the surrounding terrain. Construction
crews completed work on the disposal cell cover in December.
The Gunnison mill is the 16th of 24 congressionally
designated uranium mill tailings sites to be cleaned.

Business & Technology

ESRI: Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety (IDNS) decided
in 1992 to use a computerized, integrated GIS/GPS/radiation
detection system to map for remediation the former Kerr-
McGee Chemical Corp. thorium milling facility in West
Chicago. The department contracted with GIS Solutions Inc.,
Springfield, Ill., to assemble and develop a database for
the Kerr-McGee remediation. The company also conducted the
GIS analysis based on the GPS data collected in the study
area. GIS advised IDNS to use ARC/INFO and ArcView GIS
software from ESRI, which would allow the database to be
used for project management. ESRI is a research group
founded in 1969 to develop methods of handling georeferenced
data. It is the world leader in development of GIS software,
with more than 100,000 clients worldwide. Contact: Tim
Runyon, IDNS, (217) 786-6365; or Bob Lindquist, GIS
Solutions Inc., (217) 546-3654.

NUKEM GmbH of Germany has acquired ENSR Nuclear Services and
ENSR Nuclear Engineering, the nuclear divisions of ENSR
Corp., a key U.S. hazardous waste treatment and remediation
firm. The names of the two divisions have been changed to
NUKEM Nuclear Technologies Corp., with two divisions -
services and engineering. NUKEM is owned by RWE AG, the
fifth largest German corporation, with annual sales of more
than $45 billion. NUKEM is a world leader in engineering and
design for the nuclear industry, including radioactive waste
processing and storage, decommissioning, nuclear materials
handling and processing and related services. Other
companies in the NUKEM family include WasteChem Ltd., a
major British decommissioning company; DETEC, the leading
German decommissioning company; ANSA-A, a French state-of-
the-art robotics company; and GNB, a German spent fuel
storage system designer. NUKEM intends use the Nuclear
Technologies Corp. to introduce its nuclear technologies to
DOE, DOD and the commercial nuclear market. These include
liquid and solid radioactive waste volume reduction,
vitrification, pyrolysis, incineration, tritium control,
spent fuel services, robotics, engineering, decommissioning
and other nuclear waste services. Ruediger Koenig will serve
as Nuclear Technologies Corp. president. The existing ENSR
core leadership will remain in place, including John
Raymont, vice president; Glen Rae, national sales and
marketing manager; Robert Williams, operations manager in
the services division; Detlef Schmidt, general manager in
the engineering division; and Jim Janzen, engineering
division manager. Contact: Glen Rae, NUKEM Nuclear
Technologies, 250 Berryhill Rd., Suite 500, Columbia, SC
29210; (803) 731-1588; fax: (803) 731-8435.

Holtec International and U.S. Tool and Die (UST&D) have
received a $6-million contract to supply spent- and fresh-
fuel storage equipment to the Angra Unit 1 nuclear power
plant, owned and operated by FURNAS Centrais Eletricas S.A.,
headquartered in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Holtec will serve
as prime contractor and UST&D will fabricate the fuel
storage equipment. The reracking will increase the unit's
in-pool fuel storage capacity from 363 storage locations to
1,252. Holtec will design, license, remove and volume-reduce
the existing racks and install the new racks. UST&D will be
responsible for manufacture and testing of the new racks.
The racks are designed to store fuel in a discrete zone two-
region storage pattern. Region 1 is designed for storing
fresh fuel assemblies and Region 2 for spent fuel
assemblies, taking credit for burnup. The racks will be of a
detuned cellular construction so as to minimize pool slab
loading under seismic conditions. Boral will be used as a
neutron poison. All hardware is due to be delivered by May
1997 and installation will be completed by October 1997.
Contact: Christian Blessing, Holtec International, 2060
Fairfax Ave., Cherry Hill, NJ 08003; (609) 424-0999, ext.
620.

Rust Federal Services has entered into a Cooperative
Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with Kaiser-Hill
Co. LLC, operating contractor at DOE's Rocky Flats
Environmental Technology Site, for commercialization of
polymer encapsulation processes for stabilizing low-level
radioactive wastes (LLW) and mixed wastes. Personnel from
Rocky Flats developed a process to encapsulate LLW using
low-density polyethylene. Under the CRADA, Rust will examine
the economic feasibility of using waste plastic in the
encapsulation process. Low-density polyethylene, which
includes post-consumer products such as coffee can and
yogurt container lids, now is not recycled in Colorado. Rust
is working with its affiliate, Waste Management of Colorado
Inc., to determine if post-consumer plastic collection is
feasible. If it is, this could lead to full-scale
commercialization of the technology, with wide-ranging
applications at DOE sites and commercial nuclear plants.
Contact: Rust International Inc., 100 Corporate Parkway,
Birmingham, AL 35242-2926.

SOLUTIONS Software Corp. has available a CD-ROM with all 50
titles of the Code of Federal Regulations, including all
text, tables and graphics and Adobe Acrobat search-and-
retrieve software, at a cost of about $1 per title. Contact:
Mark Wemhoff, SOLUTIONS Software Corp., 1795 Turtle Hill
Road, Enterprise, FL 32725; (407) 321-7912; fax: (407) 323-
4898 or (407) 321-3098; Internet: solution@env-sol.com;
World Wide Web: http://www.env.sol.com.

LLW Compacts

Massachusetts: The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management
Board will meet Jan. 10 in Boston. The agenda includes a
discussion of possible changes in language on Independent
Review Grants contained in the Draft Volunteer Sites
Program; decommissioning of the Yankee Rowe nuclear power
plant; review of literature on very-low-dose radiation
exposure; and discussion of issues surrounding disposal of
radioactive materials via release into sanitary sewer
systems. Contact: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Management Board, 100 Cambridge St.,
Room 903, Boston, MA 02202; (617) 727-6018; fax: (617) 727-
6084.

Texas: The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission is
running about a month behind in its review of the license
application for a low-level waste disposal facility at
Sierra Blanca in west Texas, said sources in the Texas Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Authority (TLLRWA). The commission
originally planned to complete its review by the end of the
year, but now are saying it will be the end of January.
TLLRWA submitted the last three additional revisions to the
license application requested by the commission before the
end of the year. Revision 12 addressed site closure and
decommissioning; Revision 13 addressed various general
description changes, design criteria and features, operating
procedures, radiological and non-radiological impacts and a
list of permits the authority will have obtained prior to
operation; Revision 14 addressed the remaining questions
from the commission. The Natural Resources Commission did
not request any more information. Contact: Texas Low-Level
Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority, 7701 North Lamar,
Suite 300, Austin, TX 78752; (512) 451-5292.

Professional Development

41st Annual Underground Corrosion Short Course, May 14-16,
West Virginia University, Morgantown, W.Va. Course includes
basic, intermediate and advanced classes covering practical,
technical information about the causes of corrosion,
instrumentation, corrosion surveys, cathodic protection,
pipe coatings, water and wastewater and methods of corrosion
control. Contact: Angela Durham; (304) 293-3745.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

CALENDAR


   Jan. 10-11, 1996: Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board
Meeting, Las Vegas. Contact: Paula Alford, Nuclear Waste
Technical Review Board, 1100 Wilson Blvd., Suite 910,
Arlington, VA 22209; (703) 235-4473.

   Jan. 18, 1996: Central Interstate LLW Compact Commission
Meeting, New Orleans. Contact: Don Rabbe, Central Interstate
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Commission, 1033 O St., Suite
530, Lincoln, NE 68508; (402) 476-8247.

   Jan. 24-26, 1996: Meeting of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste, Rockville,
Md. Contact: Richard K. Major, Chief, Nuclear Waste Branch,
NRC; (301) 415-7366.

   Feb. 3-6, 1996: National Governors' Association, Fajardo,
Puerto Rico. Contact: National Governors' Association, 444
N. Capitol St., NW, Suite 250, Washington, DC 20001; (202)
624-5300.

   Feb. 5-6, 1996: Canadian Nuclear Association/Canadian
Nuclear Society Winter Seminar, Ottawa, Ontario. Contact:
Sylvie Caron, CNS Office, 144 Front St. West, Suite 725,
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2L7; (416) 977-7620, ext. 18; fax:
(416) 979-8356.

   Feb. 25-29, 1996: Waste Management '96, Tucson, Ariz.
Theme: HLW, LLW, Mixed Waste and Environmental Restoration -
Working Towards a Cleaner Environment. Contact: WM Symposia
Inc., 245 S. Plumer, Suite 19, Tucson, AZ 85719; (520) 624-
8573; fax: (520) 792-3993.

   Feb. 25-29, 1996: American Institute of Chemical
Engineers Spring National Meeting, New Orleans. Contact:
AIChExpress Service Center, 345 East 47th St., New York, NY
10017-2395; (800) 242-4363.

   March 10-14, 1996: International Conference on Nuclear
Engineering, New Orleans. Sponsored by the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers and the Japan Society of Mechanical
Engineers. Contact: Brian Bigalke, ASME, 345 E. 47th St.,
New York, NY 10017; (212) 705-7057; fax: (212) 705-7856.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>