
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-150</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B001-312</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024320 text/html 47105
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:14 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:29 GMT
Content-length: 46887
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> October 18, 1994 </p>

<p> <b>CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have long
occupied the attention of the American public. Congress has:
authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed at reducing or
preventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs and to regulate
the availability of illicit substances, appropriated billions of
dollars each year to federal agencies, provided oversight of
federal programs, and passed broad-based legislation to
coordinate programs as part of the war on drugs. </p>

<p> Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressing
the causes of substance abuse and addiction: </p>

<p> o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the driving
cause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk and
protective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, and
addiction. </p>

<p> o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by the White
House Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), are spread
among many federal agencies, whose authorization and
appropriations are the subject of action by numerous
congressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drug
demand reduction efforts alone involved the efforts of federal
agencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makes
coordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. </p>

<p> o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creation
of new domestic programs that target known risk and protective
factors in individuals and communities. The framework and
literature reviews presented in this report make clear that
multiple factors in individuals, groups, and substance abuse and
addiction can arise and be influenced by communities. Thus,
effective intervention requires prevention practitioners to
select from a variety of options, so they can target the specific
factors that are especially important for the particular
populations and communities they are addressing. This does not
mean that everything must be done at once nor that everything be
known in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakers
and practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, as
resources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps that
address a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. </p>

<p> o Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically
accepted standards for determining their success or failure.
While federal supply-side efforts yield hard data (e.g., amount
of illicit drugs confiscated, number of persons incarcerated), it
is much more difficult to demonstrate and quantify the impact of
a domestic program designed, in part or in whole, to prevent drug
abuse. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporated
into prevention programs, a critical component of success is
careful, rigorous evaluation. Answering &quot;what works?&quot;
is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. </p>

<p> This chapter addresses some of the policy issues brought to
the Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA's) attention during
the course of this assessment, and possible options for
congressional action. The issues and options are broken into four
broad categories: federal focus and prevention program structure,
research needs, community activity settings, and availability.
Given the broad nature of federal antidrug efforts, many
important issues relating to federal antidrug efforts remain
beyond the scope of this report. Such topics include drug
treatment, interdiction and enforcement, and drug legalization. </p>

<p> The order in which the issues and options are presented does
not imply priority. Moreover, the options presented under each
policy question are intended as a short menu from which Congress
can choose one or more options for consideration and
implementation, and they are not necessarily mutually exclusive. </p>

<p> FEDERAL FOCUS AND PREVENTION PROGRAM STRUCTURE </p>

<p> Supply vs. Demand Reduction </p>

<p> The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primary
focus the eradication of the supply of drugs. The federal
government currently spends over $12 billion annually on antidrug
efforts, with approximately two-thirds of this amount supporting
drug interdiction and law enforcement activities, and the
remainder supporting demand- side activities, such as drug
treatment, research, and prevention programs. While ONDCP's most
recent National Drug Control Strategy argued for a slightly
increased percentage of funds for demand-side reduction, the
larger percentage of funds remain devoted to supply-side efforts.
Congress could decide that existing levels of effort and program
approaches in interdiction may need to be continued for a longer
period of time before they can succeed in reducing the
production, distribution, and local availability of illicit
substances. Congress could direct that interdiction efforts, and
the balance between supply and demand efforts, continue on the
same track. </p>

<p> If Congress decided to increase federal efforts in demand
reduction efforts, it could adopt any of three methods: 1)
increase appropriations for treatment and prevention programs; 2)
redirect some of the interdiction funds to increase support for
treatment and prevention programs; or 3) require that assets
forfeited in drug seizures be increasingly used to support
treatment and prevention programs. If Congress chose to simply
increase appropriations for additional treatment and prevention
programs, this option would require raising the current level of
federal spending for drug control efforts at a time when the
federal deficit is a key concern. Since costly interdiction and
incarceration programs have not eliminated either the supply of
illicit substances or the demand for and use of such substances,
Congress could decide to increase appropriations for treatment
and prevention programs by reallocating funds currently spent in
drug interdiction and law enforcement activities; this would mean
a drop in supply-side efforts such as drug interdiction and law
enforcement activities. The reallocation of assets forfeited in
drug seizures to treatment and prevention programs, if done
together with closer coordination of local antidrug efforts among
law enforcement and treatment and prevention practitioners, may
be an attractive small step. Congress could direct that ONDCP
monitor the reallocation of such assets, to ensure the flow of
funds to programs that directly focus on substance abuse and
addiction and, programs that do not directly address substance
abuse and addiction but that target risk and protective factors
known to be associated with abuse and addiction. </p>

<p> Many stakeholders agree that the federal antidrug effort
should be more focused on treatment and prevention. Widespread
disagreement exists, however, as to whether such additional
treatment and prevention efforts should be created at the expense
of, or in addition to, current supply-side efforts. </p>

<p> Structure of ONDCP </p>

<p> Since its creation in 1988, ONDCP has served as the most
visible federal entity in the war on drugs. The Director, the
so-called drug czar, has the opportunity to galvanize public
attention on federal antidrug efforts, and to propose and
advocate policies within the White House. ONDCP's effectiveness
is limited, however, both in its statute and through its
operation as a White House office. Congress could choose to
reauthorize ONDCP, and in so doing maintain or alter its mission
and authority; or allow ONDCP to expire. </p>

<p> If Congress chooses to reauthorize ONDCP, a number of options
exist for altering its mission. Congress could: </p>

<p> o Direct ONDCP to address the full range of the most harmful
abusable substances, including alcohol, tobacco, and inhalants.
Although federally funded prevention programs address the range
of abusable substances, the statute creating ONDCP emphasized
illicit substances. As a result, ONDCP has historically provided
limited attention on abusable substances that have been
associated with higher levels of death and injury than illicit
drugs. More recently, ONDCP increased the focus in its National
Drug Control Strategy on the illicit use of alcohol and tobacco
by minors because of the extensive damage to the health and
safety of minors, resulting from the use and abuse of these
substances. This approach could be enhanced through congressional
authorization. </p>

<p> o Alter ONDCP's leadership structure. ONDCP by statute has a
Deputy Director of Supply Reduction and a Deputy Director for
Demand Reduction. This structure has, in part, resulted in an
ongoing public policy debate regarding the overall federal focus
on antidrug efforts, with supply-side and demand-side reduction
efforts seen by some as philosophically incompatible (see
discussion on supply versus demand reduction earlier in this
chapter). By creating an alternative structure, ONDCP may be
encouraged to adopt programs that more closely link various
elements of the antidrug strategy (e.g., a focus on drug
availability could link current supply-side elements that target
physical availability of a drug with current demand-side efforts
that focus on economic and social availability, as discussed in
chapter 4). Despite the advantages that may result from a new
organizational structure, the simplicity of the current structure
makes it easier to provide a sharper focus on supply and demand
elements of the National Drug Control Strategy. </p>

<p> o Give ONDCP increased authority over federal agency antidrug
programs. Although ONDCP is charged with leading a war on drugs,
its authority is limited to a coordinating function. Congress
could provide the Director of ONDCP with specific authority over
certain elements of various federal programs, or with additional
authority over federal agency budget proposals. Such actions
would give the drug czar more substantive authority to direct the
war on drugs, but would likely be viewed by some federal agencies
as an unwarranted intrusion in agency matters. </p>

<p> o Mandate the size of ONDCP. Because it is part of the
Executive Office of the President, ONDCP is subject to increased
political manipulation by each administration. Recently, for
example, ONDCP took the largest personnel cut of any White House
office to meet President Clinton's pledge of a 25 percent
reduction in overall size of White House staff. While mandating a
specific size for ONDCP might lead to increased effectiveness for
the office, it would hamper White House efforts to control staff
size. </p>

<p> Alternatively, Congress could allow the authorization for
ONDCP to expire. While ONDCP has produced National Drug Control
Strategies that summarize and set policy for federal efforts, the
office lacks the authority to shape the antidrug policies of the
federal agencies. Coordination of antidrug efforts is difficult
at best when the number of relevant agencies is so large; since
antidrug policy involves many federal agencies, it might make
sense to disband ONDCP and rely on efforts by diverse federal
agencies to continue to address the many aspects of the drug
problem. Recent reductions in the size of the ONDCP staff, as a
part of the down-sizing of the White House staff, could make this
an opportune time to eliminate the office altogether. Terminating
ONDCP would, however, be viewed by many as federal abdication of
the war on drugs. </p>

<p> Structure of Federal Substance Abuse Prevention Programs </p>

<p> Federal efforts supporting substance abuse prevention
programs are housed at a number of agencies. Congress recently
reorganized the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
Administration (ADAMHA), splitting service-based components into
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) and research-based components--the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute on Mental Health
(NIMH)-- into the National Institutes of Health (NIH). More
recently, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has been renamed
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), which has
already expanded its title and mission to include prevention.
Congress could maintain the current structure if it determines
that substance abuse is a problem that has many aspects and
deserves to be addressed by many agencies and in many settings. </p>

<p> If Congress decided to create a more centralized structure,
it could enact legislation designating a single federal entity as
the chief agency for prevention efforts, or merge the components
of various agencies under one federal roof. Possibilities
include: </p>

<p> o Merging NIDA and NIAAA into a single National Institute on
Substance Abuse and Addiction. The use of multiple substances
(including alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, cocaine, and heroin) is
increasingly reported by researchers and practitioners. Indeed,
the gateway theory or hypothesis focuses on the progression in
the use of substances, beginning with alcohol and tobacco (which
are illegal for youth, but legal for adults) and moving to
marijuana, cocaine, and heroin. Since clinicians and researchers
have increasingly commented on the progression in substance use
and on the co-occurrence of the use of multiple substances, the
separation of the major federal research agencies into an alcohol
agency (NIAAA) and a drug agency (NIDA) is more and more
inconsistent with the shape of the problem. The Center for
Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) is an integrated substance
abuse agency that explicitly focuses on alcohol, tobacco, and
other drugs, and all state alcohol and drug abuse agencies are
now integrated or located in the same place. To facilitate more
integrated and coherent research on the range of abusable
substances, NIDA and NIAAA could be combined into a national
institute on substance abuse and addiction. Such a merger would
further integrate the federal research efforts in substance
abuse, but might be seen by some as downplaying the emphasis
given to illicit substances. </p>

<p> o Place CSAP in CDCP or in the Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA). CDCP could give the substance abuse
prevention field a solid base in the health and medical sciences,
especially in the tracking and prevention of diseases. HRSA could
give CSAP a broader health care environment to work within, which
includes Community Health Centers and the National Health Service
Corps. One disadvantage to the merging of CSAP into either of
these other health agencies is that it would emphasize the
medical aspects and interventions of drug prevention and downplay
the many nonmedical factors and interventions that are important
in the onset of substance use and abuse. Merger would also
present problems of moving people--CSAP is headquartered in
Rockville, Maryland, while CDCP is headquartered in Atlanta,
Georgia--and threaten the loss of identity that some proponents
of CSAP say is found in an agency that solely addresses substance
abuse and prevention. However, the fragmentation of the federal
effort on substance abuse prevention has been viewed by some as
extreme and counterproductive, and the efforts of ONDCP have not
succeeded in achieving coordination across departments. </p>

<p> o Merge federal substance abuse prevention efforts into a
single agency, such as CSAP. CSAP has been working
collaboratively with the staff in many other federal agencies,
and would be seen as a natural leader for this effort. In
addition, its recent efforts to begin to develop standards of
practice for substance abuse and addiction prevention programs
could be continued and more effectively infused into the
components of programs currently in other agencies and
departments. </p>

<p> Evaluation of Prevention Programs </p>

<p> Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically accepted
standards for determining their success or failure. Most
evaluations focus on the processes used in formulating and
implementing a prevention program (e.g., who was involved, what
type of program was used) and outcome evaluation (e.g., how many
people were part of the program, how the program was replicated).
Congress could allow the current level of process and outcome
evaluation related to substance abuse prevention programs to
continue. </p>

<p> If it chose to improve the quality of program evaluation,
Congress could direct NIDA and NIAAA, or CSAP to design, lead,
and support a multiyear national process (involving
representatives of other federal agencies and of outside
organizations) to forge consensus on standardized definitions and
outcome measures, using technical reviews, consensus-forming
techniques, and technical assistance monographs. These
definitions and measures could include substance use, heavy
drinking, substance abuse, substance addiction or dependency, and
related behavioral problems such as school truancy, unemployment,
delinquent and criminal behaviors, and the like. CSAP, NIDA,
NIAAA, the Department of Education (DOE), and other federal
agencies could be required to increase funding and technical
assistance for process and outcome evaluations through grants and
contracts. CSAP could focus on process evaluations that may
assist program managers throughout the course of a program. NIDA
and NIAA could focus on outcome evaluations that are more
rigorously designed and conducted by individuals who are
independent of the programs being evaluated. DoE could require
both process and outcome evaluations by states and by schools,
using Drug-Free School monies. NIDA, NIAAA, or CSAP could be
directed to provide incentives for researchers and programs to
participate in a national program database, using consistent
definitions and including data from multiple evaluations. The
creation of such a database would allow researchers to extend
their own analyses by tapping into data from other program sites
and populations that have used consistent definitions and
measures. </p>

<p> States could be required by legislation to use a portion of
their 20 percent prevention set-asides under the Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Block Grant program and a portion of their Drug- Free
Schools funds for evaluation of substance abuse prevention
programs. Since evaluations of prevention programs can be
expensive, Congress could consider increasing block grant funding
levels to allow increases in evaluation studies without requiring
decreases in programs. If such an option were enacted, Congress
could mandate that evaluations be conducted by independent
bodies, such as university-based researchers, rather than by
state government agencies that have vested interests in
demonstrating program effectiveness. </p>

<p> RESEARCH NEEDS </p>

<p> Data Collection </p>

<p> The National Household Survey and the National Survey of High
School Seniors have developed credibility over the years for
their regular reporting of substance use in households and high
schools. These surveys could be allowed to continue, with no
substantial changes in the cost, frequency of data collection,
focus on target groups, analysis, and sharing of the database. </p>

<p> Because of the methodology employed, national surveys miss or
underreport various populations. Much of the data now collected
focuses on substance use (e.g., any use within the past 30 days
or anytime in a lifetime), rather than on more intense substance
abuse and addiction. In addition, questions are
substance-specific, and less oriented to the use and abuse of
multiple substances. Such polydrug users and abusers are
increasingly being identified by researchers and clinicians.
While substance use is a key precondition to later abuse and
addiction, most individuals who use illicit substances do not go
on to addiction. Thus, an important question for the development
of prevention policies and programs is: What are the
characteristics of individuals who abuse and become addicted to
substances, and how do they make the transition from use to abuse
and addiction? </p>

<p> If Congress felt that current data do not provide adequate
information, it could direct that the Household and High School
Surveys be conducted less intensely or less frequently. The
expense of these surveys, especially the National Household
Survey, is high. In 1992, the High School Survey cost about $3
million, and the Household Survey costover $12 million. Spending
could be reduced if the survey data were compiled less intensely
(e.g., with fewer questions or from a smaller sample) or less
frequently. Alternatively, Congress could direct NIDA to develop
and support survey methodology that reaches populations missed by
current surveys (notably the homeless, school dropouts, and
residents of some inner-city and rural areas), or through
legislation, create a mechanism, comparable to the release of
economic indicators, for the regular and nonpolitical release of
survey data. Data could then be released through a well-defined
process that includes careful and timely technical reviews for
compliance with high standards of data collection and analysis,
rather than being subjected to bureaucratic or political reviews
that may delay the release of or bias the data. </p>

<p> Individual Risk and Protective Factors </p>

<p> A substantial body of research has been developed regarding
potential risk and protective factors for children and
adolescents. A variety of theories has been developed concerning
how many and which risk factors increase the chances for a child
or adolescent to first use alcohol or other drugs. Historically,
one of the flaws with much of the risk and protective factor
research has been that studies analyzed one factor in isolation
from all others. Increasingly though, researchers are examining a
wider variety of factors among different populations, as well as
using more complex data analysis procedures. Even so,
sophisticated multifactor research studies are still in the
minority. </p>

<p> While a substantial amount of risk and protective factor
research has focused on children and adolescents, not as much is
known about factors among other populations. Recent research has
led to interest in the possibility of further analyses in
selected populations and/or selected risk or protective factors.
Some examples: </p>

<p> o Adults. Additional research in this area could result in
learning more about factors associated with long-term drug abuse
and addiction as well as the importance of factors more often
found in adult populations (e.g., effects of aging, death of a
spouse or child, divorce). Data from a recent National Household
Survey on Drug Abuse show that individuals aged 18 to 25, and 26
to 34, respectively, have the two highest reported rates for
heavy drinking and smoking, past month use of cocaine, crack,
marijuana and hashish, or psychotherapeutic drugs. Additionally,
gender, racial, and ethnic substance use differences appear
within the adult population. Some research has indicated that
women who drink heavily do so several years later than men,
although the reasons for this remain unclear. Researchers also
indicate that black men who drink heavily, do so in their late
twenties and early thirties, in contrast to white men whose
drinking peaks at age 15 to early twenties. Increased research on
the adult population could be useful in developing appropriate
substance abuse prevention and treatment programs for adults. </p>

<p> o Race and Ethnicity. The biological and genetic substance
abuse studies completed on different racial and ethnic groups
have been few in number, mostly limited to alcohol, and
inconclusive. While race and ethnicity have not been shown to be
biological or genetic predictors for substance use, abuse, or
addiction, certain risk factors appear to be unique for specific
cultures. To date, however, the racial and ethnic categories used
in many large-scale studies are so broad that many researchers
consider them useless. Increased federal funding for studies of
specific subpopulations living in geographically different areas
(e.g., urban versus rural, reservation versus nonreservation)
will provide much needed baseline data on which to plan,
implement, and evaluate appropriate substance abuse services. </p>

<p> o Poverty. Disagreement exists on the appropriate definition
of poverty and its exact relationship to substance abuse. While
few researchers deny that the daily stresses associated with
living in chronic poverty probably contribute to substance abuse,
poverty is certainly not the only factor, or perhaps even the
most important. There are after all, more individuals living in
poverty who do not abuse substances than who do. However, the
consequences of substance abuse appear to be worse in chronically
poor areas. Additional research to study the complex relationship
between poverty and substance abuse could provide substance abuse
practitioners with a framework from which to build programs most
suitable for the special needs of chronically poor areas. </p>

<p> Congress can, through its reauthorization and oversight
powers, monitor the amount and scope of risk and protective
factor research that is being conducted, and redirect federal
efforts toward more extensive multifactor research and analysis,
as appropriate. Such focus could include factors other than
substance use that may contribute to later abuse and addiction,
such as other problem behaviors, availability, marketing,
psychological factors, social norms in communities, and
subcultures. The increased use of ethnographers as part of a
multidisciplinary drug abuse prevention research teams could also
be encouraged. </p>

<p> Biomedical Research </p>

<p> Biomedical research on substance abuse helps explain the
acute and chronic biological effects of substances on the brain
and other organs, and also points to appropriate short- and
long-term medical treatments for substance abuse. This in turn
helps treatment providers understand treatment outcomes and
relapse rates for long-term abusers. Most federally supported
biomedical research is administered by the 17 institutes that
comprise the NIH. With the passage of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse,
and Mental Health Administration Reorganization Act of 1992
(Public Law 102-321), NIDA and the NIAAA were moved to NIH.
Research targeting substance use, abuse, and addiction is
supported primarily by these two institutes, whose combined
appropriation level ($580.7 million in fiscal year 1994) is
approximately 5 percent of the NIH total. </p>

<p> Congress has historically increased annual appropriations for
biomedical research at NIH; if Congress continues this trend,
both NIDA and NIAAA annual appropriations will rise, although not
at the dramatic levels many scientists would like. If Congress
were to decide that substance abuse and addiction should command
more of the nation's biomedical research budget, it could
substantially raise appropriation levels for NIDA and NIAAA. Such
an action would allow increased levels of research in a number of
areas including: genetics; drug development; identification of
biological factors related to transitions from casual drug use to
abuse, addiction, and dependence; the pharmacology of multiple
drug use; environmental factors and their effect on individual
biological susceptibility; and the biological effects of drug use
and abuse on the development of children and adolescents. Given
budget realities, however, an increase in the funding levels
available for basic biomedical research could mean a decrease
somewhere else. </p>

<p> A number of budgetary pressures have recently slowed robust
NIH budget growth, including the need to fund disease- specific
research (e.g., acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), indirect
costs of research, and the increasing pressure to limit
discretionary spending. Some scientists identify stable budget
growth--as opposed to sporadic increases targeted at particular
topics--as most important for continued progress in research. In
fiscal year 1994, both NIDA and NIAAA received a 5.2 percent
increase in appropriations, following an Administration request
that would have raised NIDA's appropriation by less than 1
percent, and decreased NIAAA's appropriation by 1.6 percent.
Fluctuations in appropriation levels could impede the development
of scientific advances that are necessary to the creation of new
medications and therapies. </p>

<p> The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in its March 1994
report to Congress, Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue
Options, identified a reduction in funding for NIH research as
one of nearly 200 policy options. As noted by CBO, a reduction in
NIH funding could have adverse effects on biomedical research and
might cause some researchers to leave the field. NIH cannot
currently fund the majority of grants it approves; in addition,
funding is insufficient to support some important areas of
research. According to a 1992 General Accounting Office report on
Drug Abuse Research: Federal Funding and Future Needs, antidrug
research appears now to have a very modest role, with only about
4 percent of total drug strategy spending devoted to research and
development. </p>

<p> COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS </p>

<p> Substance abuse and addiction occur in communities around our
Nation. Those who believe that drug abuse and addiction are
closely related to social and economic problems argue that
antidrug programs should more directly address the risk and
protective factors that have been identified by researchers. Many
prevention program providers also argue that the most successful
programs are those that are more comprehensive in scope (i.e.,
tailored to address the many community settings in which drug
abuse can occur) rather than addressing one or two risk factors
in isolation. </p>

<p> In conducting this assessment, OTA surveyed literatures
addressing substance abuse and addiction in various community
settings--families and homes, schools and peers, workplaces, and
recreational settings (see ch. 8). The literature reviews
presented in this report make clear that substance abuse and
addiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors in
individuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effective
intervention ideally should be comprehensive, employing multiple
services and addressing the many factors that cause drug abuse
and addiction; and community-based, sensitive to and directed at
the needs of the local population. </p>

<p> Still, three problems arise in assessing policy options
related to community settings: </p>

<p> 1. There is the inherent difficulty in drawing a link between
many social services and their effect on drug abuse and
addiction. </p>

<p> 2. Since broad-based social services are provided through the
work of many federal agencies, further analysis (e.g., by ONDCP
or a congressionally enacted national commission) could identify
which federal agencies are best suited to implement the variety
of options that Congress may wish to employ. </p>

<p> 3. The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creation
of new domestic programs that target known risk and protective
factors in individuals and communities. </p>

<p> Schools and Peers </p>

<p> The primary focus of federal efforts at community-based drug
prevention is programs aimed at our nation's schoolchildren. In
fiscal year 1993, Congress appropriated $598 million to DOE under
the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986. The federal
government could continue to fund school-based prevention
programs, with a continued emphasis on prevention curricula and
evaluations that are limited to substance use prevention. The
likely limited effects on preventing abuse among high-risk youth
would continue. Other school-based prevention programs would
continue to be implemented sporadically, without significant
evaluation and with few or unknown effects. </p>

<p> If Congress decided that more rigorous evaluation of school-
based programs was called for, it could mandate DOE to spend a
set percent of its Drug Free Schools monies on research and
evaluation of prevention curricula and the dissemination of
findings. A special initiative could be launched to test
prevention curricula for high-risk youth and for different racial
and ethnic groups, since most of the research and evaluation to
date has been based on samples of schools with middle income
white youth. Special expertise would need to be brought in, on
staff and as advisers, to assure the research and evaluation meet
high standards of methodological rigor. This could be achieved by
hiring staff with research and evaluation expertise, detailing
staff from the NIDA, setting up an interdepartmental advisory
group that guides and oversees a research and evaluation program,
or appropriating funds directly to NIDA (e.g., as a set- aside
from the Drug-Free Schools appropriation) to support such a
research and evaluation program. Also, easier access to
information about the many drug prevention curricula that exist
could help school personnel select curricula that fit their
needs. DOE could be directed to prepare and disseminate more
widely information about the purposes, design, methods, resources
required, and evaluations (if any) of drug prevention curricula
currently available, and to inform school personnel of the
limitations of school- based curriculum approaches and the
growing availability of supplementary and alternative approaches.
If Congress decided that Drug-Free Schools funds should be used
more widely to target risk and protective factors found in
school-aged populations, it could require DOE to set aside a
certain percentage of Drug-Free Schools funds for a variety of
activities that target high-risk youths and to work individually
with them and their families. Such targeting could enhance
activities already carried out under the Drug- Free Schools Act
(e.g., Drug Abuse Resistance Education, replication of successful
programs, local programs for high- risk youth, school personnel
training). However, congressional mandates could reduce state and
local flexibility in tailoring programs best suited to local
needs, and could increase administrative costs associated with
implementing the Drug-Free Schools Act. </p>

<p> In addition to Drug-Free Schools programs, comprehensive
primary health, mental health, and social services can be
provided in many school-based clinics. School-based clinics can
be supported by a variety of federal funding sources, including
Medicaid, the Maternal and Child Health Block Grant, Drug-Free
Schools, and Special Education funds. DOE and the Department of
Health and Human Services could be encouraged or directed to
collaborate on the support of such services in schools. </p>

<p> Since researchers have found that peers and other social
influences strongly affect substance use, programs that
strengthen total school environments may be potent in preventing
substance use and abuse. Models that involve school
restructuring, parent involvement, mental health components, and
elevated expectations for achievement have been developed and are
being tested. The hypothesis is that engaging high-risk youth in
positive educational environments and experiences can profoundly
influence their behaviors for the better. Congress could expand
research on the effects of restructuring of school environments
on substance abuse by appropriating funds for extensive large-
scale longitudinal research that could be supported by DOE, NIDA,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), and other
federal agencies that conduct and support research on youth
outcomes. </p>

<p> Homes and Families </p>

<p> Congress appropriates funds for federal programs addressing
substance abuse and addiction in homes and families, which are
supported by the HUD and HHS' Administration on Children, Youth,
and Families (ACYF) and CSAP. Also relevant to the health and
welfare of families are health funding programs (e.g., Medicaid
and Medicare) and welfare programs (e.g., Aid to Families with
Dependent Children). Through its oversight, authorization, and
appropriations of these programs, and others that impact on the
quality of family life, Congress can support a number of
preventive interventions that are both comprehensive and
intensive. Programs can be initiated by almost any local service
or support setting, such as health care, school, family
preservation, juvenile justice, and housing authority, with
coordination with other services and settings. Such interventions
can include health care, counseling, intensive in-home services,
neighborhood patrols, clean sweeps of public housing, and family
and parent education for all family members. </p>

<p> Because substance abuse and other related problems can be
influenced by so many family factors and programs, a long- term
effort to identify family needs may be desired. Congress could
enact legislation to create a Presidential commission or task
force to formulate a national family policy and create a
blueprint for long-term national efforts to shore up the many
families, rich and poor, that would benefit from more guidance,
skills, and support. Such a national policy could be framed in
the near-term, based on the many studies and program
interventions that have been documented so far. Alternatively, it
could be formulated later, after additional research and program
interventions have been supported and major gaps in knowledge
have been filled. </p>

<p> Workplaces </p>

<p> Congress could allow current activities that focus on
providing workplace employees with information, development of
drug-free workplace policies, drug testing, and employee
assistance programs to continue. These programs are scattered
among many federal agencies, with some leadership by the
Department of Labor (DOL), CSAP, and the Office of Management and
Budget. </p>

<p> If Congress chose to increase efforts in workplace antidrug
prevention, it could mandate that federal agencies increase the
information that is made available to workplaces about drug-free
workplace programs and policies. For example, DOL is implementing
an electronic database, with information about workplace
substance abuse treatment, prevention, and other control programs
and research. Such a database, if properly supported, publicized,
and accessed by businesses and unions, could help workplaces
identify and implement approaches that can meet their needs in
affordable ways. </p>

<p> Recreational and Community Settings </p>

<p> Congress currently funds community partnership demonstration
programs administered by CSAP. These partnerships foster
public/private sector partnerships that create and preserve
comprehensive strategies for addressing substance abuse
prevention within communities. A major advantage of these
partnerships is the ability to create programs that address
substance abuse prevention within individual communities. As with
other drug prevention programs, however, evaluation has generally
been limited. Congress could, through appropriations and
authorization, direct CSAP to expand the provision of technical
assistance and expand the national process and outcome evaluation
of partnerships. More site visits would be possible, with
additional resources for national and regional workshops,
conferences, and training. </p>

<p> Other federal activities in this area remain limited and
largely uncoordinated. Major current programs are administered by
the Department of Agriculture's Cooperative Extension Service
(with its 4-H program, which is refocusing its efforts on
high-risk youth) and CSAP (through some of its High Risk Youth
Demonstration Grants). The President's Council on Physical
Fitness addresses one aspect of recreational and leisure
activities--that is, physical fitness. If Congress decided to
provide more information and support more research on
recreational, leisure, and other youth development programs, an
information clearinghouse could be established to share
information about federal and non-federal recreational, leisure,
and youth development activities. The purpose would be to help
communities and program developers identify and develop such
programs especially for youth at risk of drug use and abuse. The
clearinghouse could be managed in-house or under contract, and
could be located in the Cooperative Extension Service (which is
now attempting to redirect 4-H programs to address high-risk
youth); ACYF; or CSAP (perhaps in the existing National Center
for Alcohol and Drug Information, a federally sponsored
clearinghouse). </p>

<p> The dearth of recreational places, especially in highly
developed urban areas, can be remedied by an enhanced national
effort to acquire land and facilities for park and recreation
purposes. Such an effort could focus especially, but not
exclusively, on rural and inner city areas where low property
values make the acquisition of such properties financially
attractive as long-term investments in the future development and
enrichment of communities. Such a national effort could be
comparable in scope and long-termcommitment to the development of
the national park system, but could contribute to a broader
national system of parks owned and managed by the federal, state,
and local governments specifically for more intense human uses.
Such a system could focus on the developmental needs of youth,
especially in urban areas, where usable open spaces are often in
short supply. Congress could designate a lead federal agency for
such an effort (e.g., Department of Interior or HUD), and could
acquire properties outright or by encouraging and subsidizing the
acquisition of properties by nonprofit groups and by state and
local governments. The latter approach would require less federal
funding and administration. Possible sources of land and
facilities include: closed military bases, holdings of the
Resolution Trust Corporation, assets forfeited through drug
seizures, individual gifts and bequests, and corporate and
philanthropic gifts. </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY </p>

<p> The primary current focus of federal antidrug efforts is
stemming the physical supply of illicit drugs. A multitude of
policy issues arise in addressing drug availability, most of
which are beyond the scope of this report. The discussion in
chapter 4, however, touches on two availability issues currently
on the congressional agenda. </p>

<p> Taxes </p>

<p> The federal government currently levies excise taxes on
alcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on all
types of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their current
levels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack, 12-ounce cans)
carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of wine
carries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettes
carries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. If Congress takes no
action, current federal levies will remain in effect. </p>

<p> Congress could enact legislation raising the federal excise
tax on a variety of tobacco and alcohol products if it sought to
decrease consumption of such products, to recover estimated
societal costs (i.e., health costs, injury, </p>

<p> death) resulting from consumption of such products, or to
raise revenue for federal spending programs. Such tax hikes could
be targeted at all tobacco and alcohol products, or at selected
products in these industries. Advocates of increased excise taxes
have argued that abuse of and addiction to tobacco and alcohol
products cost the United States more than any illicit substance;
that increased taxes would make such products less economically
affordable and hence less used and abused; that increased taxes
could be used to pay for financial damages arising from the use
of such products; and that such excise taxes, which have
increased less rapidly than the general rate of inflation, should
be adjusted upward to reflect inflation. Opponents of taxation
have argued that excise taxes are regressive in that they target
primarily low- and middle- income taxpayers, that increased taxes
would result in significant losses to major companies that are
important players in the American economy, and that targeting
so-called sin taxes unfairly singles out millions of Americans
who use tobacco and alcohol products. </p>

<p> Alcohol Labeling </p>

<p> Federal law currently requires that each alcoholic beverage
container bear a specific warning statement that is conspicuously
and prominently located (27 USC 215). This requirement was
enacted by Congress in 1980. Both Congress and States have
authority regulating alcohol advertising. At least 35 states
regulate alcohol advertising, and self-policing by segments of
industry places some limits on advertising (e.g., the distilled
spirits industry code prohibits the advertising of liquor on
radio or television). </p>

<p> Congress has considered legislation that would require
warnings on all alcohol beverage advertising, both print and
electronic media. Congress could amend current alcohol labeling
law to require stricter labeling (e.g., multiple labels, rotating
labels, specific messages). Opponents of such action argue that
no significant relationship has been found between exposure of
individuals to alcoholic beverage advertising and/or labeling and
drinking behaviors. _ <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>