
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B15-54</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA027-000293-B029-181</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/14_pdr.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022652 text/html 21449
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:17:51 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 21277
Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:47:08 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
   <TITLE>14_pdr.html</TITLE>
   <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//SQ//DTD HTML 2.0 HoTMetaL + extensions//EN"> 
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">

<P ALIGN=CENTER><A HREF="image14.map"
name="/usr/ns-home/docs/www.bernaproducts.com/image14.map"><IMG ISMAP
SRC="image14.gif" WIDTH=468 HEIGHT=94 BORDER=0 ALIGN=middle></A></P>

<H2>VlVOTIF BERNA&reg; VACCINE Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a</H2>

<P><B>Description</B><BR>

Vivotif Berna&reg; (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a) is a live
attenuated vaccine for oral administration. The vaccine contains the
attenuated strain <I>Salmonella typhi</I> Ty21a. Vivotif Berna&reg;
Vaccine is manufactured by the Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute. The
vaccine strain is grown under controlled conditions in medium
containing a digest of bovine tissues, an acid digest of casein,
dextrose and galactose. The bacteria are collected by centrifugation,
mixed with a stabilizer containing lactose and amino acids, and
lyophilized. The lyophilized bacteria are filled into gelatin
capsules which are coated with an organic solution to render them
resistant to dissolution in stomach acid. The enteric-coated capsules
are then packaged in 4-capsule blisters for distribution. The
contents of each enteric-coated capsule are shown in Table 1.</P>

<P><B>Table I . Contents of one enteric-coated capsule of Vivotif
Berna&reg;</B></P>

<P><TABLE BORDER=2 CELLPADDING=1 WIDTH="100%">
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Viable <I>S. typhi</I> Ty21a -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>2-6 x 10(9) colony-forming units /
      </TD></TR>
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Non-viable <I>S. typhi</I> Ty21a -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>5-50 x 10(9) bacterial cells /
      </TD></TR>
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Sucrose -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>26--130 mg /
      </TD></TR>
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Ascorbic acid -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>1-5 mg /
      </TD></TR>
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Amino acid mixture -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>1.4--7 mg /
      </TD></TR>
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Lactose -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>100-180 mg /
      </TD></TR>
   <TR>
      <TD colstart="1">
         <P>Magnesium stearate -
      </TD><TD colstart="2">
         <P>3.6-4.4 mg /
      </TD></TR>
</TABLE></P>

<P><B>Clinical Pharmacology</B><BR>

<I>Salmonella typhi</I> is the etiological agent of typhoid fever, an
acute, febrile enteric disease. This vaccine will not afford
protection against species of Salmonella other than <I>Salmonella
typhi</I> or other bacteria that cause enteric disease There are
approximately 500 cases of typhoid fever per year diagnosed in the
United States (1). In 62% of these patients (statistics from
1977-1979) the disease was acquired outside of the United States
while in 38% of the patients the disease was acquired within the
United States (2). Of the disease acquired during foreign travel 50%
of the cases were contracted in Mexico, 20% in Asian countries and
15% in India. The majority of the remaining cases were acquired in
the Caribbean basin, South and Central America, North Africa, and
Southern Europe (2). Typhoid fever is considered to be endemic in
most areas of Central and South America, North and Central Africa,
Southeast Asia and the Indian Subcontinent (3). Of the disease
acquired in the United States, 23% of the cases were associated with
typhoid carriers, 24% were due to food outbreaks, 23% were associated
with the ingestion of contaminated food or water, 6% due to household
contact with an infected person and 4% following exposure to <I>S.
typhi</I> in a laboratory setting. The majority of typhoid cases
respond favorably to antibiotic therapy. However, the emergence of
chloramphenicol or ampicillin-resistant strains has greatly
complicated therapy. Even with appropriate antibiotic therapy there
were 7 deaths among 901 acute typhoid cases reported in the United
States from 1977-1979 2. Approximately 3-5% of acute typhoid cases
result in the development of a chronic carrier state (4). These non
symptomatic carriers are the natural reservoir for <I>S. typhi</I>
and can serve to maintain the disease in its endemic state or to
directly infect individuals (2). Eradication of the carrier state by
antibiotic therapy has been unsuccessful.(5)</P>

<P>Virulent strains of <I>S. typhi</I> upon ingestion are able to
pass through the stomach acid barrier, colonize the intestinal tract,
penetrate the lumen and enter the lymphatic system and blood stream,
thereby causing disease. One possible mechanism by which disease may
be prevented is by evoking a local immune response in the intestinal
tract . Such local immunity may be induced by oral ingestion of a
live attenuated strain of <I>S. typhi</I> undergoing an aborted
infection.</P>

<P>The ability of <I>S. typhi</I> to cause disease and to induce a
protective immune response is dependent upon the bacteria possessing
a complete lipopolysaccharide(6),(7). The <I>S. typhi</I> Ty21a
vaccine strain, by virtue of a reduction in enzymes essential for
lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, is restricted in its ability to
produce complete lipopolysaccharide (8),(9). However, a sufficient
quantity of complete lipopolysaccharide is synthesized to evoke a
protective immune response. Despite low levels of lipopolysaccharide
synthesis, the cells lyse before regaining a virulent phenotype due
to the intracellular build-up of intermediates during
lipopolysaccharide synthesis (5),(8),(9).</P>

<P>The efficacy of the <I>S. typhi</I> Ty21a strain has been
evaluated in a series of double-blind field trials. The first trial
was performed in Alexandria, Egypt with a study population of 32,388
children aged 6 to 7 years. Three doses of vaccine, in the form of a
freshly reconstituted suspension administered after ingestion of 1 g
of bicarbonate, were given on alternate days. Immunization resulted
in a 95% decrease in the incidence of typhoid fever over a 3-year
period of surveillance (5),(10).</P>

<P>A series of field trials were subsequently performed in Santiago,
Chile to evaluate efficacy when the vaccine strain was administered
in the form of an acid resistant enteric-coated capsule. The initial
trial involved 91,954 school-aged children, and compared 1 or 2 doses
of vaccine given one week apart. After 33 months of surveillance
vaccine efficacy was 21% for the single dose schedule and 54% for the
2-dose schedule.(11) A further field trial was performed in Santiago,
Chile involving 109,594 school aged children.(12) Three doses of
enteric-coated capsules were administered either on alternate days
(short immunization schedule) or 21 days apart (long immunization
schedule). Following 36 months of surveillance vaccination resulted
in a 67% decrease in the incidence of typhoid fever in the short
immunization schedule group and a 49% reduction in the long
immunization schedule group. After 48 months of surveillance, the
short immunization schedule resulted in a 68% decrease in typhoid
fever.(13) An undiminished level of protection was observed during
the fifth year of surveillance. A field trial was next conducted in
Santiago, Chile to determine the relative efficacy of 2,3 and 4 doses
of enteric-coated vaccine administered on alternate days to
school-aged children. Relative vaccine efficacy as determined by
comparison of disease incidence within the three vaccinated groups
was highest for the four dose regimen. An additional trial held to
determine vaccine efficacy was conducted in Plaju, Indonesia
involving 22,001 individuals approximately 3 to 50 years of age. Due
to logistical considerations three doses of enteric-coated capsules
were administered at weekly intervals, a schedule known to provide
suboptimal protection.(12) After two years of surveillance, vaccine
efficacy for all age groups was 41%. It should be noted that vaccine
efficacy was 36% for subjects 3 to 14 years of age and 60% for those
15 to 44 years of age.</P>

<P>At present, the precise mechanism(s) by which Vivotif Berna&reg;
Vaccine confers protection against typhoid fever is unknown. However,
it is known that immunization of adult subjects can elicit a humoral
anti-<I>S. typhi</I> LPS antibody response. Taking advantage of this
fact, the seroconversion rate was compared between adults living in
an endemic area (Chile) and non-endemic areas (United States and
Switzerland) after the ingestion of 3 doses of vaccine. Comparable
seroconversion rates were seen between these groups. Other studies in
North American volunteers have shown that the Ty21a strain is capable
of providing significant protection to an experimental challenge of
<I>S. typhi</I>.</P>

<P>Because of the very low incidence of typhoid fever in United
States citizens, efficacy studies are not currently feasible in this
population. However, the above observations support the expectation
that Vivotif Berna&reg; will provide protection to recipients from
non-typhoid endemic areas such as the United States.</P>

<P><B>Indications and Usage Vivotif Berna&reg; </B><BR>

Vaccine is indicated for immunization of adults and children greater
than 6 years of age against disease caused by <I>Salmonella
typhi</I>. Results from clinical studies indicate that adults and
children greater than 6 years of age may be protected against typhoid
fever following the oral ingestion of 4 doses of Vivotif Berna&reg;
Vaccine. Immunization (ingestion of all 4 doses of Vivotif Berna&reg;
Vaccine) should be completed at least 1 week prior to potential
exposure to <I>S. typhi</I>.</P>

<P>Routine immunization against typhoid fever is not recommended in
the United States of America. Selective immunization against typhoid
fever is recommended under the following circumstances 1) expected
intimate exposure to a house-hold contact with typhoid fever, 2)
travelers to areas of the world with a risk of exposure to typhoid
fever, and 3) workers in microbiology laboratories with expected
frequent contact with <I>S. typhi</I>.(14)</P>

<P>Not all recipients of Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine will be fully
protected against typhoid fever. Travelers should take all necessary
precautions to avoid contact or ingestion of potentially contaminated
food or water sources. There is no evidence to support the use of
typhoid vaccine to control common source outbreaks, disease following
natural disasters or in persons attending rural summer camps.</P>

<P>Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine will not afford protection against
enteric microorganisms other than <I>S. typhi</I>. An optimal booster
dose has not yet been established. However, it is recommended that a
booster dose consisting of 4 vaccine capsules taken on alternate days
be given every 5 years under conditions of repeated or continued
exposure to typhoid fever (see Dosage and Administration section).
</P>

<P>Typhoid fever continues to be an important disease in many parts
of the world. Travelers entering such areas are at risk to
contracting typhoid fever following the ingestion of contaminated
food or water. Parenterally administered typhoid vaccine has been
shown to be effective at reducing the incidence of disease in such
endemic areas. However, immunization with such vaccines is frequently
accompanied by adverse reactions such as pain and/or swelling at the
injection site, fever, malaise, and headache.</P>

<P><B>Contraindications</B><BR>

Hypersensitivity to any component of the vaccine or the
enteric-coated capsule.</P>

<P>Safety of the vaccine has not been demonstrated in persons
deficient in their ability to mount a humoral or cell-mediated immune
response, due to either a congenital or acquired immunodeficient
state including treatment with immunosuppressive or antimitotic
drugs. The vaccine should not be administered to these persons
regardless of benefits.</P>

<P><B>Warnings </B><BR>

Vivotif Berna&reg; (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a) is not to be
taken during an acute febrile illness or in the face of acute
gastrointestinal illness. Postpone taking the vaccine if persistent
diarrhea or vomiting is occurring (see General Precautions).</P>

<P><B>Precautions</B><BR>

<B>General:</B> The vaccine should not be administered to persons
during an acute febrile illness or acute gastrointestinal illness.
The vaccine should not be administered to individuals receiving
sulfonamides and antibiotics since these agents may be active against
the vaccine strain and prevent a sufficient degree of multiplication
to occur in order to induce a protective immune response. The vaccine
should not be administered to persons with a known hypersensitivity
to any vaccine component or medium component (see Description ).</P>

<P><B>Information for Patients:</B> It is essential that all 4 doses
of vaccine be taken at the prescribed alternate day interval to
obtain a maximal protective immune response. Vaccine potency is
dependent upon storage under refrigeration (between 2&#176;C and
8&#176;C [35.6&#176;F - 46.4&#176;F]). The vaccine should be stored
under refrigeration at all times. It is essential to replace unused
vaccine in the refrigerator between doses. The vaccine capsule should
be swallowed approximately one hour before a meal with a cold or
lukewarm (temperature not to exceed body temperature. eg, 37&#176;C
[98.6&#176;F] ) drink. Care should be taken not to chew the vaccine
capsule. The vaccine capsule should be swallowed as soon after
placing in the mouth as possible.</P>

<P><B>Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:
</B>Long-term studies in animals with Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine have
not been performed to evaluate carcinogenic potential, mutagenic
potential or impairment of fertility.</P>

<P><B>Pregnancy</B></P>

<P><B>Category C</B><BR>

Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with Vivotif
Berna&reg; Vaccine. It is not known whether Vivotif Berna&reg;
Vaccine can cause fetal harm when administered to pregnant women or
can affect reproduction capacity. Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine should
be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.</P>

<P><B>Nursing Mothers</B><BR>

There is no data to warrant the use of this product in nursing
mothers. It is not known if Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine is excreted in
human milk.</P>

<P><B>Pediatric Use</B><BR>

The safety and efficacy of Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine has not been
established in children under 6 years of age. This product is
therefore not recommended for use in children under 6 years of age.
</P>

<P><B>Adverse Reactions</B><BR>

Several lots of Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine have been evaluated in
several field trials both in adults and in school-aged children.
Objectively monitored side effects, e.g., abdominal pain, diarrhea,
vomiting, fever, headache and skin rash, did not occur at a
statistically higher frequency in the vaccinated group as compared to
a placebo group.(11) Post marketing surveillance outside of the
United States has found that side effects are infrequent, transient,
and resolve of their own accord. Reported adverse reactions include
nausea, abdominal cramps, vomiting, skin rash or urticaria on the
trunk and/or extremities.</P>

<P><B>Overdosage </B><BR>

Five to 8 doses of Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine containing between 3-10
x 10(12) viable vaccine organisms were administered to 155 healthy
adult males. This dosage was, at a minimum, 5-fold higher than the
currently recommended dose. No significant reactions, e.g., vomiting,
acute abdominal distress or fever, were observed. At the recommended
dosage, the<I> S. typhi </I>Ty21a vaccine strain is not excreted in
the feces. However, clinical studies in volunteers have shown that
overdosing can increase the possibility of shedding the <I>S.
typhi</I> Ty21a vaccine strain in the feces.(15)</P>

<P><B>Dosage and Administration</B><BR>

The blister containing the vaccine capsules should be inspected to
ensure that the foil seal and capsules are intact.</P>

<P>One capsule is to be swallowed approximately 1 hour before a meal
with a cold or lukewarm (temperature not to exceed body temperature,
e.g., 37&#176;C [98.6&#176;F] ) drink on alternate days, e.g., days
1, 3, 5 and 7. The vaccine capsule should not be chewed and should be
swallowed as soon after placing in the mouth as possible. A complete
immunization schedule is the ingestion of 4 vaccine capsules as
described above. Unless a complete immunization schedule is followed,
an optimum immune response may not be achieved. Not all recipients of
Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine will be fully protected against typhoid
fever. Travelers should take all necessary precautions to avoid
contact or ingestion of potentially contaminated food or water.</P>

<P><B>Booster Use </B><BR>

The optimum booster schedule for Vivotif Berna&reg; has not been
determined. Efficacy has been shown to persist for at least 5 years.
Further, there is no experience with Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine as a
booster in persons previously immunized with parenteral typhoid
vaccine. Despite these limitations it is recommended that booster
dose consisting of four vaccine capsules taken on alternate days be
given every 5 years under conditions of repeated or continued
exposure to typhoid fever.</P>

<P><B>How Supplied </B><BR>

A single foil blister contains 4 doses of vaccine in a single
package.</P>

<P><B>Storage</B><BR>

Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine is not stable when exposed to ambient
temperatures, Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine should therefore be shipped
and stored between 2&#176;C and 8&#176;C (35.6-46.4&#176;F). Each
package of vaccine shows an expiration date. This expiration date is
valid only if the product has been maintained at 2&#176;C 8&#176;C
(35.6-46.4&#176;F). Vivotif Berna&reg; Vaccine is manufactured by
Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute, Berne, Switzerland, and
distributed by Berna Products, Corp., Coral Gables, FL 33134.</P>

<P><B>References</B><BR>

(1). Centers for Disease Control. Annual summary 1980: reported
morbidity and mortality in the United States. MMWR.29: 12- 117,1981.
(2). Taylor. D. N., R.A. Pollard, P.A. Blake. Typhoid in the United
States and the Risk to the International Traveler J. Infect. Dis.148:
599-602,1983. (3). Levine, M. M., R. E. Black, C. Lanata, and the
Chilean Typhoid Committee. Precise estimation of the numbers of
chronic carriers of <I>Salmonella typhi</I> in Santiago, Chile, an
endemic area. J. Infect. Dis.146: 724-726,1982. (4). Ames, WR., M.
Robbins. Age and sex as factors in the development of the typhoid
carrier state and a model for estimating carrier prevalence. Am. J.
Public Health 33:221-230,1943 (5) . S. Germanier, R, Typhoid Fever
In, Bacterial Vaccines, R. Germanier (ed.) p.137-165,1984.(6).
Germanier, R., Immunity in experimental salmonellosis. l. Protection
induced by rough mutants of Salmonella typhimurium. Infect. Immun.
2:309-315,1970. (7). Germanier, R. E. Furer, Immunity in experimental
salmonellosis. ll. Basis for the avirulence and protective capacity
of Gal E mutants of <I>Salmonella typhi</I>murium. Infect.
Immun.4:663-673,1971. . Germanier. R. E. Furer Isolation and
characterization of Gal E mutant Ty21 a of <I>Salmonella typhi</I>: a
candidate strain for a live, oral typhoid vaccine. J. Infect.
Dis.131: 553-558,1975. (9). Germanier, R. E. Furer Characteristics of
the attenuated oral vaccine strain <I>S. typhi</I> Ty21 a. Develop.
Biol. Standard,43: 3-7,1983. (10). Wahdan, M. H., C. Serie, Y.
Cerisier, S. Sallam, R. Germanier A controlled field trial of live
<I>Salmonella typhi</I> strain Ty21a oral vaccine against typhoid:
three-year results. J. Infect. Dis.145: 292-296, 1982. Levine, M. M.,
R. E. Black, C. Ferreccio, M. L. Clements, C. Lanata, J. Rooney, R.
Germanier, A. Schuster, H. Rodriguez, J. M. Borgono, H. Lobos. (11).
Prenzel, C. Ristorio, M.E. Pinto. The efficacy of attenuated <I>S.
typhi</I> oral vaccine strain Ty21a evaluated in controlled field
trials. In, Development of Vaccines and Drugs against Diarrhea .11 th
Noble Conference, Stockholm, l985. p. 90-101. J. Holmgren. A.
Lindberg and R. Mollby (eds.). Studentlitteratur, Lund, Sweden 1986.
(12). Levine. M. M., C. Ferreccio, R.E. Black. R. Germanier, Chilean
Typhoid Committee. Large-Scale Field Trial of Ty21 a Live Oral
Typhoid Vaccine in Enteric-Coated Capsule Formulation. Lancet 1: 1049
1052,1987. (13). Cryz, S. J., Jr, E. Furer, M. M. Levine. Zur
Wirksamkeit des oralen, attenulerten <I>Salmonella typhi</I> Ty21a
Lebendimpfstoffes in Kontrol lierten Feldversuchen. Schweiz. Med.
Wschr 118: 467-470,1988. (14). Report of the Committee on Infectious
Diseases. Twenty-first edition, p.373-374. American Academy of
Pediatrics,141 Northwest Point Blvd., PO. Box 927, Elk Grove Village,
IL 60009-0827,1988. (15). Gilman,R. H.,R.B. Hornick,WE.Woodward,H. L.
DuPont,M.J. Snyder, M. M. Levine, J. P Libonati. Evaluation of a
UDP-Glucose-4 epimeraseless mutant of <I>Salmonella typhi</I> as a
live oral vaccine. J. Infect. Dis. 136: 717-723, 1988.</P>

<P>Manufactured by:<BR>

<B>Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute,<BR>

Berne, Switzerland</B></P>

<P>US License No. 21</P>

<P>Distributed by:<BR>

<B>Berna Products Corp.,<BR>

Coral Gables, FL 33146 </B></P>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>