
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-53</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B036-106</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/groups1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070613 text/html 5781
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:06:04 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:41 GMT
Content-length: 5564
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Presentations to Social Clubs about drug legalization</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Presentations to Social Clubs </h2>

<p> <b>How to make presentations to social groups such as
churches, Lions Clubs, Rotary, and other similar groups.</b> </p>

<p> <b>By Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h3>How to find them. </h3>

<p> Many of them will be listed in your local phone directories.
If no chapters of a particular group are listed in your area, it
doesn't necessarily mean they don't exist. You can also look in
the Encyclopedia of Associations, at your local library, to
contact their national headquarters and ask for any chapters in
your area. </p>

<h3>What kind of groups typically have meetings where people can
make presentations? </h3>

<p> Here are just a few examples: </p>

<p> Lions, Rotary, Elks, Moose, churches, synagogues, Chambers of
Commerce, Business groups, other social clubs, political parties,
etc. Any place where more than a few people gather for nearly any
purpose may be an opportunity to make a presentation. </p>

<h3>How to get a date to speak to their group. </h3>

<p> First, put together a coherent, sensible presentation of
material pertinent to your area of interest. It is best to
present factual, interesting material, rather than political
diatribe. Visual displays and graphics are always good to help
keep the audience's interest. </p>

<p> Second, call them. You will be surprised at the number of
social groups which are looking for, or receptive to, speakers.
Calling them is the toughest part for many people, but it is
really easy. The worst that can happen is that they will say no,
and you have heard that before. </p>

<h3>What is interesting to these groups? </h3>

<p> Many of these groups want speakers for their regular
luncheons.all the time for their lunch and, therefore they cover
a wide variety of topics over the year. You will often find a
situation where there is someone who is designated to find good
speakers for the meetings who invariably has a hard time finding
enough interesting speakers to fill the bill. Therefore, in many
cases, there is a wide degree of latitude in what these groups
would like to hear. The facts about hemp are usually interesting
to these groups, but there are any number of other subjects which
would also get a good reception with a good presentation. </p>

<h3>Dress and act conservatively. </h3>

<p> The people in these groups are business people for the most
part, and will expect and appreciate a business like demeanor and
approach. Whether you like it or not, they are most likely to
respond favorably to conservatively dressed and
&quot;normal&quot; looking and acting people, as opposed to the
&quot;hippy&quot; look. </p>

<h3>Use Visual Aids </h3>

<p> Charts, graphs, pictures, and other visual aids can be very
helpful in getting your point across. There are a number of
charts and graphs on these pages as samples of things you might
use. </p>

<h3>Read the Persuasive Strategies and Debate Materials </h3>

<p> These social groups tend to be politically and socially
conservative so wild-eyed arguments about how it is everyone's
right to get loaded will not get a good reception. The best
approach is a soft, factual approach which presents some part of
the vast amount of information which most people don't know about
drugs. Don't promote or even defend the use of drugs, drug
dealers, or anything else that your audience will find hard to
accept. You will often have a long way to go to convince them, so
don't try to bring them too far, too fast. </p>

<h3>But I am afraid to make presentations to groups. </h3>

<p> What are you afraid of? That you will look like a fool? (As
if that hasn't happened before.) Seriously, speaking in front of
a group is one of the items which produces the highest levels of
fear in many people. They realize everyone is looking at them and
they get nervous and freeze up. The more nervous they get, the
more they worry about it, and the more nervous they get. </p>

<p> Forget it. If you are afraid of embarrassing yourself and
looking like a fool, don't worry. In the first place, most people
don't have to stand up in front of a group to look like fools, so
looking like a fool is nothing new. Get over it. Everyone looks
like a fool now and then. The truth is that most members of most
audiences are so awestruck by anyone who can get up in front of
an audience and speak (because they know they couldn't do it
themselves) that they will never notice that you are nervous - at
least not to the degree that you feel nervous. </p>

<p> Experience will get you over it. The first presentation is
the roughest, and from that point it gets progressively easier.
By this time I have done so many, and encountered all the
questions that come up so many times, that I could do these
things in my sleep. There are a lot of other people who are also
quite adept at presentations and they started out as shy
wallflowers just like you. Give it a try. You will find it is a
lot of fun. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>