
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B02-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B045-156</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021734 text/html 137985
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:17:11 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:09:35 GMT
Content-length: 137766
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Drugs and Their Effects</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<p>STAFF PAPER I </p>

<p><font size="5">The Drugs and Their Effects</font> </p>

<p><i>by James V. DeLong</i> </p>

<hr>

<p>A Primer on Psychopharmacology </p>

<p>Drugs of Abuse<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>A PRIMER ON PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY <br>
</b></p>

<p>Psychopharmacology, as the term is used here, refers to the
study of the interactions of drugs with the central nervous
system (CNS), including physical, behavioral, and subjective
effects. The term is not always used so broadly; we have chosen a
comprehensive definition because this brief paper is neither
detailed enough nor sophisticated enough to require the fine
divisions implied by more exact categorization into such
subspecialties as neurophysiology, neurochemistry,
neuropharmacology, psychopharmacology, neuropsychology, and so
forth. </p>

<p>As will become obvious, there are many areas in which basic
knowledge about the mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs
does not exist. Our purpose here is to describe for laymen the
framework within which such knowledge must be sought, and the
difficulties involved.*<br>
</p>

<p>* Since this paper was written by a layman for laymen,
technical terms and discussion have been avoided as much as
possible. In most cases where extended discussion would have to
be highly technical, the conclusions of experts on the present
state of knowledge are set forth with a citation to the
discussion leading to these conclusions. Drs. Avram Goldstein,
Norman Zinberg, Andrew Weil, Frederick DiCarlo, and Alan Green
all read earlier drafts of this paper. They prevented some
embarrassing errors, but they are not to blame for any that
remain.<br>
</p>

<p><b>THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I<br>
</b></p>

<p>The nervous system is composed of millions of nerve cells
(neurons) that are by no means homogeneous in structure. Some are
very long, even up to several feet; some are bushy, with -many
fibers reaching out to connect with other nerves; some are small
and simple. The cells do not interlock with each other at the
ends, where the impulse is transmitted from one to another. There
are, instead, microscopic gaps, called synapses, between them,
which must be bridged by the impulse. </p>

<p>There are several ways to categorize the parts of the nervous
system, each useful for different purposes. One division is
between the CNS-the brain and spinal cord-and the peripheral
nervous system, which is everything else. The peripheral system
is composed of nerve fibers extending out from cell bodies
contained within the CNS and, to some extent, of cell bodies
clumped outside of it but, of course, still connected. While the
peripheral system has groups of fibers (nerves) and groups of
cell bodies (ganglia), it is simple compared to the CNS, which
consists of millions of tightly packed neurons, fiber groups
(tracts), and clumps of cell bodies (nuclei) with billions of
synapses. </p>

<p>The psychoactive component of the effect of drugs is due to
their effects on the CNS rather than on the peripheral system,
and it is the CNS with which we are concerned. The peripheral
system is relevant only insofar as research into the mechanisms
of peripheral action casts light on the workings of the CNS. </p>

<p>Another way of dividing the nervous system is by function. The
somatic system includes both the central and the peripheral
neurons that convey impulses from the sense organs, organize them
in the brain, and deliver motor impulses to the skeletal muscles.
The autonomic system governs the smooth muscles of the
intestines, urogenital tract, and blood vessels; the heart
muscles; and the endocrine glands. In short, the somatic system
controls the body's response to the external environment; the
autonomic system governs the internal environment. </p>

<p>The autonomic system is further subdivided into two parts. The
sympathetic system generally mobilizes bodily resources for
action-it constricts visceral blood vessels so that more blood is
directed to muscles and brain, accelerates the heart beat,
inhibits intestinal and gastric activity, widens the pupils of
the eye, and secretes adrenaline The parasympathetic system is
the antagonist of these effects. It acts to conserve bodily
resources, usually by having effects that are the reverse of
those of the sympathetic system. The parasympathetic system is
more specific than the sympathetic, however. While the latter
tends to act diffusely, causing all the effects at once, the
parasympathetic system can act independently on different organs.
</p>

<p>The differentiation between autonomic and somatic systems is
clearest at the periphery of the nervous system. As one traces
the systems toward the CNS, the distinction becomes more vague.
In the main trunks of peripheral nerves, for example, the fibers
of the different systems are bound together and can be separated
only by tracing them to their terminations or on the basis of
some differences in fiber types. Within the CNS centers, division
of functions is always a matter of degree rather than of complete
specialization. While some centers are concerned primarily with
somatic or with autonomic functions, the two are always closely
coordinated, and the separation is not complete. </p>

<p>The CNS itself is not, of course, a random melange of
heterogeneous neurons. There are many different and identifiable
parts to it-medulla, pons, cerebellum, midbrain, reticular
formation, thalamus, optic tract, cerebral hemispheres, basal
ganglia, and so forth. For some of these, the functions are
fairly well established; for others, they are not. To try to
describe these would be far beyond the scope of this appendix.
For our purposes, it is enough to state the following
propositions: </p>

<ul>
    <li>There is much specialization within the CNS, in that a
        particular part will have a specific and identifiable
        function. (For example, the thalamus is a relay station,
        with impulses arriving from lower centers and being
        passed on to higher ones; the hypothalamus has the
        primary control over autonomic functions; the cerebral
        cortex contains the more complex psychological functions;
        and so on.) </li>
    <li>Each part consists of packed nerve cells with many
        connections to each other and to different parts of the
        brain. </li>
    <li>Many, if not all, functions involve more than one CNS
        center. </li>
    <li>It is easier to study motor or sensory functions, where
        CNS activity can be correlated with an output, than to
        study pure cognitive functions, where it cannot. <br>
    </li>
</ul>

<hr>

<p><b>PROBLEMS IN STUDYING THE CNS <br>
</b></p>

<p>The study of the CNS is extraordinarily difficult. As Kenneth
Moore states, &quot;The human brain contains a complex of
millions of nerve cells that are anatomically independent but
functionally interconnected. An impulse starting in one neuron
can propagate throughout the nervous system over a variety of
pathways. The route taken is determined by the inborn
organization of the brain and by ongoing events that, because of
neural plasticity, can establish new circuits.&quot;' Obviously,
the number of permutations possible in such a system would make
study difficult, even if no other problems existed. Moore,
however, goes on to list some of the major impediments to
research on the CNS: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Many ideas about neural functioning derive from study of
        the peripheral system, where most synapses are well
        defined in that only one synapse exists at a particular
        point. In the CNS, the cell bodies are covered with
        synapses. They are also closely packed among other cells
        (the glia), which may perform some neural functions even
        though they are not neurons. </li>
    <li>In each peripheral synapse only one chemical transmitter
        is thought to act. Each CNS nerve cell may be affected by
        several different transmitters. [Transmitters are
        discussed on pp.67-68.] </li>
    <li>Neural reactions occur in milliseconds and are hard to
        find and measure. </li>
    <li>The biochemical processes involved in peripheral systems
        can be studied in test tubes (in vitro) where tissue
        slices can be made to react. This is not true for studies
        of the brain, because brain neurons in vitro are in a
        resting state, disconnected from the other neurons that
        ordinarily determine their activities. While artificial
        stimulation can be applied, there is no way of knowing
        whether this corresponds to actions in the body. In
        particular, it is difficult to relate any in vitro
        reactions to such higher functions as thought or emotion.
    </li>
    <li>Because the different units of the CNS have different
        functions and anatomies, the biochemical reactions of any
        particular part are probably not the same as those of any
        other part. </li>
    <li>There is a unique blood-brain barrier between the blood
        and the brain that makes chemical manipulation of the CNS
        via injection into the bloodstream more difficult than is
        manipulation of other tissues. [The capillaries in the
        brain are somewhat less permeable than the capillaries
        elsewhere in the body.] </li>
    <li>The synapses are so densely packed that chemical
        manipulation by administration directly to the brain is
        much more difficult. </li>
    <li>Some brain structures are not accessible in a live
        subject because they are surrounded by other structures.
        If it is not useful to study them in vitro, and one
        cannot study them in situ, it is rather difficult to
        study them at all. </li>
    <li>When experiments are carried out in a live subject it is
        often necessary to stop a chemical reaction quickly so as
        to preserve the tissue at a particular point in the
        process. This is usually done by rapid excision and
        immersion in a low-temperature liquid. Since the entire
        CNS is surrounded by bone, it is difficult to perform
        this operation quickly enough. Some chemicals present in
        vivo may never be identified because they are destroyed
        too quickly.'<br>
    </li>
</ul>

<p>This represents a formidable list of difficulties. And, since
psychoactive drugs are usually fairly specific to the CNS-in that
they affect the CNS without having much effect on other body
systems-it is easy to see why knowledge of their sites and
mechanisms of action is less than complete, despite intensive
study during the past several decades. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>THEORIES OF PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS <br>
</b></p>

<p>The present theory about the manner in which psychoactive
drugs operate is that they affect the transmission of the nerve
impulses across the synapses. This hypothesis is based upon more
general theories concerning the chemical nature of this
transmission. Researchers know that in a peripheral system
certain chemical substances (acetylcholine in the somatic system
and norepinephrine in the autonomic) are associated with the
stimulation of nerve impulses. These substances can also be found
in the CNS and appear to be correlated with activity levels
there. </p>

<p>Because nerve impulses are thought to be electrical in nature,
the theory of their effect is as follows: A nerve impulse that
reaches the synapse of a particular neuron stimulates the release
of a particular transmitter substance. This substance affects the
receptors of the adjoining nerve cell (the postsynaptic neuron),
changes its electrical potential, and triggers an impulse within
it. Most of the transmitter substance is taken back into the
neuron from which it came, although some of it is destroyed by
enzymes or diffused by the blood. The postsynaptic nerve then
returns to its original state. </p>

<p>Psychoactive drugs may affect this sequence by stimulating or
inhibiting the production of the transmitter substance, by
causing its release from storage, by affecting the process by
which it is taken back into the neuron, or by stimulating or
inhibiting its destruction. These processes have an effect on the
level and type of activity in the CNS and a consequent effect on
the perceptions and activities of the body. </p>

<p>Beyond this, it is difficult to say anything with much
certainty. Some psychoactive drugs are associated with increased
CNS levels of particular substances that are thought to be
transmitters, but the causation is not firmly established.
Mandell and Spooner have pointed out that the evidence for
transmitter theory is in many ways startlingly indirect.' Their
final comment is: &quot;Even on a neurochernical level, we must
talk about empirical correlates of behavioral states. Rigorous
establishment of the transmitter or modulator role of brain
substances appears to remain for the future.&quot; </p>

<p>The strongest evidence that a particular substance has
transmitter functions concerns acetlycholine Wh). Neurons
sensitive to this substance are distributed throughout the brain,
so that it can have excitatory or inhibiting functions, depending
on the region. ACh is difficult to study, because it does not
pass the blood-brain barrier easily and is destroyed rapidly
after artificial administration. Its effects on certain cells in
the spinal cord have been studied, but not much is known about
effects at other synapses in the CNS. There is also fairly good
evidence that two catecholamines-norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(D)-perform transmitter functions. Again, however, much of what
is thought about their action is derived from research with the
peripheral system, and conclusions must be approached warily. NE
and D, together with their degrading enzymes, are also located in
various regions of the brain.-' </p>

<p>Some researchers believe that 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-11T),
often called serotonin, is also a transmitter, but the evidence
is not as strong as for the substances already discussed. As
Moore states, &quot;Despite years of active investigation, the
functional significance of this amine remains obscure.&quot;' The
substance may excite, depress, or have no effect on neurons, but
the reasons for the differences are not known. It has no
functions in the peripheral system and is thus even more
difficult to study than the other possibilities. </p>

<p>A number of other substances may be transmitters, but the
evidence is ambiguous. For example, the brain contains a
relatively high concentration of free amino acids, some of which
may have transmitter functions. And there are a number of other
possibilities, such as histamine, substance P, Prostaglandins,
and ergothioneine. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>MECHANISMS OF DRUG ACTION<br>
</b></p>

<p>Even if the transmitter theory were certain and a connection
between transmitters and psychoactive drugs proved, there would
be the problem of understanding the mechanisms by which the drugs
affect the transmitters. This problem relates to the more general
pharmacological question of the manner in which drugs affect
cells and to the basic pharmacological concept of receptor sites:
</p>

<p>. . . most drugs are thought to produce their effects by
combining with enzymes, cell membranes, or other specialized
functional components of cells. Drug-cell interaction is presumed
to alter the function of the cell component and thereby initiate
the series of biochemical and physiological changes that are
characteristic of the drug.... </p>

<p>The cell component directly involved in the initial action of
the drug is usually termed ... its receptor., </p>

<p>In its simplest form, the receptor-site theory is that, at the
basic site of action of any drug, there are cells or cell
surfaces that form molecular bonds with the drug molecules.
Current theory is that these sites are stereospecific-it is not
only the chemical composition of the drug that determines whether
the receptor can bond with it but its three-dimensional geometric
shape as well. A cell surface might have, for example, three or
four different points of contact where different molecular bonds
could be formed. A drug molecule must have a geometric shape that
allows proper subgroups of the molecule to come in contact with
these points for the formation of a firm bond. </p>

<p>This theory of stereospecificity explains why drugs that are
diverse in chemical structure may have similar effects (e.g.,
morphine, methadone, and meperidine). Even though chemical
structures are different, geometric structures can be similar. In
contrast, variations of the same substance with similar chemical
structures but different geometric structures may not have
similar effects.' </p>

<p>The classic assumptions of receptor-site theory are: (1) One
molecule of drug combines with one receptor site, (2) a
negligible fraction of the total drug is combined, and (3) the
response of the body to the drug is directly related to the
proportion of available receptor sites that are occupied. </p>

<p>The interaction between drugs and cells is governed by the law
of mass action. The molecules of a drug are constantly
associating with and dissociating from receptor sites. At some
point, for any given drug concentration, an equilibrium is
reached where association and dissociation balance. The
drug-receptor interaction, therefore, is dynamic, not static.
Since most drug-toreceptor bonds are thought to be relatively
weak ionic bonds that are readily reversible, this concept of
dynamic interaction becomes important in understanding the
process of antagonistic effects, blockade, and reversibility of
drug action. All are based on theories about differences in the
strength of bonds formed by different drugs and on competition
for receptor sites. </p>

<p>Since these basic assumptions do not, however, explain all the
observed phenomena of drug action in many cases, including the
action of narcotic analgesics, various departures from the basic
occupancy assumption have been suggested. The most important are
(1) that not only occupation of the receptor sites matters but
also the intrinsic &quot;efficacy&quot; of the drug; (2) that it
is not the occupancy of the site that matters but the act of
occupying, and that drug effect depends on the relative rates of
association and dissociation, and (3) that there are spare
receptors that may be occupied, although at a lower level of
efficiency, when the primary receptors are already occupied.
These explain some of the otherwise unexplained phenomena, but
they leave other, different mysteries of their own.' Nor are
these questions likely to be settled soon. </p>

<p>There are two ways to gain information about a receptor. The
first and only really satisfactory approach is to identify and
isolate it. Then the investigation can follow established
biochemical and physicochemical procedures. Sequence analysis can
establish the primary structure of the macromolecules. Techniques
like x-ray crystallography, high-resolution electron micrography,
spectrophotometry, and analytical ultracentrifugation can yield
data from which the secondary and tertiary structure may be
deduced. </p>

<p>In the case of proteins, recent years have seen the
elucidation of complete primary structures at an ever-increasing
rate.... </p>

<p>The second way of obtaining information about receptors is
indirect. It has dominated pharmacologic research in the past.
The approach is to draw inferences about a receptor from the
biologic end results caused by drugs. A powerful tool employed
toward this end has been the study of structure-activity
relationships (abbreviated SAR). A suitable biologic effect of a
drug is chosen for study. A prototype drug, which elicits the
characteristic effect, is then modified systematically in its
molecular structure. Substituents are added or subtracted at
various positions and in different steric configurations. A
series of such chemically related drugs is known as congeneric
series. By testing the members of a series and observing how
biologic potency is affected by each molecular modification, one
may ultimately draw conclusions about the precise mode of
combination of a drug with its receptor surface.10 </p>

<p>Unfortunately, the study of psychoactive drugs belongs in the
second category. No one has found the receptor sites or knows
which cells might be involved. Concerning narcotic analgesics,
Goldstein says, &quot;It must be remembered . . . that the
receptor, whose structural features are inferred from the SAR
studies . . . is entirely hypothetical.&quot;11 </p>

<p>Finally, theories of action at the receptor site say nothing
about the biochemical events in the CNS that constitute the
eventual product of the interaction of the drug and the receptor
site. &quot;Investigations of the mechanism of tolerance and of
the mechanism of narcotic action have been hampered by the same
difficulty-that the biochemical alterations produced by the drug
in the whole brain are unlikely to have much to do with the
specific biochemical changes that are responsible for the drug
effects at the sites of drug action.&quot;12 </p>

<p>Jaffe makes a similar point. After reviewing the various
theories and experiments on the effect of opiates on cerebral
neural action, cerebral metabolism, and neurotransmitters, he
says: </p>

<p>... Unfortunately, knowledge of the functional role of the
several postulated neurobumoral transmitter agents in the CNS is
still so limited and controversial that the demonstration of an
effect of morphine on them has not yet contributed significantly
to an understanding of either the neurophysiological and
behavioral effects of the drug or its mechanism of action .13<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5"><b>DRUGS OF ABUSE <br>
</b></font></p>

<p><b>OPIATES</b> </p>

<p>The Drugs.&quot; Opium is a natural substance derived from one
variety of the poppy plant. It contains over twenty different
alkaloids with varying properties, constituting 25 per cent of
opium by weight. A few of these-primarily morphine and codeine
are medically useful. </p>

<p>In discussing opiate abuse, the specific drugs of concern are
the following: </p>

<p><i>Morphine </i>is a natural alkaloid constituting 10 per cent
by weight of the raw opium. </p>

<p><i>Heroin. </i>Because heroin is produced by chemical
treatment of morphine with acetic acid, the technical name for it
is diacetylmorphine. In terms of analgesic effect, heroin is a
little over three times as potent as morphine-for example, it
takes three milligrams of heroin to produce the same analgesic
effect as 10 milligrams of morphine. </p>

<p>Although heroin is the principal opiate of abuse in the United
States, most research has been done with the more readily
available morphine. In the opinion of experts, such research is
applicable to heroin if the dosage difference is considered,
because heroin rapidly breaks down into morphine in the body.
Thus, its subsequent pharmacological action is the same. </p>

<p><i>Methadone </i>is a synthetic opiate of approximately the
same strength as morphine. </p>

<p><i>Meperidine </i>is another synthetic opiate that is about 10
to 20 per cent as potent as morphine. It is better known under
its trade name, Demerol. </p>

<p>While all four drugs are analgesic, euphorigenic, and in many
ways fungible, there are some differences among them,
particularly in maximal effect and duration of action. Throughout
this paper, morphine is the primary subject. Important
differences in the characteristics of the other opiates are
discussed where relevant. </p>

<p>Because of lack of information, two topics are not discussed.
First, it should not be assumed that the effects and
characteristics of raw opium are the same as those of morphine.
It has been suggested that the mixture of many different
alkaloids in opium may have substantially modifying effects on
the action of any individual alkaloid, such as morphine.15 This
is unproved; but-since the medical use of crude opium ended in
the Western world soon after 1850-there are no data either way.
Secondly, it is possible to produce drugs from crude opium that
are stronger than morphine. For example, some derivatives of
thebaine, a nonanalgesic opium alkaloid, may be one thousand
times more potent.16 The effects of such superpotent opiates have
not been studied and might differ qualitatively from those of
morphine. </p>

<p><i>Medical Uses. </i>In the late nineteenth century, opium and
morphine were sometimes referred to by physicians as
&quot;GOM,&quot; &quot;God's Own Medicine.&quot; They were used
for asthma, dysentery, alcoholism, and a wide variety of other
diseases-including the simple cough.&quot; In fact, the opiates
are effective cough suppressants, constipants, and tranquilizers,
and, in an era lacking other drugs, their heavy use was natural. </p>

<p>Today, however, since there are drugs without the addictive
potential of opiates that are equally, or nearly as, effective
for most of these purposes, the medical use of opiates has become
less common. Yet, the opiates are still the most effective
pain-killing drugs known to medicine, and large quantities of
morphine and meperidine are used as such every year. Although
there is a continuing search for equally effective nonaddictive
pain relievers, none has been found, and it may be that none will
be. For a time, some of the narcotic antagonists were believed to
have the desired properties; more recently, pentazocine was
thought promising. But the latest evidence indicates that the
analgesic qualities of these drugs are due to properties that
also cause addiction. </p>

<p><i>Physical Effects and Toxicity. </i>The exact method by
which morphine blocks pain is unclear. It does not appear to
block the transmission of the pain impulse through the nerves (as
do local anesthetics), because sensation and feeling are not
affected. For example, someone heavily dosed with morphine will
still be able to feel a touch or other relatively slight
sensations. In addition, experiments have shown that a patient,
even after being given morphine as a pain reliever, can
accurately determine the amount of pain he would be suffering
without the drug. What seems to change is the relationship of the
subject to the pain. Although he feels the pain and can tell how
great it would be without the drug, he is not
&quot;bothered&quot; by it. For these reasons, it is thought that
the drug acts in the part of the brain that interprets the nerve
message.&quot; </p>

<p>For a nontolerant individual, morphine is highly toxic. A dose
of 100 to 200 mg. would be sufficient to cause a fatal
respiratory depression. This, like the analgesic effect, is a
consequence of the effects of the drug on the CNS rather than on
other parts of the nervous system-morphine reduces the
responsiveness of brainstem respiratory centers to concentrations
of carbon dioxide.&quot; </p>

<p>Tolerance to the respiratory effect increases rapidly, and no
researcher has yet found an absolute limit to the quantity of
morphine that can be taken by a tolerant individual without
causing death. Some persons have been known to take as much as
four grams of morphine without adverse effect.&quot; </p>

<p>No one has discovered long-term organic damage caused by
morphine. In autopsy, neither gross nor microscopic examination
of tissues shows evidence of such effects.&quot; Various studies
have followed the medical history of addicts over a substantial
period of time, and, according to one of the studies, &quot;while
there is ample evidence that the aberrant way of life followed by
most heroin abusers has both acute and chronic medical
consequences . . . there is insufficient scientific basis for
maintaining that long-term use of opiates-in and of itself-is
related to any major medical condition.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>Addicts do, however, suffer from a variety of conditions
ancillary to their general life-style and frequently die of viral
hepatitis, bacterial infections, or other diseases. The death
rate of the addict population is not known, but it is usually
estimated as about 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent per year.&quot;
Malaria used to be common among addicts, until dope sellers began
using quinine to cut heroin. Other deaths are often attributed to
an overdose of heroin sufficient to cause respiratory depression.
The possibility of an overdose is always present, because the
quality of street heroin so varies that an addict may not know
how much pure heroin he is getting in any purchase or even how
much he is used to taking. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, several experts have stated that overdose and
disease do not explain all addict deaths.&quot; In many cases,
the dead addict did not receive more heroin than he was used to
or should have been able to take, given his pre-existing level of
tolerance. It is possible that some people have a special
sensitivity to heroin that takes the form of an idiosyncratic
response to a single dose or that is analogous to an allergic
reaction triggered by repeated use. However, there are no reports
in medical annals of persons having this reaction after receiving
morphine in a medical setting. Since morphine is used extensively
in medicine, it would be expected that such a serious effect
would have been observed by this time. But there are also some
reports of an unusually high death rate in England, where addicts
receive pure heroin. The English data on this are incomplete,
however, and the causative factors have not been adequately
analyzed. </p>

<p>Morphine does cause some physical effects, of uncertain
significance. There are changes in excretion of epinephrine and
norepinephrine. Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is depressed.
Stabilized addicts become hypochondriacal, apathetic, and bored
with other people and have fitful sleep.&quot; Whether these
responses signify permanent change or damage, however, is not
clear. </p>

<p>In all animal species, including man, morphine has an
excitatory effect as well as an analgesic one. This pattern is
not unique to morphine; it is also true, for example, of
barbiturates and alcohol. The reasons are not well understood.
The effect could be due to be a difference in the speed with
which the drug affects different CNS centers, with certain
inhibiting centers being affected first. Or some CNS centers
excited by the drug may react first, with the response
subsequently suppressed by later-reacting centers. Various animal
species, however, react to morphine in different fashions. The
predominant effects in monkeys, dogs, rabbits, and rats, as well
as in man, are sedative, while in horses, cats, and mice they are
excitatory. </p>

<p>Man is considerably more sensitive to the effects of morphine
than are most other animals. For example, the effective analgesic
dose for a man is about <b>0.2 </b>mg. of morphine per kilogram
of body weight. In a dog it is at least ten times as high.&quot;
This raises a number of questions about the meaning of animal
experimentsspecifically, about the relative importance of direct
physical (as opposed to psychological or psychoactive)
consequences of taking the drug. </p>

<p>The opiates vary in several ways affecting consumer
preferences, abuse potential, and the ability of an addict to
stabilize his dosage and lead a relatively normal existence. The
major elements of variance are as follows: </p>

<p><i>Peak effect. </i>This is usually calculated as the maximum
analgesic effect that can be obtained from a given dose of the
drug as measured by the ability to relieve pain. Sometimes
euphoric effect is measured directly through the observation of
physical correlates of drug taking or through verbal responses to
tests designed to determine the degree of euphoria. It is
generally assumed, although not indisputably proved, that the
peak of analgesic effect and the peak of euphoric effect are the
same. </p>

<p><i>Duration of action. </i>This is a more diffuse concept,
because it could mean the duration of relief of a given amount of
pain or the duration of the peak effect. Generally, as used in
the sources, it seems to mean the length of time after
administration before the drug user begins to feel withdrawal
symptoms. Sometimes, however, the phrase &quot;duration of
analgesic action&quot; is used. The exact meaning of this term is
not clear, since it would seem to depend on the level of pain to
be relieved. Empirically, it seems to be about the same as the
generally accepted &quot;duration of action&quot; to withdrawal. </p>

<p><i>Method of administration. </i>All opiates can be taken
orally, subcutaneously (by injection under the skin),
intravenously (by injection into the vein), intramuscularly (by
injection into the muscle), or through the nasal passages. The
effects will differ somewhat, depending on the method used. In
addition, the effect of different methods of administration
varies with the drugs. For example, when taken orally, methadone
retains its efficacy more than morphine. </p>

<p><i>Potency and power. </i>The power of a drug is defined by
the upper limit of the absolute effects it can produce. The
potency of a drug relates to the dosage that is necessary to
produce a given effect. Thus, heroin is not more powerful than
morphine, because both can produce the same effects; but it is
more potent, because it produces equivalent effects at lower
doses. Viewed narrowly, potency might seem of little significance
medically, because one could always give more of the less potent
drug. Few drugs, however, are so specific that they have only one
effect, and the differences in potency may not be uniform for all
effects. For example, morphine is an analgesic producing a side
effect of nausea. Heroin is a more potent analgesic, but this
does not mean, necessarily, that it would be more potent in
causing nausea. </p>

<p>As stated above, potency of an opiate is measured in terms of
analgesic effects, and this is thought-and only thought to equal
euphoric effect. But, given the lack of knowledge about the
mechanisms by which opiates work, it is not impossible that the
various drugs affect different CNS centers in various ways, and
that therefore qualitative variations occur in psychoactive
experiences. Also, superpotent opiates, such as the thebaine
derivatives, might have distinct effects that have not shown up
in comparisons of existing drugs. </p>

<p>Although the basic facts about the opiates are not entirely
clear, the following facts are known: &quot; </p>

<p><i>Morphine, </i>taken subcutaneously, has its peak effect in
one half to one hour. Its duration of analgesic action is four to
six hours, and the decline from the peak is rapid. When it is
taken intravenously, the peak effect is reached sooner and is
somewhat greater. Morphine is effective when taken orally, but
the peak effect is much lower-perhaps only 20 per cent to 30 per
cent of the subcutaneous peak. The duration of action of oral
morphine is at least twelve hours and may be as long as
twenty-four. </p>

<p><i>Heroin </i>is generally thought to act about the same as
morphine. Some animal experiments, however, indicate that heroin
crosses the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine. If
this is true for humans, its peak would come more rapidly than
the morphine peak. Addicts sometimes cannot distinguish between
heroin and morphine when they are injected subcutaneously; most
are able to do so, however, when the drugs are taken
intravenously. </p>

<p><i>Methadone, </i>taken subcutaneously, has a peak effect in
three hours and a duration of analgesic action of about twelve
hours. When methadone is taken orally, the peak is about 70 per
cent as great and occurs after four hours. Duration of action
after oral administration is around twenty-four hours, and the
decline from the peak is slow. Intravenously injected methadone
peaks almost immediately, and the duration of action is lessened
accordingly. </p>

<p>Subcutaneous <i>meperidine </i>has a duration of analgesic
action of only two to four hours, and the peak is reached in less
than an hour. With oral administration, the peak is about 50 per
cent as high. Intravenous administration lessens the time needed
to reach the peak effect. Addicted medical personnel, who have
ready access to meperidine, tend to prefer that drug to the other
opiates, possibly because of its fast action and relatively high
potency when taken orally. The dosages of the different drugs
required to produce the same peak effect when administered
subcutaneously are: morphine-10 mg.; heroin-3 mg.; methadone-10
mg.; and meperidine-80 to 100 mg. </p>

<p><i>Addiction. </i>Three aspects of opiate use are particularly
important to an understanding of addiction and its consequences:
(1) the nature of the euphoric psychoactive effect; (2) the
development of tolerance to the drugs; and (3) the development of
physical dependence, with physical withdrawal symptoms, when the
drug is removed. </p>

<p><i>Psychoactive Eflects. </i>Opiates cause a mental clouding
characterized by drowsiness, an inability to concentrate,
lethargy, and reduced visual acuity. As was mentioned before,
stabilized addicts may be hypochondriacal, withdrawn, bored with
other people, and less motivated. Opiates, however, do not cause
slurred speech or significant motor incoordination.&quot; In some
persons, they produce a very pleasant euphoria, but this reaction
is not universal. Many people find that dysphoria, consisting of
mild anxiety and fear, results instead and may be accompanied by
such unpleasant effects as nausea and vomiting. Dysphoria is
extremely common at first use, even among those who eventually
become addicted; indeed, to attain euphoric effects at first may
be an atypical response. In some subjects, the initial response
is a desire to engage in increased activity.&quot; </p>

<p>Goldstein states: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>It is well known . . . that most people react with extreme
    displeasure to an initial dose of an opiate narcotic, both
    nausea and dysphoria being common responses. It was once
    supposed that administration of opiates in legitimate medical
    practice might &quot;create&quot; addicts. There is no valid
    evidence of this claim, although it is true that the
    incidence of addiction is high in the health professions,
    where there is easy access to addicting drugs. It is quite
    obvious, however, that of the many millions of patients who
    receive morphine, an insignificantly small fraction ever seek
    to take the drug again. Likewise, in the population as a
    whole, very few of those who could obtain morphine or heroin
    illegally, if they wished, become addicts.30 <br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Despite this, people start taking opiates because they like or
expect to like the effect. It is not known whether those who
become addicts have a different response to the initial use,
experiencing some atypical internal metabolic change, or whether
they simply have more persistence. </p>

<p>For those who find that they have an affinity for the drug,
the euphoric effect is very powerful, although its exact nature
is almost indescribable. This effect can be divided into two
parts. The first part is the &quot;rush&quot;-the initial impact
of the drug on the nervous system. This appears to occur only
when the drug is taken intravenously, and not when it is taken
orally or subcutaneously. Sexual images are frequently used to
describe this effect: &quot;It was like a huge orgasm&quot;;
&quot;It was like coming from every pore.&quot; The second part
is the follow-up sensation of being &quot;high.&quot; Describing
this is more difficult, however, for there is no common
experience from which a pattern can be drawn. Basically, the
effect appears to be that of an emotional analgesic, suppressing
anxiety and care, although the analgesia is not a mere deadening
of emotion. On the contrary, it can be a profoundly heightened
sense of well-being. Whether everyone who persisted in opiate use
would attain this euphoric state, or whether such a state is a
selective reaction based on psychological factors, remains an
unanswered question. There is no model of the addict personality
as such that satisfactorily distinguishes between users and
nonusers; nor is the psychic explanation the only one available.
Some researchers believe that opiate addiction has a
physiological basis, and that the attempt to find psychological
variables is therefore pointless. The varying theories on this
subject are discussed in the last part of this section. </p>

<p><i>Tolerance. </i>A person can become accustomed to a drug's
effects and thus require steadily larger doses to produce a
constant effect. This phenomenon is common with many drugs in
pharmacology, not just drugs of abuse. Tolerance is not the same
as physical dependence and often occurs without it. It is an
important aspect of opiate addiction, because the addict's need
to take steadily larger doses to achieve a euphoric effect
elevates the cost of his habit, causing increased criminal
activity and presumably increasing any long-term toxic effects
that may exist. </p>

<p>Tolerance does not always develop uniformly to all aspects of
a drug's action. For example, while tolerance in time develops to
the sedative effects of barbiturates, the amount needed for a
lethal dose remains constant. On the other hand, tolerance seems
to develop to all the major effects of narcotics. It &quot;is
characterized by a shortened duration and decreased intensity of
the analgesic, sedative, and other CNS depressant effects as well
as by a marked elevation in the average lethal dose.&quot;&quot;
As observed in the section on toxicity, limits on tolerance have
not yet been determined. </p>

<p>Tolerance takes two forms. First, the body to some extent may
increase its ability to metabolize or excrete the drug. While
this has not been shown to be directly the case for the opiates,
it has been shown that brain morphine levels become lower in
tolerant than in nontolerant animals eight hours after drug
administration. Secondly, constant brain levels of morphine will
produce less effect in tolerant than in nontolerant animals,
indicating that there must be some form of adaptation within the
CNS at the cellular level. These two forms of tolerance are
called &quot;drug disposition&quot; and &quot;metabolic
tolerance,&quot; respectively. Several theories have been
developed to explain them-they are too complex to discuss
here-only to come to the same conclusion, namely, that &quot;the
precise mechanisms underlying these two forms of tolerance to
narcotics are not known.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>In a study of drug addiction as a social problem, an important
issue is the speed with which tolerance develops. If, for
example, tolerance develops rapidly, then whenever an addict
increases his dose for a few days-or possibly even for a day-he
will become tolerant to the increased dose and must therefore
maintain at least that level of habit from then on to avoid
withdrawal symptoms. Experimental evidence indicates that
tolerance does develop rapidly. Human subjects have been brought
to a level of 500 mg. of morphine within ten days. Tolerance to
morphine begins with the first dose administered and builds
rapidly; tolerance to heroin lags for a few days, then follows
the same course. In animal experiments, it has been found that a
dog, when given morphine continuously for eight hours, will begin
to recover from behavioral depression by the end of that time,
indicating a rapid development of tolerance to a given
concentration of morphine in the body.&quot; </p>

<p>It is not clear whether tolerance increases arithmetically or
geometrically. For example, although a nonaddict might find 100
mg. of morphine fatal, none of the sources indicates whether a
dose of 200 mg. would be fatal to an addict who was already
taking 100 mg. per day, or whether a dose of 600 mg. would be
fatal to an addict on 500 mg. </p>

<p>Another important question is how long tolerance lasts after
an individual has been abstinent for a time. Generally, it is
believed that tolerance disappears when the drug taking stops.
There are numerous street stories to the effect that addicts will
voluntarily detoxify themselves to the point where their habit
becomes such as to be economically supportable. Yet, in one
classic experiment rats were found to retain substantial
tolerance to morphine for almost a year after the last
administration of the drug.&quot; </p>

<p>The final important aspect of tolerance is the phenomenon of
cross@tolerance between drugs. Morphine, heroin, methadone, and
meperidine are at least partial substitutes for one another, and
tolerance to one confers tolerance to equipotent doses of the
others. </p>

<p><i>Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. </i>The term
&quot;physical dependence&quot; or &quot;physical addiction&quot;
means that an organism requires a drug for &quot;normal&quot;
physical functioning. Abstinence will result in physical symptoms
of varying types and severity until the body adapts to the new
state. The term &quot;addiction,&quot; however, is eschewed by
experts in the drug-abuse field. Since drug abuse is dependent on
an intermixture of physical and psychic variables, and since
drugs of abuse are often used in such low doses that the degree
of actual physical addiction is questionable, experts feel that
it is more correct to use the terminology &quot;drug dependence
of the morphine type&quot; or &quot;drug dependence of the
barbiturate type.&quot;&quot; Even the withdrawal symptoms
developed by abstinent users may be psychogenic in origin. In
addition, users of drugs that are not powerfully addictive
physically (e.g., tobacco) sometimes have a more difficult time
in abstaining from use than do users of addictive drugs. For
these reasons, it makes some sense to blur the distinction
between physical and psychological dependence when discussing
drug abuse as a social problem. </p>

<p>This should not induce the belief, however, that there is no
such thing as physical addiction or physical dependence. Clearly,
an opiate user becomes physically dependent in the sense that
abstinence will cause severe and well-documented physical
symptoms. These include restlessness and drug craving, followed
by yawning, lacrimation, runny nose, perspiration, fever, chills,
vomiting, panting respiration, loss of appetite, insomnia,
hypertension, general aches and pains, and loss of weight. The
intensity can be &quot;nearly unbearable&quot; if the dosage is
high enough.&quot; </p>

<p>Several researchers have commented that withdrawal from
opiates-as well as from barbiturates and other hypnotics-is
characterized by <i>rebound hyperexcitability; </i>that is,
during withdrawal, the physiological systems that were depressed
by the drug are in a state of increased excitability. It is not
clear, however, whether all withdrawal symptoms are rebound
effects, or whether this is a general,rule applicable to other
drugs as well.&quot; </p>

<p>Withdrawal from the various opiates has been studied
scientifically. As a general rule, the intensity and duration of
the withdrawal symptoms are related to the intensity and duration
of the drug's action. Thus, morphine withdrawal starts within a
few hours (four to ten, depending on the user's tolerance level),
peaks rapidly (around the second day of abstinence), then
declines sharply. Most of the obvious symptoms disappear within
seven to ten days. Meperidine withdrawal reaches its peak in
about twelve hours and lasts only four or five days. In some
ways, however, its peak intensity is greater than that of
morphine withdrawal. Withdrawal from methadone follows a slower
course. No symptoms appear until about the third day. After this,
they increase steadily until between the sixth and the ninth day,
when they peak at a level less than two-thirds as intense as the
peak for morphine withdrawal. Thereafter, they decline slowly,
not disappearing until after about two weeks. The maximum
intensity of methadone withdrawal is always tolerable, but its
duration may be the factor that causes some addicts to regard the
withdrawal from methadone as nastier than the withdrawal from
morphine.&quot; </p>

<p>The disappearance of the gross symptoms does not mean,
however, that the withdrawal is complete. Increasingly,
researchers are finding some effects that persist for many weeks
longer, and empirical observations show that the relapse
vulnerability is greatest immediately after withdrawal. Dr.
William Martin divides the abstinence syndrome into <i>early and
protracted </i>abstinence. In human experiments, subjects were
stabilized on 240 mg. of morphine, then withdrawn slowly over a
period of three weeks. They showed the general withdrawal
symptoms discussed above, although in milder degree than occurs
after sudden withdrawal. The symptoms persisted to some extent
for six to nine weeks. After this, the protracted abstinence
syndrome emerged, characterized by minor physical differences
that persisted through the twenty-sixth week of withdrawal. The
clinical significance of this is not clear, for it has not been
proved that protracted abstinence contributes to readdiction. But
careful experiments with rats have shown that postaddict rats
have a greater liking for narcotics than do rats that have never
been addicted. This preference lasts four to six months after
withdrawal.&quot; </p>

<p>While no limit on the development of tolerance to opiates has
been found, there does seem to be a limit on the degree of
physical dependence that can be developed, as measured by the
intensity of the withdrawal symptoms. For morphine, this maximum
is reached at dosages of around 400-500 mg. per day; higher doses
do not result in more intense withdrawal symptoms.&quot; </p>

<p>This points up the fact that tolerance to, and physical
dependence on, a drug are not the same thing. The body can even
develop a tolerance to drugs on which it does not become
physically dependent. But tolerance is always present when
physical dependence develops. </p>

<p>In the case of the opiates, the speed with which physical
dependence develops seems to lag only slightly behind the speed
of the development of tolerance. A patient receiving therapeutic
doses of morphine for a week or two will not have recognizable
withdrawal symptoms spontaneously after discontinuance, but these
can be precipitated by an antagonist after only two or three days
on morphine. By similar means, withdrawal has been caused in a
dog after an eight-hour infusion of morphine. Goldstein believes
that physical dependence is probably initiated with the first
dose of the drug.&quot; At that stage, of course, withdrawal
would be so mild as to be unnoticeable, but it seems possible
that a single dose could create a craving for the drug, even
though the physical genesis of this feeling would be unknown to
the user. </p>

<p>As might be expected, there are no definitive explanations for
the phenomenon of physical dependence. Its existence is simply
defined by the presence or absence of withdrawal symptoms. Jaffe
states: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>At present no single model is able to account for all the
    complex phenomena that are seen with the many classes of
    drugs producing tolerance and physical dependence. It is
    likely that multiple mechanisms are involved, and that each
    model may reflect a facet of the truth. For the present the
    most heuristic models are the best ones <font size="1">.42 <br>
    </font></p>
</blockquote>

<p>Goldstein also observes that, although &quot;the mechanism of
the development of tolerance and physical dependence is still
unknown.... there has been no dearth of theoretical
speculation.&quot;&quot; It appears that dependence is due to
&quot;drug-induced alterations at the cellular level, with the
most prominent changes occurring in the CNS . . . these changes
are not limited to any one part of the CNS but occur throughout
the entire neuraxis.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>The sources are silent, however, on two important questions
about physical dependence and tolerance. The first of these
concerns stabilization dosages. It is well known, for example,
that an addict can be stabilized on a drug, since taking a given
amount will result in neither withdrawal nor euphoria. But there
is little information on how much latitude there is in the
stabilization dose. That is, if a morphine addict is used to 100
mg., can he take anywhere between 90 and 100 mg. without becoming
aware of the difference; or is his tolerance of deviation from
his normal dose less than this? Also, are there variations
between the opiates, depending on peak intensity and duration of
action? Generally, experts believe that it is harder to stabilize
on such short-acting drugs as morphine and heroin than on
methadone. The short, sharp peak and rapid decay characteristic
of the morphine effect may mean that a dose insufficient to
produce euphoria soon results in bodily concentrations too low to
prevent withdrawal. </p>

<p>Another important question is whether the euphoric effect
disappears at high levels of opiate tolerance. That is, will an
addict who is used to 500 mg. of morphine achieve euphoria if he
takes 550 or 600 mg.? The fact that the severity of withdrawal
levels off at around this dose might indicate an upper limit on
the ability to obtain a euphoric effect. None of the sources
found, however, presents evidence to support either possibility. </p>

<p>Finally, it is well known that physical dependence on a given
opiate can be satisfied by any other opiate. This is the
pbenomenon of cross-dependence, described by Jaffe as follows: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Cross-dependence may be partial or complete, and the
    degree is more closely related to pharmacological effects
    than to chemical similarities. A broad-spectrum drug such as
    methadone, which depresses the entire range of functions that
    are similarly affected by morphine, can completely substitute
    for morphine or meperidine. However, meperidine, which has a
    narrower spectrum with less autonomic and sedative effects,
    does not entirely prevent the autonomic manifestations of
    withdrawal from morphine. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>In general, any potent narcotic analgesic, regardless of
    chemical class, will show cross-dependence with other
    narcotic analgesics . <font size="1">. . . 45<br>
    </font></p>
</blockquote>

<p><font size="1">METHADONE MAINTENANCE </font></p>

<p>A successful method of treating heroin addicts is to maintain
them on daily doses of methadone. More detail about the programs
using this technique is contained in Staff Paper 3. </p>

<p>The pharmacological basis of methadone maintenance has been
covered in preceding sections, albeit implicitly. The significant
characteristics are as follows: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Methadone is a synthetic opiate. Its administration to a
        heroin addict will either prevent the withdrawal symptoms
        caused by abstinence from heroin or end them if they have
        already developed. </li>
    <li>Methadone and the other opiates exhibit cross-tolerance.
        A person tolerant to one of them is tolerant to
        equipotent doses of another. </li>
    <li>The action of oral methadone lasts about twenty-four
        hours. A methadone program can administer the drug once a
        day, rather than three or four times, as would be
        necessary if morphine or heroin were used. </li>
    <li>High doses of methadone (e.g., about 80 mg. or more) will
        prevent withdrawal, block the euphoric effect from an
        injection of heroin, and prevent the &quot;drug
        hunger&quot; (defined by Dr. Jerome Jaffe as &quot;a felt
        sense of physical abnormality&quot;) felt by addicts who
        have become abstinent. </li>
    <li>Lower doses of methadone (e.g., 50 mg.) will prevent
        withdrawal and the drug hunger. They will not block the
        euphoric effect of an injection of heroin, although
        presumably some minimum quantity of heroin is required.
        The success rate for programs using low doses is
        approximately the same as the rate for those using high
        doses for addicts in treatment six months. Experts
        believe that blocking the euphoria is not so important as
        preventing the drug hunger. </li>
    <li>No significantly harmful side effects of methadone have
        been discovered.<br>
    </li>
</ul>

<p>The effects of methadone on the heroin addict have been
described diagrammatically by Dr. Vincent Dole.&quot;'<br>
</p>

<p>Fig. 1. Diagrammatic summary of the functional state of a
typical &quot;mainline&quot; heroin user. Arrow shows the
repetitive injection of heroin in uncertain dose, usually 10 to
30 mg but sometimes much more. Note that the addict is hardly
ever in a state of normal function (&quot;straight&quot;). </p>

<p><img src="img00001.gif" align="bottom" width="1184"
height="470"><br>
</p>

<p>Fig. 2. Stabilization of the patient in a state of normal
function by blockade treatment. A single, daily, oral dose of
methadone prevents him from feeling symptoms of abstinence
(&quot;sick&quot;) or euphoria (&quot;high&quot;), even if he
takes a shot of heroin. Dotted line indicates the course if
methadone is omitted. </p>

<p><img src="img00002.gif" align="bottom" width="1225"
height="373"> </p>

<p>Fig. 3. The induction of narcotic tolerance by the gradual
increase of methadone dosage. Two typical patients are shown: one
starting with tolerance (from previous use of heroin) and the
other with little or no tolerance (e.g., recently in hospital or
jail). The right-hand ordinate shows the total daily dose of
methadone (given in divided portions during the first months);
the left-hand ordinate indicates the degree of narcotic blockade
on an arbitrary scale (O to ****). </p>

<p><img src="img00003.gif" align="bottom" width="1132"
height="397"> </p>

<p>Some important questions about the nature of methadone
treatment remain unanswered. Because methadone and heroin can be
substituted for each other in so many ways, it would seem logical
that their effects would be cumulative, and that the addict on
methadone would be able to achieve the euphoric state with a
smaller dose of heroin than he normally used. Certainly, other
drugs, such as alcohol and the barbiturates, have cumulative
effects. Yet, many of the discussions about methadone treatment
evidently assume, with actually saying so, that their effects are
not cumulative. </p>

<p>The explanation may lie in the pharmacological principle that
the body's response to many drugs is logarithmic, not linear.
That is, as the dosage is increased, steadily larger incremental
doses are required to produce a constant increment of response.
Heroin and methadone may be cumulative in their effects, but the
administration of methadone elevates the recipient to a point on
the dose-response curve where only very large additional amounts
of heroin have discernible impact.&quot; </p>

<p>In this context, it is important to remember the suggestion
made earlier that there may be a limit of 120-150 mg. per day of
heroin (the equivalent of 400-500 mg. of morphine) above which
additional amounts of the drug have no euphoric effect. If this
limit is roughly true, even with substantial individual
variations, then many methadone programs may simply boost the
addict to the point where he cannot attain euphoria. Either he
reaches this limit, which would be true at about 180 mg. per day
of methadone, or he reaches a dosage that leaves too small a
margin between his tolerance level and this limit for a euphoric
dose. Lower doses (e.g., 50 mg.) would not approach the euphoric
limit, but they might shift an addict to a point on the
doseresponse curve where the heroin dose he is used to taking
would not have any euphoric effect. </p>

<p><i>Physiological Factors Underlying Addiction. </i>It is
commonly assumed that the causes of addiction are psychological,
and that there is no inherent physical predisposition to
addiction. There is, however, no experimental evidence that would
rule out the possibility that drug addiction, or at least
vulnerability to drug addiction, has a physiological basis. As
Goldstein says: </p>

<p>Certainly socioenvironmental reasons can be found, <i>ex post
facto, to </i>explain each case of addiction to heroin, the
barbiturates, or alcohol, or of habituation to lysergic acid
diethylamide [LSD], marijuana, nicotine, or amphetamine. But most
people afflicted by the same adverse environmental circumstances
do not seek escape through drug abuse. Despite the present
paucity of evidence, therefore, the possibility should be
entertained that the characteristic effects of psychotropic drugs
upon mood, which underlie the development of drug abuse, may be
at least in part genetically determined. </p>

<p>Investigation in this field has not yet transcended the
difficulties of designing experiments free of self-selection or
other kinds of bias, and of working out methods suitable for
quantitation of subjective responses. It has been found, for
example, that housewives who drink large amounts of coffee
responded entirely differently to a test dose of caffeine in a
placebo-controlled experiment than did housewives who never drink
coffee. The coffee drinkers felt more alert and had a sense of
well-being after caffeine, as compared with placebo. The
non-drinkers obtained significantly fewer effects of this kind;
on the other hand, caffeine made them feel nervous and
&quot;jittery.&quot; But it is not known if the group habituated
to coffee would have reacted in the same way at an earlier age,
before their first exposure to caffeine. Large individual
differences are observed in the sensitivity of people to the
sleep-disturbing actions of caffeine, but again it is not clear
whether or not these are innate differences, independent of any
prior exposure to caffeine. One investigation on the coffee
drinking and smoking habits of monozygotic and dizygotic twins
suggests that these two kinds of drug-seeking behavior are
subject to genetic influences.411 </p>

<p>Dole has suggested that an addict may have an underlying
neurological vulnerability to addiction that is triggered by
opiate use.&quot; More recently, he has indicated that opiate use
may induce a metabolic change that will cause the body to crave
opiates thereafter.&quot; But he is not optimistic about the
potential of research on the question, given the present lack of
testable hypotheses that might explain it.&quot; </p>

<p>Another theory concerning physiological propensity to
addiction is more complex. Martin has suggested that an addict
has a particular physiological vulnerability to stress either
before he takes his first narcotic drug or after he starts taking
it. In Martin's view, this vulnerability is not lost after
withdrawal from the drug, and stress situations will trigger a
physiological reaction that results in a craving for the drug.
Martin believes that there is some experimental evidence for this
view and is more optimistic than Dole about possible
research.&quot;<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE HALLUCINOGENS</b> </p>

<p><i>The Drugs.&quot;</i> </p>

<p><i>LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) </i>is a synthetic drug
discovered in 1938. It is closely related to the ergot family,
and ergotamine tartate, used in treatment of migraine headaches,
can be used as raw material in the manufacture of LSD. </p>

<p><i>Mescaline,</i> an alkaloid of the peyote cactus, was
isolated in 1896. It is about .025 per cent as potent as LSD in
producing an altered state of consciousness. But it is probably
just as powerful. </p>

<p><i>Psilocybin</i> <i>and psilocin </i>are the active alkaloids
of the Mexican magic mushroom and are about 1 per cent as potent
as LSD. </p>

<p><i>DOM </i>(also called STP) and MDA are other hallucinogens
chemically related to both mescaline and amphetamine. </p>

<p>DMT (dimethyl tryptamine) is a short-acting hallucinogen. </p>

<p><i>Medical Uses.&quot;</i> Although there are no recognized
medical uses for the hallucinogens at present, some of them have
been, and are being, used experimentally for a variety of
research and therapeutic purposes. LSD and mescaline, for
instance, have been used for research on mental illness and in
psychotherapy. Since certain effects of these drugs mimic the
symptoms of schizophrenia in some ways, it has long been thought
that study of these effects will yield insights into the nature
and causes of psychotic states. A few experiments have been
conducted in which terminal-cancer patients are given LSD in
order to make the &quot;waiting for death&quot; period more
meaningful. Through the LSD experience, the patient learns to
live in the &quot;here and now,&quot; taking each day as it comes
rather than dwelling on his past. Alcoholics and drug addicts
have also been given LSD as part of more comprehensive courses of
treatment. </p>

<p><i>Physical Eflects and Toxicity. </i>LSD is effective when
taken orally, which is the usual method of administration. Some
users claim to have taken it nasally or by injection and state
that injected LSD produces a powerful rush. It produces some
somatic effects that are sympathomimetic, such as pupillary
dilation, increased blood pressure, tremor, nausea, muscular
weakness, and increased body temperature, but these effects are
usually minor. The major effects are almost entirely on the
CNS.&quot; </p>

<p>The effective dosage is quite small. Perceptual changes, the
most dramatic result, can be produced by as little as 251 mcg.
(micrograms). (I gram = 1,000 milligrams = 1,000,000
micrograms.)&quot; The standard dose taken by LSD users is
probably around 200 mcg., although the variability of street
drugs makes it difficult to be accurate. </p>

<p>Although no human deaths as a result of the pharmacological
action of LSD have been reported, animal deaths due to
respiratory failure have occurred in response to massive doses.
At present, it is not clear whether there is a fatal dose for
humans, but it is clear that the ratio of the lethal dose (if
there is one) to the therapeutic dose is very high. It is
difficult to determine the significance of animal experiments for
humans, because different species have markedly different
reactions. Some animals, for example, have been found to be
resistant to LSD; mice, in particular, detoxify the drug quickly,
and the half-life (the period within which half the drug is
metabolized) in a mouse is only seven minutes. In a human, the
half-life is approximately three to three-and-a-half hours; the
total duration of action of the drug is about twelve hours .57 </p>

<p>Despite claims to the contrary, there is no reliable evidence
that LSD causes birth defects. The early studies on this have
been discredited, and no definitive work has been done
since.&quot; One exhaustive study concluded that pure LSD, in
moderate doses, &quot;does not produce chromosome damage
detectable by available methods.&quot;&quot; This problem is
difficult to study, because that part of the population that uses
LSD heavily is also likely to be malnourished, careless about
hygiene and prenatal care, and prone to a variety of physical
problems. Since LSD seems to be a relatively specific drug, in
that it acts primarily on the CNS and has few peripheral effects,
it is not particularly logical to expect that it will produce
birth defects. It would be more sensible to study the large
number of legal drugs that have massive effects on various body
systems, because they would be more likely to affect the
reproductive system as well. The stress on birth defects as a
possible result of LSD appears to be motivated more by the desire
to prevent its use than by the desire to prevent birth defects. </p>

<p><i>Psychoactive Eflects.&quot; </i>The hallucinogens do not
produce hallucinations in the classic sense-it is rare for a user
to see things that are not there. Rather, perception is altered:
Afterimages are prolonged and overlap with present perceptions;
objects seem to move in a wavelike fashion or melt; and sensory
impressions become overwhelming. Synesthesia-a state where colors
are &quot;heard&quot; and sound is &quot;seen&quot;-is common. </p>

<p>Perhaps more important to the user than these perceptual
effects are the subjective effects. Time may seem to pass very
slowly; self-boundaries appear to disintegrate; and the user soon
comes to feel a sense of oneness with the universe. There may
also be a sense of unusual clarity, and one's thoughts may begin
to assume extraordinary importance. Moods may change radically,
from gaiety to depression, from elation to fear, or vice versa. </p>

<p>Many users attach great meaning to their experiences. Some
regard the use of LSD as a form of psychotherapy, since they
believe it increases <b>one's </b>self-knowledge and
self-awareness, largely through the recall of old and hitherto
buried memories. Others may go further and emphasize the mystical
and religious aspects of their drug-induced feelings. </p>

<p>Some of the possible, long-term psychological reactions were
examined in an experiment in which LSD was administered to
previously naive subjects. The subjects were given a number of
psychological tests-before taking LSD, immediately after the
experience, and six months later.&quot; All changes were quite
small; the main findings indicated a negative correlation between
the use of LSD, on the one hand, and aggression, competition, and
preference for structure and conformity, on the other. Rather, a
positive correlation with an increase in aesthetic appreciation
was found. One result of the experiment was proved particularly
illuminating: Fifty-nine per cent of the subjects who had been
given 200 mg. of LSD thought that the drug had had lasting
effects on their personality, even though the tests
&quot;provided only minimal supportive evidence.&quot;&quot; In
the control groups, none of those given 25 mg. of LSD, and 13 per
cent of those given 20 mg. of amphetamine, had similar feelings
about the experience. While other researchers have found a
negative correlation between chronic LSD use and aggression and
competition,&quot; there is a self selected quality to the
voluntary chronic user that did not exist in the above
experiment. </p>

<p>The major short-term risk of taking LSD is the &quot;bad
trip,&quot; a term used to describe several different types of
adverse experiences. A mild adverse reaction can mean only that
the images and feelings during the experience were unpleasant. At
the other extreme, a serious panic reaction, accompanied by
immense anxiety and fear, may occur. Bad trips are probably
common, but most of them do not reach the severe level. </p>

<p>Under clinical conditions, serious adverse reactions appear to
be rare. In one study, for instance, it was found that 25,000
administrations of LSD to 5,000 people in clinical settings had
resulted in only 0.08 per cent serious reactions in experimental
subjects and 0.34 per cent in subjects undergoing therapy.
&quot;Serious&quot; was defined as causing either suicide or a
suicide attempt or a psychotic break lasting more than
forty-eight hours. 14 </p>

<p>Of course, most LSD use does not take place under clinical
conditions; some observers believe that such use may therefore
result in higher percentages of adverse effects, for several
reasons. To begin with, putative LSD may be heavily adulterated
with substances ranging from strychnine to methamphetamine. Also,
use of LSD has been an illegal and deviant activity; this may
make users anxious and more susceptible to bad reactions. It is
also possible that a higher proportion of street users have
psychological factors impelling them toward deviant behavior than
would be true of an experimental population. Age differences may
also be an important factor in adverse reactions (a theory in the
field is that young users are more likely to lack the experience
and identity that enable a more mature person to handle the
powerful impact of the drug) . </p>

<p>One could, of course, argue the precise opposite on almost
every point made in the last paragraph. For example, street users
may seek out warm and supportive settings that reduce the
incidence of bad reactions as compared with the clinical setting.
LSD use may be deviant in the context of the larger culture but
not in the subculture within which most users live. Older people,
generally more rigid in their attitudes, may resist the drug
effect and panic, while younger people, being more flexible, may
accept -the drug experience more easily. Contact with a
subculture in which LSD is common may reduce fear of the drug,
regardless of age, more than will clinical reassurances. </p>

<p>At present, there is no rational way to choose between these
arguments. It should be emphasized that reports of large numbers
of serious adverse reactions among street users have not been
documented. What evidence there is consists mostly of anecdotes. </p>

<p>Chlorpromazine, a powerful tranquilizer used in the treatment
of psychiatric illness, will counter the physical effects of <b>LSD
</b>almost immediately. If, however, the LSD user is having a
panic reaction, it may continue in spite of the chlorpromazine.
Physicians familiar with this phenomenon believe that
chemotherapy may prolong panic because of the anxiety its
administration arouses in the patient. &quot;Talking the patient
down&quot; in a calm manner is the preferred treatment .115 </p>

<p>There are some long-term risks associated with LSD use. In
some individuals, prolonged negative effects are associated with
use of hallucinogens; cases of serious depression, paranoid
behavior, and prolonged psychotic episodes have been documented.
Whether the hallucinogens cause these effects is not clear. LSD
may serve only to precipitate them in someone who is about to
have such a problem anyway. The frequency of such effects is not
known. </p>

<p>Another possible long-term effect of the hallucinogens is the
flashbacks recurrence of some aspect of the drug experience vhen
the subject is nor under the influence of the drug. The flash)ack
encompasses a wide range of possible LSD-like perceptual or
subjective effects of varying degrees of severity and duration,
lasting from a few minutes to several hours and occurring with
indeterminate frequency. The user is not affected between
experiences. Causation has not been definitely proved, however,
and it could be that a controlled experiment would find similar
experiences in a non-LSD-using populations&quot; </p>

<p>The most common type of flashback recorded is the recurrence
of perceptual distortion; the rarest is the recurrence of altered
physical sensation; and the most dangerous is the recurrence of
disturbing emotion and panic. (This may be hard to distinguish
from the depressive reaction or schizophrenic episodes discussed
above.) The last two types of flashbacks are more likely to occur
after a bad trip than after a good one. </p>

<p>Assuming that flashbacks are caused by LSD, the mechanism
responsible is a mystery. The theory that LSD persists in the
nervous system is not compatible with its known short life, and
the theory of a persistent, undiscovered metabolite is
incompatible with the wide variations in onset and duration.
Nevertheless, there is no lack of other theories, ranging from
semipermanent changes in the optic pathways, to learned responses
to stress, to dissociative reactions. Generally, it is probably
psychological rather than chemical, but, given the lack of
knowledge about the relationship between psychological and
chemical events, this conclusion does not tell very much.&quot; </p>

<p>There is no information on the incidence of flashbacks, the
extent to which they occur after only one LSD experience, or the
relative frequency of the different types. </p>

<p>The effects of the other hallucinogens are similar to those of
LSD. Mescaline, which lasts as long and has about the same
effects, although it is less potent, seems to be the usergs drug
of choice. It is unclear whether this preference is due to the
publicity regarding possible birth defects caused by LSD or to
some subtle difference in effect. It may just as well be due to
the belief of many users that natural substances are superior to
synthetics, a factor that may also account for the preference for
the mushroom hallucinogens. This question has not been studied
clinically, and it is difficult to know the effects of natural
hallucinogens, since they are rarely available. Most street
mescaline is either LSD or LSD plus speed or some other
adulterant. </p>

<p>DOM (STP), MDA, and some other drugs are a cross between
hallucinogens and amphetamines. The duration of action of DOM is
sixteen to twenty-four hours, and rough observations indicate
that the incidence of panic reactions and flashbacks has been
higher than that associated with LSD. The physiological effects
(rapid heart rate, dry mouth, dilated pupils) are also more
pronounced. It is possible that, when the drug first appeared,
users were more prone to panic, because they were not prepared
for the long duration and greater physical reaction.&quot; Jaffe
states that low doses of DOM give some of the subjective effects
of LSD without the perceptual or hallucinogenic effects, although
the drug has typical psychedelic action at higher doses.&quot; </p>

<p>According to some sources, MDA causes an LSD-type reaction for
the first six to eight hours, but it also has amphetaminelike
effects that persist for a longer time. Other reports are that
MDA is <i>sui generis, </i>with LSD-like subjective feelings but
without the perceptual distortion of LSD or
depersonalization.&quot; </p>

<p>DMT is a hallucinogen whose effects last only forty-five
minutes to an hour. It is sometimes called &quot;the
businessman's lunch.&quot; </p>

<p><i>Tolerance. </i>Tolerance to the hallucinogens develops
rapidly. If taken daily for three or four days, LSD will cease to
have any substantial effect.&quot; The tolerance does not appear
to be so closely tied to the dosage as in the case with other
drugs to which tolerance develops-that is, it seems that one
cannot achieve the desired effect simply by increasing the dose.
The sources, however, are ambivalent on this. Sensitivity returns
after a few days of abstinence. </p>

<p>There is cross-tolerance among LSD, mescaline, and psilocybin
but not between any of these and the amphetamines.&quot; There is
no information on DOM, MDA, or DMT on this point. </p>

<p><i>Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. </i>Hallucinogens such
as LSD and mescaline do not produce physical dependence, and
there are no withdrawal symptoms after discontinuation.&quot;
Again, there appears to be little information on DOM, MDA, or
DMT; at least, there are no reports of dependence or withdrawal.
They are likely to be about the same as LSD. </p>

<p><i>Mechanisms of Action. </i>A number of CNS effects of LSD
are known; the manner in which LSD causes these effects, however,
is still not known. LSD and the other hallucinogens interfere
with the production and action of serotonin (also called 5-HT or
5-hydroxytryptamine) in the brain. This is an important body
substance with significant effects on many organ systems. But,
since the functions of serotonin in the CNS are not known, this
does not represent substantial progress in understanding
LSD.&quot; <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>CANNABIS&quot;<br>
</b></p>

<p><i>The Drugs. Cannabis sativa, </i>the hemp plant, grows
almost everywhere in the world. It flourishes in hot, dry
climates, and it is generally believed that plants produced in
such regions have the most pronounced psychoactive effects. <i>Marijuana
</i>consists of the chopped leaves and stems of the cannabis
plant. It is usually smoked, but it can be taken orally. <i>Hashish
</i>is formed of resin scraped from the flowering top of the
cannabis plant. It, too, can be smoked or eaten, and it is
thought to be about five to eight times as potent as marijuana.
Some experts believe there are qualitative differences in effect
as well as simple differences in potency. <i>Kil, bhang, and
gania </i>are other preparations of cannabis used in various
parts of the world. Their potency lies between that of marijuana
and that of hashish. </p>

<p>The most important psychoactive ingredient of cannabis is
known to be delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), but the
possibility of additional ingredients exercising some effect has
not been precluded. </p>

<p><i>Cannabis </i>is a difficult drug to classify. Although it
is often referred to as a mild hallucinogen, it does not have
many of the effects associated with hallucinogens, and probably
has a different mechanism of action altogether. It also has some
sedative effects but lacks many of the other characteristics of
the sedative hypnotics. With good reason, therefore, it is
usually classified as unique.&quot; </p>

<p><i>Medical Uses. </i>There is no accepted medical use for <i>cannabis
</i>in the United States. In the past, especially during the late
nineteenth century, it was quite popular among European and
American doctors, who prescribed it for a variety of ailments
ranging from menstrual cramps to migraine headaches. It was thus
used generally as a mild anodyne (pain killer) or
tranquilizer-but it may have more specific effects as well.&quot;
</p>

<p>By the early twentieth century, the use of <i>cannabis </i>for
medical purposes had declined, largely because of inconsistency
in the potency of the drug. Since <i>cannabis </i>was cultivated
in many places with wide variations in climatic and soil
conditions, no physician could be sure of potency of any given
batch. This made it difficult to predict results. It also
inhibited research, since nonreplication of scientific findings
might invariably have been due to differences in the drugs used. </p>

<p>Another problem was that there was no satisfactory way to
administer the drug for medical purposes. Smoking is not a
medically acceptable method, because the doctor cannot know how
much of the drug is being inhaled and absorbed. Oral
administration is possible, but effects are delayed. Moreover,
since neither the plant material nor the resin is soluble in
water, injection is difficult. Thus, as other drugs became
available-particularly the barbiturate sedative hypnotics, which
began appearing on the market in <i>1903-cannabis </i>was
replaced. </p>

<p>Almost no research has been done on the drug since the late
nineteenth century, and government policies made such research
impossible from 1937 to about 1968. Whether <i>cannabis </i>has
unique medical uses or is in some ways superior to common
tranquilizers now in use is therefore an open question. A revival
of interest is now taking place, however, in the medical
community. For example, several doctors are using <i>cannabis </i>to
treat migraine headaches, and some research is being done into
its effectiveness as a treatment for epilepsy. Certain variants
of THC may lower the blood pressure of hypertensive people.&quot;
</p>

<p>The isolation and synthesis of THC-achieved in the early
1960's-has promoted such research by making consistency in dosage
conceivable for the first time. In addition, NIMH has a project
under way to cultivate <i>cannabis </i>in Mississippi, with the
objective of providing drugs of constant quality to researchers.
But there are still problems: For example, there is some evidence
that THC is subject to oxidation, and that the potency of <i>cannabis
</i>may therefore change over a period of time that varies with
storage methods. Also, THC is expensive to synthesize and remains
in short supply. Recent work has developed at least one water
soluble derivative of THC with a pharmacological profile similar
to that of the original drugs. This should aid research further. </p>

<p><i>Physical Effects and Toxicity. </i>The immediate physical
effects <i>of cannabis </i>on man are mild. Heart rate is
increased moderately. There is a dilation of the conjunctival
blood vessels (i.e., a reddening of the eyes) and sometimes an
increase in heart rate. There appear to be no changes in
respiratory rate, pupil size, or blood-sugar level. After a
single inhaled dose, measurable physical effects reach a maximum
within half an hour and diminish three to five hours later.&quot;
When <i>cannabis </i>is eaten, the effects are delayed for
several hours, and symptoms may persist for up to twenty-four
hours. </p>

<p>As discussed in the next section, subjective effects of high
doses of the cannabinols may be similar to those of LSD. This has
led some to classify them as mild hallucinogens. Physical effects
are not the same, however, because <i>cannabis </i>does not have
the stimulating effects of LSD and has sedative properties that
LSD lacks. There is no cross-tolerance between the cannabinols
and the hallucinogens.&quot; </p>

<p>At present, there is no reliable evidence of organic damage,
and the most that can be said against <i>cannabis </i>is that the
effects of long-term or heavy use have not been ascertained. To
be sure, heavy, long-term smokers of <i>cannabis </i>develop
bronchial disorders, but these seem no different from the
difficulties experienced by heavy smokers of tobacco. Reports of
long-term brain damage are suspect, at best. For one thing, they
derive from studies of <i>cannabis </i>users in underdeveloped
countries, such as India and Morocco. These studies, furthermore,
are skewed by the fact that they used inmates of mental
institutions as subjects and assumed a causative relation if they
found that the inmates had been users of <i>cannabis. </i>Scientific
protective devices, such as control groups and blind studies,
were lacking. The recent crash program of federal research has
not filled this gap, and many experts do not expect that it will
do so. In this view, gross organic damage would have been found
before now, and long term subtle damage is difficult to study
retrospectively. </p>

<p>The lethal dose of THC for humans has not been determined, but
it is known that the cannabinols are not very toxic: There has
yet to be a report of a human death due to an overdose of THC.
Animal experiments have found that the 16thal dose for rats is
between 800 and 1,400 milligrams of drug per kilogram of body
weight for oral administration. Extrapolating from studies in
mice, the ratio of the lethal dose to the effective dose for
humans would be about 40,000 to 1. (The effective dose is that
amount necessary to produce clinically desired effects. For THC
in humans, it is about 50 micrograms per kilogram.) By way of
comparison, the ratio for barbiturates is about 10 to 1&quot; </p>

<p>Recent research has found that injected THC has a half-life in
the body of fifty-six hours, and that traces can be found in the
urine for up to eight days. There is also a possibility that it
may accumulate in lung or fat tissue.&quot; The clinical
implications of these facts, however, are not known. </p>

<p><i>Psychoactive Effects. </i>The general effect of <i>cannabis
</i>is &quot;a subtle mood change not easily perceived by the
novice.&quot;&quot; The most common mood encouraged by the drug
is a sense of increased well-being, but this is heavily dependent
on the setting and expectations of the user. The nervousness that
may accompany first use, for example, can negate any reaction to
the drug. Set and setting help to produce a wide range of
reactions and may be more crucial determinants of the effects of <i>cannabis
</i>use than those of most other drugs.&quot; The effects
described below are those observed in clinical trials and
obtained from interviews with users. </p>

<p>One important effect is the enhancement of the senses.
Sensitivity to colors, sounds, patterns, textures, and taste is
greatly increased. Perception of space and time is distorted in
ways that can be either pleasing or disconcerting. In particular,
time passes very slowly. Inhibitions may be relaxed in a manner
reminiscent of the effects of low doses of alcohol. The subject
may develop a sense of being in a fantasy or dreamlike state (an
effect achieved also by sedatives and anesthetics). </p>

<p>In clinical experiments, large doses of THC have produced
LSD-type experiences, but this requires quantities of THC far in
excess of the concentrations found in organic <i>cannabis. Real </i>hallucinations
do not occur. </p>

<p>The dose-response curve of THC has not yet been established;
nor have systematic comparisons of THC and LSD been made. </p>

<p>Significant adverse reactions to <i>cannabis </i>are rare, but
they do occur. They are more common when strong forms, such as
hashish, are used. There are four types that may result: </p>

<p>(1) simple depression, (2) a panic state, (3) toxic psychosis,
and (4) psychotic break. </p>

<p>Of the four, the simple depression reaction is the mildest and
most common. Its genesis is not known. People may be responding
idiosyncratically to pharmacological effects of the drug; or <i>the
cannabis </i>may intensify pre-existing but suppressed
psychological states or traits. It is likely, also, that the
different explanations might each account for some of the
depressions seen. In any event, the reaction ends spontaneously. </p>

<p>The panic reaction occurs when a user interprets the use or
effects of <i>cannabis </i>as a threat to life or sanity. It is
most likely to occur in subjects with no prior drug experience
who are ambivalent toward drug use and possibly fearful of police
arrest. Verbal and personal support by peers is the most
effective therapy; hospitalization and the use of tranquilizers
are usually contraindicated unless the person is highly
agitated.&quot; </p>

<p>Many panic reactions have been misdiagnosed as examples of
toxic psychosis-a condition in which the presence of toxins in
the body causes organic malfunction in the cerebral cortex and a
resultant psychotic state. This reaction is even rarer than the
panic reaction and ends when the toxins are flushed from the
system. A user is vulnerable to such a reaction when consuming <i>cannabis
</i>in concentrated forms, especially if the drug is mixed with
food and drink. The effects are delayed while the drug is being
absorbed, and the user cannot use the effects of the drug as a
measure of when he has had enough. In the view of some experts,
smoking <i>cannabis </i>allows the user to regulate consumption
in reaction to the immediate effects of the drug's passing into
the blood stream via the lungs. </p>

<p>The view that differences in reaction to the two methods of
administration are due to control of dosage can be questioned,
however. Dr. Andrew Weil states: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>This theory of autotitration sounds nice, but I do not see
    it happen much. Most marijuana smokers I know smoke as much
    as they are handed. What is interesting is that one reaches
    some sort of ceiling in smoking: beyond a certain point, one
    does not get any higher, only more sedated. With oral
    ingestion, on the other hand, one can <br>
    easily get into the toxic range. These observations suggest
    pharmacological differences between the two routes of
    administration.86<br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>The use of <i>cannabis </i>may also trigger a psychotic break
in individuals who have normal psychological histories. Although
evidence is scarce, the degree of risk is probably very small. A
recent study reviewed twelve cases of <i>cannabis-related </i>psychotic
breaks arising over a ten-month period among soldiers stationed
in Vietnam. Only two of the twelve had &quot;significant
psychiatric histories and diagnosis of personality
disorder.&quot; In all cases, the reaction occurred after the
first use of <i>cannabis </i>and was self limiting, in that the
condition cleared spontaneously.&quot; Since about 30 per cent of
the 500,000 American soldiers in Vietnam at the time had probably
consumed <i>cannabis </i>at least once, often in potent form, the
incidence seems low. </p>

<p>Other data support this conclusion. During a fifteen-month
period, approximately 30,000 persons were treated at the Haight
Ashbury Clinic for a variety of medical and psychiatric problems.
An estimated 95 per cent had used <i>cannabis. </i>No case of a
psychotic break was recorded.&quot; </p>

<p>The risk of a psychotic break may be higher for users who have
a history of mental disorder. There is some evidence to support
this, but there are no statistical data on the degree to which
such population is at greater risk than &quot;normals.&quot; </p>

<p><i>Tolerance. Cannabis </i>appears to have the unusual
property of &quot;reverse tolerance,&quot; in that regular users
are more sensitive to the drug than novices. This characteristic
has been conventional wisdom within the drug culture for some
time; it is supported by a recent scientific study that used
radioactive isotope tagging to detect THC in body tissues several
days after the drug had been injected. The conclusion was that
THC may accumulate in the body, so that a regular user may
already have a &quot;basic dose&quot; and require only a small,
additional amount to obtain a psychoactive effect.&quot; </p>

<p>It is not known whether pharmacological tolerance to <i>cannabis
</i>develops. Because of the &quot;reverse tolerance&quot;
effect, experts have assumed that there was no such tolerance;
but, if the effects are cumulative, then &quot;reverse
tolerance&quot; in users could be accompanied by pharmacological
tolerance. For example, when synhexyl, a potent synthetic <i>cannabis
</i>derivative, is administered, tolerance develops in four to
six days.&quot; </p>

<p><i>Physical Dependence. </i>There is little evidence that
physical dependence develops with the consumption of <i>cannabis,
</i>and no significant withdrawal symptoms accompany cessation of
use. If dependence of any kind develops, it is probably
psychological, but even this appears to be minimal.&quot; </p>

<p><i>Mechanisms of Action. </i>The way in which <i>cannabis
causes </i>CNS effects is not known. </p>

<p><i>Additional Sources. </i>A number of comprehensive reviews
of marijuana have recently been published, taking up many of the
above issues in greater depth. Some of these are </p>

<p>U.S. Government, Secretary of Department of Health, Education
and Welfare, <i>Marihuana and Health: A Report to Congress, </i>January
31, 1971 (GPO, 1971) </p>

<p>Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology, <i>A
Review of the Biomedical Effects of Marijuana on Men in the
Military Environment </i>(Bethesda, Maryland, December, 1970) </p>

<p>Lester Grinspoon, <i>Marihuana Reconsidered </i>(Harvard
University Press, 1971) </p>

<p>Leo E. Hollister, &quot;Marihuana in Man: Three Years
Later,&quot; <i>Science, </i>CLXXII, No. 21 (April, 1971)<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE MAJOR STIMULANTS<br>
</b></p>

<p><i>The Drugs.&quot; </i>This category of drugs includes those
that have the effect of stimulating physical and mental activity
and of providing a feeling of such stimulation to the user: </p>

<p><i>Amphetamines </i>are synthetic drugs that are part of the
general category of sympathomirnetic agents-a group of drugs
whose effects resemble the response to stimulation of certain
nerves of the sympathetic nerve system (hence
&quot;sympathomimetic&quot;). They are CNS stimulants. </p>

<p><i>Methamphetamine </i>is a close relative of the
amphetamines. The major distinction is that it has a different
ratio between central effects and peripheral actions than do the
basic amphetamines. Small doses of methamphetamine produce
prominent central stimulant reactions without significant
peripheral effects. </p>

<p><i>Cocaine </i>is an alkaloid of the coca plant. In general
effects, it is quite similar to the amphetamines. </p>

<p><i>Methylphenidate (Ritalin) </i>is a mild CNS stimulant,
between caffeine and the amphetamines in its effects. </p>

<p><i>Phenmetrazine (Preludin) </i>is also a sympathomimetic
agent. Its effects are almost indistinguishable from those of
amphetamines. </p>

<p>This section discusses amphetamines primarily, as the
prototype. Significant differences are noted as relevant. </p>

<p><i>Medical Uses.&quot; </i>The amphetamines are used to treat
a rare condition called narcolepsy-the inability to stay awake.
They are also used in the treatment of obesity because of their
characteristic of depressing the appetite centers, but the
results in this area are unimpressive. Amphetamines are useful in
the treatment of children with hyperkinesis. This condition,
which is also called minimal brain dysfunction, is one in which a
child shows an inability to concentrate, a deficiency in motor
skills, a low frustration level, and often an abnormal EEG
pattern. </p>

<p>Quasimedical uses are very common. Amphetamines increase
short-term physical and mental performance and are widely used by
people who desire this effect, such as students and athletes.
They are also used by people who have become dependent on or
habituated to them to maintain their normal level of functioning.
</p>

<p>Cocaine is not used medically for any of the above purposes,
but it is used as a local anesthetic. </p>

<p>Ritalin is effective in treating hyperkinesis and, because it
is milder than the amphetamines, may be the drug of choice.&quot;
</p>

<p><i>Physical Effects and Toxicity. </i>In different relative
degrees, sympathomimetic agents have the following major
actions:&quot; </p>

<p>A peripheral excitatory action on such smooth muscles as those
in blood vessels supplying the skin and on salivary and some
sweat glands; </p>

<p>A peripheral inhibitory effect on other types of smooth
muscles, such as those in the wall of the gut, on the bronchial
tree, and on the blood vessels supplying the skeletal muscle; A
cardiac excitatory action that increases heart rate and force of
contraction; </p>

<p>Certain metabolic actions; </p>

<p>CNS excitatory actions, such as respiratory stimulation and
others. </p>

<p>Amphetamines follow this scheme. Blood pressure is increased,
and the smooth muscle responses, while somewhat unpredictable,
are as indicated. The amphetamines are more potent in their CNS
effects than other drugs in the group, and it is through the
effects on the CNS that they stimulate respiration, depress the
appetite, and reverse fatigue. The results of an oral dose of 10
to 30 mg. of amphetamine (the standard therapeutic dose is 10
mg.) are wakefulness, alertness, decreased sense of fatigue,
elevation of mood with increased initiative, confidence, and
ability to concentrate, elation and euphoria, and an increase in
motor and speech activity. Prolonged use or heavy dosage is
followed by mental depression and fatigue. </p>

<p>Cocaine has the same effects as the amphetamines. The major
difference is that the effects of the amphetamines last several
hours, while those of cocaine seem to last only minutes.&quot;
Ritalin has less motor effect on motor and mental activities than
do the amphetamines. Some CNS effect is produced by doses that
have little effect on respiration and blood pressure.&quot; </p>

<p>The amphetamines can be quite toxic. Severe reactions have
occurred with only 30 mg., and death has resulted from 120 mg. of
injected amphetamine. The range is wide, however, and doses of
400 to 500 mg. have been survived by nontolerant individuals.
Death from overdose is quite rare, possibly because the ratio of
lethal to effective psychoactive dose is high for a tolerant
user.&quot; </p>

<p>Cocaine is toxic because the central stimulation that is the
immediate effect of the drug is followed by depression of the
higher nervous centers. Death from respiratory depression occurs
when the vital medullary centers are sufficiently depressed. The
fatal dose of cocaine has been estimated to be about 1.2 grams
taken at one time, but severe toxic effects have been reported on
doses as low as 20 mg.&quot; </p>

<p>The basic symptoms of amphetamine poisoning are extensions of
its normal therapeutic effects on the CNS, the cardiovascular
system, and the gastrointestinal system. A fatal dose ends in
convulsions and coma. Cerebral hemorrhage is a common autopsy
finding, but it is rarely massive. &quot;Pathological findings in
both man and animals are generally nonspecific and show pulmonary
congestion and often congestion of other organs including the
brain.&quot;&quot;' </p>

<p>Amphetamines are usually taken orally, but they can be
injected. Cocaine is not effective when taken orally, but it can
be snorted and absorbed through the mucous membrane or taken
intravenously. Medically, cocaine is only applied to body
surfaces as a local anesthetic; it is not injected or used
internally. </p>

<p>The major, long-term toxic effect of amphetamine use is a
paranoid psychosis that is often indistinguishable from a
schizophrenic reaction. This can occur after continued use or
even after an extremely heavy single dose. It usually disappears
within a week if the individual stops using the drug. Cocaine can
cause the same condition even more rapidly. </p>

<p>Whether these drugs cause long-term organic damage to the body
is at present unknown. Some experts who have worked with
amphetamine users believe that there is a long-term deterioration
that is explicable only in terms of organic damage. At present,
however, this has not been definitely established. In animal
experiments, death often results from continued administration of
methampbetamine, but the reason appears to be that the animal's
disinterest in food, combined with its hyperactivity, results in
a malnourished conditi6n that leaves it vulnerable to infection.
There have been some preliminary reports attributing arterial
disease to methamphetarnine use, but these have not yet been
substantiated and should not be accepted until further evidence
develops. </p>

<p>Hepatitis is very common among amphetamine users. This is to
be expected when hypodermic needles are used without proper
sterilization, but its incidence goes even beyond the level
logically attributable to this cause alone. Some consideration is
now being given to the possibility that amphetamine is itself
directly toxic to the liver. No clinical evidence on this
possibility has been developed, however, and it remains only a
possibility.&quot;' </p>

<p><i>Psychoactive Effects. </i>When taken orally, amphetamines
produce an elevation of mood and feeling of power and intensity
that many persons find quite pleasurable. The drugs increase
concentration and physical and mental performance and reduce
fatigue. Some users claim that orgasms are delayed and made more
intense when they occur, but no objective experiments have been
done. </p>

<p>The drugs produce the same effect even when taken
intravenously. In addition, the user obtains a &quot;rush&quot;
that is reputed to be different from, although related to, the
effect obtained from opiate injection. Again, sexual analogies
are often made by users. It is difficult to know whether the rush
is a product of the drug itself or of the process of intravenous
injection. Some users actually prefer impure methamphetamine
because of the belief that the impurities cause a faster, more
intense rush.&quot;' </p>

<p>As the dosage increases, the experience seems to become more
fragmented. Increased ability to concentrate turns either into a
compulsion to do repetitive tasks over and over or into a total
focusing of attention on some object or toy. Heavy users have a
compulsion to take mechanical objects apart and a similar
compulsion to try (unsuccessfully) to put them together again.
Such repetitive behavior occurs in animals as well as in
humans.&quot;' </p>

<p>Eventually-and fairly predictably-heavy amphetamine use during
a limited period of time will result in paranoid ideation and the
toxic psychosis discussed above. To some extent, users are aware
of this aspect of amphetamine use and can make allowances for it
during the experience. They will not act on moderate ideas of
persecution or visual illusions. If the run continues long
enough, this control will be lost. </p>

<p>Some heavy users may become chronically psychotic, in that
they exhibit psychotic symptoms even when not taking the drug.
The California experience is that normal functioning returns over
a period of six to twelve months, although the user himself may
feel some residual disablement .104 </p>

<p>Cocaine has roughly the same effects as amphetamines in terms
of creating feelings of well-being, euphoria, and power.
According to the accounts of users, these feelings are even
stronger with cocaine than with the amphetamines, but reliable
evidence is unobtainable. </p>

<p>Tolerance.&quot; Tolerance to most effects of the amphetamines
develops rapidly, and very high dosage levels can be reached. A
speed user on a run may inject as much as a gram of the drug
every two or three hours around the clock for several days.
Whether this is drug disposition or cellular tolerance is not
known. The development of tolerance is not uniform, however, and
the ability to withstand what would otherwise be a fatal dose
does not confer tolerance to the toxic psychosis. </p>

<p>It is not certain that tolerance to cocaine develops. There
are reports of very large doses-such as 10 grams per day-but
individuals seem able to tolerate the same doses after a period
of abstinence as before. it is known that the liver is extremely
effective at detoxifying cocaine and can process a lethal dose
every hour. </p>

<p>There are no reports of cross-tolerance between cocaine and
the amphetamines, but cross-tolerance between amphetamine and the
other stimulants has been reported clinically. </p>

<p><i>Physical Dependence. </i>For a long time, it was believed
that there were no withdrawal symptoms from amphetamines and
therefore no physical dependence. At present, it is thought that
the prolonged sleep, lassitude, and depression that follow
discontinuation of the drug are greater than would be
attributable to the preceding loss of sleep and weight. These may
be withdrawal symptoms. In addition, the percentage of REM sleep
increases after discontinuance of amphetamine, returns to normal
when amphetamine is given, and rises again when amphetamine is
withheld. This meets the criteria for a withdrawal
symptom.&quot;' The sources are silent, however, on the extent to
which these symptoms are dose-related. </p>

<p>Some experts in the field believe that amphetamines are far
more dangerous than the opiates. This is related not only to the
typicality of the euphoric effect but also to the problems of
tolerance and stabilization. Dr. Weil elaborates: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>In fact, amphetamine dependence is more serious than
    narcotic dependence because it is inherently less stable.
    When a person begins using a tolerance-producing drug, he
    must soon face the problem of trying to stabilize his use in
    order to keep his life from being disrupted. More than any
    other class of drugs, the amphetamines foil the user's
    attempt to reach equilibrium with his habit because they
    produce such powerful and unrelenting tolerance.
    Consequently, users develop erratic patterns of use such as
    &quot;spree shooting,&quot; alternation with barbiturates
    and, eventually, with heroin. The high correlation of
    amphetamine use with impulsive and violent behavior is
    consistent with this pharmacological instability.107 <br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Because intensive use of amphetamines is a relatively recent
phenomenon, there is little information on such problems as
readdiction vulnerability, physiological bases of abuse, or
comparative success of different methods of treatment. There is
no treatment comparable to methadone, but neither is there any
particular evidence that such treatment is needed. The pattern of
heavy amphetamine use is probably too hard to sustain for an
extended period of time anyway, and there is increasing
indication that heavy amphetamine users eventually turn to
&quot;down&quot; drugs, such as heroin or barbiturates.&quot;' </p>

<p><i>Mechanisms of Action. </i>There are several theories about
the mechanisms of the CNS effects of the amphetamines, most based
on analogies to their peripheral effects, but none is
definitive.&quot;' While the effects of all the drugs are
similar, the mechanisms may be different; for example, there are
probably significant differences between the amphetamines and
cocaine.&quot;'<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>BARBITURATES AND TRANQUILIZERS<br>
</b></p>

<p><i>The Drugs.&quot;'</i> Barbiturates and tranquilizers are
sedatives (calming agents), hypnotics (sleep-inducing agents),
and depressants. The category encompasses a wide range of drugs
of different families. For example, over 2,500 barbiturates have
been synthesized, and at least twelve are in common clinical use.
In the area of nonbarbiturate hypnotics, Sharpless lists
twenty-three commonly used drugs belonging to ten different
families. In addition to these two groups, there are a number of
major tranquilizers that are used in the treatment of psychiatric
disorders. </p>

<p>More is known about these drugs than about those discussed in
previous sections. This is in part because they have been in wide
use for a long time, and in part because most of them have more
general effects than do other drugs of abuse. Drugs of this
category act on a number of bodily systems besides the CNS, and
these other systems are more easily studied. This section
discusses the effects of the drugs only insofar as these are
relevant to their abuse potential. </p>

<p>The major drugs involved are as follows: </p>

<p><i>Barbiturates </i>are derivatives of barbituric acid; they
were first used medically in 1903. The major abused drugs in the
series are secobarbital and pentobarbital. </p>

<p><i>Meprobamate (Equinil, Miltown), glutethimide (Doriden),
chlordiazepoxide (Librium), and diazepam (Valium) </i>are CNS
depressants belonging to several different families. Medically,
they are regarded as anti-anxiety agents-not hypnotics-and they
and similar drugs are called the minor tranquilizers. </p>

<p>One group of powerful tranquilizers, the <i>phenothiazines
(Chlorpromazine),</i> are not covered. While they are in common
use, especially for the treatment of serious mental illness, this
class of drugs does not appear to be abused.&quot;' There is no
satisfactory explanation of why they are not attractive to drug
abusers. Obviously, their psychoactive effects must differ
significantly from those of barbiturates or the minor
tranquilizers, but the nature of these differences is unexplored.
</p>

<p>The discussion here centers on barbiturates-the most powerful
and often abused drugs-and brings in others as relevant. </p>

<p><i>Medical Uses.&quot;' </i>The barbiturates are used as
calming agents and as sleeping pills. Some of them are also used
as anticonvulsants in the treatment of certain types of poisoning
or epilepsy. The tranquilizers are used in any situation where
the patient will benefit from an anti-anxiety drug. They are not
sleep-inducing, except insofar as insomnia may be caused by
anxiety. Both are widely used in the practice of medicine. </p>

<p><i>Physical Effects and Toxicity.&quot;' </i>The barbiturates
are general depressants of a wide range of cellular functions in
many organ systems. They are not general anesthetics or
analgesics, however, and will not prevent or relieve pain. (Some
of the ultra-shortacting barbiturates are anesthetics when
injected, but this is a minor exception.) They are respiratory
depressants, and in high concentrations they have direct effects
on the cardiovascular system. Most of the peripheral effects-the
effects directly on the organs themselves-occur only at
concentrations of the drug that exceed those necessary to affect
the CNS and are thus relatively rare. &quot;The CNS is
exquisitely sensitive to the barbiturates, so that, when the
drugs are given in sedative or hypnotic doses, direct actions on
peripheral structures are absent or negligible.&quot;&quot;' The
effect on the CNS can range from coma to mild sedation, depending
on the particular drug, the method of administration, and the
dose. In some individuals, and in some circumstances, low doses
will act as a stimulant rather than a sedative. It is not clear
whether this depends on the mental set of the user or on the
pharmacological phenomenon that the first effect of a drug is
sometimes on brain centers that regulate and inhibit excitatory
bodily functions. </p>

<p>For short- and intermediate-acting barbiturates, the hypnotic
dose is 100-200 mg., which will give six or seven hours of sleep
in the proper environment. The sleep is like physiological sleep,
except that the proportion of REM phase is reduced. (The
amphetamines also reduce REM.) The usual sedative dose is 30-50
mg., given two or three times daily. </p>

<p>The duration of action varies with the particular barbiturate.
Some will last only ten or fifteen minutes, some for more than a
day. Performance degradation, however, may last longer than overt
effects. A 200-mg. dose of secobarbital (which is known as
intermediate in its duration) may cause decreased performance ten
to twenty-two hours later. The aftereffect of the drug may be
hyperexcitability, even though functioning is, in fact, still
impaired. </p>

<p>Taken in large quantities, barbiturates can cause death. The
lethal dose varies, but it can generally be assumed that anything
over ten times the normal hypnotic dose administered at one time
will cause severe poisoning. Moderate poisoning is strikingly
similar to alcoholic intoxication, with slurred speech, poor
reflexes, and the rest of the well-known syndrome. Severe
poisoning is characterized by a deep coma, with respiratory
depression, falling blood pressure, shock syndrome, kidney
failure, and other complications. </p>

<p>The long-term effects of barbiturate use seem to be in some
doubt. The pharmacology books mention only the results of severe
intoxication, not the effects of chronic use. At the same time,
it is known that alcohol and the barbiturates have many
characteristics in common and are to some extent substitutes for
each other. Barbiturates will suppress the withdrawal symptoms of
alcohol and vice versa; the intoxications are similar, and so are
the withdrawal symptoms. In the formal literature, abuse of the
two kinds of drugs is linked as &quot;drug dependence of the
barbiturate-alcohol type.&quot;&quot;' The destructive effects of
long-term heavy alcohol use are familiar, and some authorities
believe that barbiturates may have very similar effects on the
cells of the liver and brain. Presumably, our knowledge of the
toxicity resulting from long-term but moderate use of
barbiturates is in the same limbo as our knowledge of comparable
use of alcohol. </p>

<p><i>Psychoactive Effects. </i>The literature contains numerous
descriptions of the effects of barbiturates on outward behavior.
Intoxication may cause sluggishness, slowness of speech and
comprehension, bad judgment, exaggeration of basic personality
traits, moroseness, or irritability.&quot;' </p>

<p>The sources do not contain a description of the subjective
effects, however, and the nature of the &quot;high&quot; involved
in heavy use is less discussed than is the case for any of the
other drugs of abuse. The general effect seems to be one of
tranquility and peace. How this compares with an opiate high is
not clear. </p>

<p>At doses only slightly in excess of the therapeutic dose, the
effect may be one of excitation and mood elevation rather than of
tranquilization. </p>

<p>A combination of barbiturates and amphetamines produces more
elevation of mood than either taken separately. The reason for
this is not known. Nor is it known whether this is the reason for
the common drug abusers' practice of taking the two in
combination. </p>

<p>The other depressants in this category are abusable and have
much the same effects and symptoms as abused barbiturates. Abuse
in the sense of self-administration does not seem to be terribly
common, however; some of them, such as Librium, have rather
minimal euphoriant effects. In general, from the standpoint of
the abuser, barbiturates-particularly short-acting ones-are a
superior good, with others acceptable as substitutes only if
barbiturates are unavailable. </p>

<p><i>Tolerance. </i>Both drug disposition and pharmacodynamic
tolerance to the barbiturates develop with repeated
administration. The first is caused by the activation of
drug-metabolizing enzymes in the liver and consequent increase in
the speed of detoxation of the drug. A higher dose is then
required to maintain a given tissue concentration. The second
involves the adaptation of nervous tissue to the presence of the
drug. Tolerance develops quickly, and the CNS probably becomes
resistant to the effects of the drug during the action of a
single administration.&quot;' </p>

<p>The tolerance, however, is largely limited to the sedative and
intoxicating effects of the drug. The lethal dose is not much
greater for addicts than for nonaddicts. In addition, the range
of tolerance is narrow. An individual tolerant to 1.2 grams of a
particular drug may show acute intoxication if the dose is raised
as little as 0.1 gram per day. </p>

<p>The other drugs of this class develop tolerance in the same
way and with the same limitations as do the barbiturates. </p>

<p><i>Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. </i>Severe physical
dependence on the barbiturates develops, but, unlike the
situation for the opiates, the dosages required for this effect
are higher than the therapeutic dose. With pentobarbital, for
example, 200 mg. per day can be taken for months without
producing withdrawal, and 400 mg. per day for three months will
produce EEG changes in only 30 per cent of the cases. The other
70 per cent apparently show no effects. After 600 mg. per day for
one to two months, half the subjects will have minor withdrawal
symptoms, and 10 per cent may have a seizure. After continuous,
intoxication with doses of 900 mg. to 2.2 grams, 75 per cent of
the subjects may have seizures, and 60 per cent delirium; all
experience lesser symptoms.&quot;' </p>

<p>Defining &quot;major&quot; withdrawal symptoms as seizures or
psychoses, the time and dosage necessary to produce severe
physical dependence for different sedative hypnotics have been
calculated as follows: ...<br>
</p>

<p>TABLE 1-1 </p>

<p>ADDICTING DOSES OF COMMON SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS* </p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td>Drug</td>
        <td><i>Dependence- producing dosage (mg. daily)</i> </td>
        <td><i>Time necessary to produce dependence (days)</i></td>
        <td><i>Drug dosage equivalent to </i>30 <i>mg. of
        phenobarbital</i> <i>(mg.)</i> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Secobarbital <p>Pentobarbital </p>
        </td>
        <td>800-2,200</td>
        <td>35-37</td>
        <td>100</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Diazepam (Valium)</td>
        <td>80-120</td>
        <td>42</td>
        <td>10 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Chlordiazepoxide hydrochloride (Librium)</td>
        <td>300-600 </td>
        <td>60-180</td>
        <td>25</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Meprobamate (Equanil)</td>
        <td>2,400</td>
        <td>270</td>
        <td>400 </td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>* Dosages sufficient to produce &quot;major&quot; withdrawal
signs in humans.<br>
</p>

<p>As Table 1-1 indicates, the other sedative hypnotics are
thought to produce dependence similar to that caused by
barbiturates. They have not been as carefully studied. </p>

<p>We have found no study that divides opiate withdrawal into
major&quot; and &quot;minor&quot; symptoms. Thus, it is not
possible to compare the development of barbiturate dependence
with that of opiate dependence. </p>

<p>Once physical dependence develops, withdrawal from
barbiturates is severe, and-unlike opiate withdrawal-may be life
threatening. For one of the short-acting drugs, for the first
twelve hours or so the patient seems to improve as the
intoxication clears. He then becomes restless, anxious,
tremulous, and weak, and sometimes has nausea or cramps. Within
twenty-four hours, he may be too weak to get out of bed,
experience severe tremors in the hands, and have hyperactive deep
reflexes. The peak is reached on the second or third day, and
convulsions may occur. Half the patients who have convulsive
seizures go on to delirium, which occurs between the fourth and
seventh days. This consists of high anxiety, hallucinations, and
disorientation. Once delirium occurs, it may not be suppressed
even by large doses of barbiturates. This is contrary to the
normal course of withdrawal symptoms, which are quickly
suppressed by the drug of addiction. The reason for this anomaly
is not known. During the delirium, exhaustion and cardiovascular
collapse may occur. The withdrawal syndrome usually clears by
about the eighth day, if untreated. For longer-acting drugs,
seizures may not occur until the seventh or eighth day, and the
general course is slowed down accordingly.&quot;' </p>

<p>Hallucinations sometimes persist for months, but &quot;this is
felt by most investigators to be a manifestation of an underlying
psychosis.&quot;&quot;' The sources do not discuss whether
barbiturates, like the opiates, have early and protracted
abstinence syndromes. </p>

<p>Meprobomate (Equanil, Miltown) follows the short-acting
course. Libriurn follows that of the long-acting barbiturates. </p>

<p><i>Mechanisms of Action. </i>More is known about the fate of
barbiturates in the body than is known about the other drugs of
abuse. It is known, for example, that they are transformed by the
liver into a number of inactive metabolites that are in turn
excreted. This lessens the concentration of the drug and causes
the withdrawal from its site of action in the CNS. The general
state of knowledge concerning metabolism, physical
redistribution, and excretion is discussed in the sources, as are
the general theories of sites of action in the CNS. These are too
technical to discuss here. The mechanisms by which barbiturates
operate to cause CNS effects are not well understood.&quot;'<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>A WORD ON ALCOHOL<br>
</b></p>

<p>Problems of alcohol and alcoholism were not within the mandate
of the Drug Abuse Survey Project, and they have not been included
in the report or in any of the supporting papers. In the context
of this chapter, however, one comment should be made: Alcohol is
a drug and could easily be analyzed in the same terms as the
drugs that are covered. It has a potent psychoactive effect and
is, like most of the drugs with which we are concerned, highly
specific to the CNS. Both tolerance and physical dependence
develop, and withdrawal can be a very serious clinical condition.
The drug causes organic damage. The interplay of physiological
factors and psychological factors involves as many uncertainties
for alcohol as for the opiates. </p>

<p>In short, the common distinction between alcohol and
&quot;drugs of abuse&quot; is based on the fact that alcohol is
known and accepted in the culture, not on any pharmacological
considerations. It is entirely possible that alcohol is
inherently more dangerous than most of the other drugs discussed.
</p>

<p>In his listing of the hazards of different drugs, Dr. Samuel
Irwin makes the following rankings, starting with the most
dangerous: ... </p>

<p>1. Glue sniffing </p>

<p>2. Methamphetamine </p>

<p>3. Alcohol </p>

<p>4. Cigarettes </p>

<p>5. Barbiturates and hypnotics </p>

<p>6. Heroin and related narcotics </p>

<p>7. LSD and other hallucinogens </p>

<p>8. Marijuana<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5"><b><i>NOTES<br>
</i></b></font></p>

<p>Because the same authors are cited continually in this staff
paper, footnotes give only the author, date of publication when
necessary, and page number. The complete references are as
follows: </p>

<p>Baden, M. Interview by Project Staff. </p>

<p>Ball, I., and 1. Urbaitis. &quot;Absence of Major Medical
Complications Among Chronic Opiate Addicts,&quot; in 1. Ball and
C. Chambers (eds.), <i>The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction in
the United States </i>(Springfield, </p>

<p>Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1970), p. 301. </p>

<p>Blacker, K. &quot;Aggression and the Chronic Use of LSD,&quot;
<i>journal of Psychedelic</i> </p>

<p><i>Drugs, 111, </i>No. I (September, 1970), 32. </p>

<p>Brazeau, P. &quot;Oxytocics,&quot; in L. Goodman and A.
Gilman, <i>The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics </i>(4th
ed.; New York: Macmillan, 1970), p. 893. (This book is hereafter
referred to as Goodman and Gilman.) Brotman, R., and A. Friedman.
&quot;Perspectives on Marijuana Research&quot; </p>

<p>(Center for Studies in Substance Use; mimeograph, undated). </p>

<p>Chopra, C. &quot;Man and Marijuana,&quot; <i>The International
journal of the Addictions, </i>IV, No. 2 (June, 1969), 219-33, </p>

<p>Cohen, S. &quot;Lysergic Acid DiethyIamide: Side Effects and
Complications,&quot; <i>journal of Nervous and Mental Disease </i>CXXX
(1969), 30. Cooper, J., F. Bloom, and R. Roth. <i>The Biochemical
Basis of Neuropharmacology </i>(Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1970). </p>

<p>Dishotsky, N., W. Loughman, R. Mogar, and W. Lipscomb.
&quot;LSD and </p>

<p>Genetic Damage,&quot; <i>Science, </i>CLXXII (April 30, 1971),
431. </p>

<p>Dole, V. &quot;Narcotic Blockade,&quot; <i>Archives of
Internal Medicine, </i>CXVIII </p>

<p>(October, 1966), 304, 305. </p>

<p>... &quot;Research on Methadone Maintenance Treatment,&quot; <i>The
International journal of the Addictions, </i>V, No. 3 (September,
1970), 359. </p>

<p>Dole, V., and M. Nyswander. &quot;Methadone Maintenance and
Its Implications for Theories of Narcotic Addiction,&quot; in A.
Wikler (ed.), <i>The Addictive States </i>(Baltimore, Md.:
Williams and Wilkins, Inc., 1968), p. 359. Douglas, W.
&quot;Histamine and Antihistamines: 5-Hydroxytryptamine and
Antagonists,&quot; in Goodman and Gilman, p. 620. </p>

<p>Eddy, N. Interview by Project Staff. </p>

<p>Eddy, N., <i>et al. </i>&quot;Drug Dependence: Its
Significance and Characteristics,&quot; </p>

<p><i>Bulletin of the World Health Organization, </i>XXXII
(1965), 721. </p>

<p>Egozcue, J., and S. Irwin. &quot;LSD-25 Effects on
Chromosomes: A Review,&quot; </p>

<p><i>journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 111, </i>No. 1 (September,
1970), 10. </p>

<p>Esplin, D., and B. Zablocka-Esplin. &quot;Central Nervous
System Stimulants,&quot; </p>

<p>in Goodman and Gilman, p. 348.<br>
</p>

<p>Fingl, E., and D. Woodbury. &quot;General Principles,&quot; in
Goodman and Gilman, P. 1.<br>
</p>

<p>Goldstein, A. Interview by Project Staff. </p>

<p>Goldstein, A., L. Aronow, and S. Kalman. <i>Principles of Drug
Action (New</i> </p>

<p>York: Harper &amp; Row, 1968).<br>
</p>

<p>Grinspoon, L. <i>Marihuana Reconsidered </i>(Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1971).<br>
</p>

<p>Health, Education and Welfare, Secretary of, <i>Marihuana and
Health: A Report to Congress, </i>January 31, 1971 (GPO, March,
1971). Innes, 1. R., and M. Nickerson. &quot;Drugs Acting on
Postganglionic Adrenic Nerve Endings and Structures Innervated by
Them (Sympathomimetic Drugs),&quot; in Goodman and Gilman, p.
478. </p>

<p>Irwin, S. <i>Drugs of Abuse: An Introduction to Their Actions
and Potential Hazards </i>(Student Association for the Study of
the Hallucinogens, 1970). </p>

<p>Jaffe, J. &quot;Narcotic Analgesics&quot; and &quot;Drug
Addiction and Drug Abuse,&quot; in </p>

<p>Goodman and Gilman, pp. 237 and 276. </p>

<p>Jarvik, M. &quot;Drugs Used in the Treatment of Psychiatric
Disorders,&quot; in </p>

<p>Goodman and Gilman, p. 15 1. </p>

<p>Koelle, G. &quot;Neurohumoral Transmission and the Autonomic
Nervous System,&quot; in Goodman and Gilman, p. 402. </p>

<p>Kramer, J. &quot;An Introduction to Amphetamine Abuse,&quot; <i>journal
of Psychedelic</i> </p>

<p><i>Drugs, 11, </i>No. 2 (1969), 1. </p>

<p>Lemberger, L., <i>et al. </i>&quot;Marijuana: Studies on the
Disposition and Metabolism </p>

<p>23. This estimate is based on interviews with several experts.
</p>

<p>24. We found no studies on deaths by overdose. </p>

<p>25. Martin, 1970, p. 4. </p>

<p>26. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>p. 592. </p>

<p>27. Based primarily on Jaffe, pp. 239-60. </p>

<p>28. Martin, 1970, p. 4. </p>

<p>29. Jaffe, p. 240; Irwin, p. 5. </p>

<p>30. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>p. 474. </p>

<p>31. jaffe,p.279. </p>

<p>32. <i>Ibid., </i>pp. 279-80. </p>

<p>33. <i>Ibid., </i>p. 279; Goldstein <i>et al., </i>pp. 593-94.
</p>

<p>34. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>pp. 597-99. </p>

<p>35. Eddy, 1965, p. 721. </p>

<p>36. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>pp. 600, 603. </p>

<p>37. jaffe,p.280. </p>

<p>38. <i>Ibid., </i>p. 288; Goldstein <i>et al., </i>pp. 602-3. </p>

<p>39. Martin, 1970, pp. 2-3. </p>

<p>40. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>p. 603; Jaffe, p. 281. </p>

<p>41. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>p. 605. </p>

<p>42. jaffe,p.283. </p>

<p>43. Goldstein, p. 605. </p>

<p>44. Jaffe, pp. 281-82. </p>

<p>45. <i>Ibid., </i>p. 282. </p>

<p>46. Dole, 1966, p. 305. </p>

<p>47. Goldstein, interview. </p>

<p>48. Goldstein <i>et al., </i>pp. 474-75. </p>

<p>49. Dole, 1968, p. 364. </p>

<p>50. Dole, 1970, p. 373. </p>

<p>51. Dole, interview. </p>

<p>52. Martin, 1970, pp. 8-9. </p>

<p>53. See Jaffe, pp. 296-97, and Brazeau, pp. 899-900. </p>

<p>54. This section is summarized from the <i>Journal of
Psychedelic Drug</i> </p>

<p>September, 1970. </p>

<p>55. Jarvik, p. 196. </p>

<p>56. <i>Ibid., </i>p. 197. </p>

<p>57. <i>Ibid.; </i>laff e, p. 296; Shiek and Smith, p. 16. </p>

<p>58. Egozcue and Irwin, pp. 1 0-1 1. </p>

<p>59. Dishotsky <i>et al., </i>p. 439. </p>

<p>60. See Irwin, p. 8; Jaff e, p. 296. </p>

<p>61. McGlothlin <i>et al., </i>pp. 20-31. </p>

<p>62. <i>Ibid., </i>pp. 30-31. </p>

<p>63. Blacker, pp. 32-37. </p>

<p>64. Cohen, p.30. </p>

<p>65. Irwin, p. 9. </p>

<p>66. Shick and Smith, pp. 13-19. </p>

<p>67. <i>Ibid.</i> </p>

<p>68. D. Smith, 1969, p. 75. </p>

<p>69. jaffe,p.297. </p>

<p>70. D. Smith, 1969, p. 82; STASH, 1970. </p>

<p>71. Irwin, p. 8; Jaffe, pp. 297-98. </p>

<p>72. jarvik, p. 197. </p>

<p>73. Irwin, p. 9; Jaffe, p. 298. </p>

<p>74. Jarvik, p. 196; Cooper <i>et al., </i>pp. 157-59; Douglas,
p. 656. </p>

<p>75. This section was written with the assistance of Peter
Wilson. </p>

<p>76. Jaffe, p. 300; Meyers, p. 32. </p>

<p>77. Snyder, pp. 121-25. </p>

<p>78. <i>Ibid.</i> </p>

<p>79. Irwin, p. 7; Weil <i>et al., </i>p. 1242. </p>

<p>80. jaffe,p.300. </p>

<p>81. HEW, p. 68; Grinspoon, pp. 227-28. </p>

<p>82. Lemberger <i>et al., </i>p. 1322. </p>

<p>83. jaffe,p.299. </p>

<p>84. Tart, pp. 701-4. </p>

<p>85. Weil, p. 999. </p>

<p>86. Weil, letter. </p>

<p>87. Talbot and Teague. </p>

<p>88. D. Smith, 1968, p. 41. </p>

<p>89. Lemberger <i>et al., </i>p. 1322. </p>

<p>90. jaffe,p.300. </p>

<p>91. Brotman and Friedman, p. 20; Jaffe, p. 300; Irwin, p. 7. </p>

<p>92. See Innes and Nickerson, Jaffe, and Ritchie <i>et al.</i> </p>

<p>93. Innes and Nickerson, except as otherwise noted. </p>

<p>94. Esplin and Zablocka-Esplin, pp. 354-55. </p>

<p>95. Innes and Nickerson, p. 478. </p>

<p>96. Ritchie <i>et al., </i>pp. 379-82; Jaffe, p. 293. </p>

<p>97. Esplin anl Zablocka-Esplin, p. 354. </p>

<p>98. Kramer, p. 10; Jaffe, p. 295. </p>

<p>99. Ritchie <i>et al., </i>p. 381. </p>

<p>100. Kramer, p. 1 1. </p>

<p>101. <i>Ibid., p. </i>12. </p>

<p>102. Jaffe, pp. 293-94; R. Smith, p. 35. </p>

<p>103. Jaffe, p. 294; Kramer, p. 9. </p>

<p>104. Kramer, p. 7. </p>

<p>105. Jaffe, pp. 294-95; Ritchie <i>et al., </i>p. 381. </p>

<p>106. jaffe,p.295. </p>

<p>107. Weil, Staff Paper 6. </p>

<p>108. R. Smith, p. 184. </p>

<p>109. Innes and Nickerson, pp. 503-4. </p>

<p>110. Jaffe,p.293. </p>

<p>111. Sharpless, pp. 98-134. </p>

<p>112. Irwin, p. 9; Weil, interview. </p>

<p>113. Sharpless, pp. 98-120.<br>
</p>

<p>114. <i>Ibid.</i> </p>

<p>115. <i>Ibid., p. </i>100. </p>

<p>116. Eddy, p. 725. </p>

<p>117. Jaffe, pp. 289-90. </p>

<p>118. Sharpless, pp. 107-8. </p>

<p>119. laffe,p.290. </p>

<p>120. <i>Ibid.</i> </p>

<p>121. D. Smith and Wesson, pp. 294-95. </p>

<p>122. laffe,p.290. </p>

<p>123. <i>Ibid.</i> </p>

<p>124. Sharpless, pp. 101-2, 1 1 0-1 1. </p>

<p>125. Irwin, pp. 3-4.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>