
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B15-97</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA070-000439-B039-219</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/doers.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204554 text/html 10222
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Microsoft-IIS/3.0
Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:41 GMT
Content-Type: text/html
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Last-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 04:29:52 GMT
Content-Length: 10023
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Do-ers</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">

<p><img src="images/todayhdr.jpg" alt="Today's Workplace"
width="634" height="69"></p>

<h2>Helping Safety &amp; Health Committee Members Become
&quot;Do-ers&quot;</h2>

<hr color="#008080">

<p><font color="#008080"><strong>&quot;It must be considered that
there is nothing<br>
more difficult to carry out, nor more doubtful<br>
of success, nor more dangerous to handle than<br>
to initiate a new order of things.&quot;<br>
-Machiavelli</strong></font></p>

<p>You've been sitting on your organization's safety and health
committee for awhile now. Maybe it's the way Theresa is reading
her nursing charts until it's her turn to report, maybe it's the
way Ralph simply takes everyone's written suggestions, hole
punches them and stashes them in his committee binder (didn't he
wipe dust off of it when he sat down?), or how Julian is going on
<em>ad nauseam</em> about the broken electrical outlet at the
nurse's station. There's a nagging little voice at the back of
your mind saying &quot;we're not doing anything to solve the big
problems.&quot; Does this sound familiar to you?</p>

<p>Safety &amp; Health Committees are required by Joint
Commission and recommended by OSHA guidelines, but that doesn't
guarantee good committees. Another law to pay attention to when
forming safety committees is the National Labor Relations Act and
its restrictions on &quot;employee dominated&quot; committees.</p>

<p>This stereotype of a S &amp; H committee is a bunch of boring
people sitting around a table listening to reports on recent
incidents. Yet, there's real gold to be mined if you can turn the
committee into Do-ers, not just passive attendees. Your success
is influenced by the way management sets up and empowers
committee members to reach beyond the confines of problem giving
to become problem solvers.</p>

<p>Depending on your approach, the safety committee can be a
valuable two-way communication tool with significant powers for
action, or nothing more than a waste of everyone's time. One of
the keys is good planning. Some organizations operate
interrelated S &amp; H committee responsible for different
functions (i.e., a policy committee, an employee safety &amp;
health committee, a committee for facilities &amp; maintenance).
Groups work on their own issues, identifying the &quot;big&quot;
problems through data analysis, incidents and other reporting
mechanisms. They also report to each other, coming together to
work on common problems such as implementing the new OSHA
personal protective equipment standard. If your organization
isn't large enough to warrant several committees, a single one,
which is well organized and operated, can be just as effective.
The number and arrangement of committees is not as important as
understanding what makes a S &amp; H committee
&quot;successful.&quot;</p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="images/check.gif" alt="Checkmark"
        width="15" height="15"></td>
        <td><font color="#008080"><strong><u>Organizing the
        Committee</u></strong></font></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p><font color="#000000">Who should be asked to participate?
Picking the right Chair is very important. While the safety and
health manager may seem the obvious choice, we'd encourage you to
choose someone else for the role. That way the power can be
distributed more evenly and the voices of all members encouraged.
Look for a good meeting &quot;conductor&quot; that everyone
respects and likes.</font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">Five to seven members are the ideal
committee size but can vary depending on the organization. When
picking your members, include a person from the department with
the poorest mishap record (these people already have a problem).
Invite someone with a demonstrated interest in safety and health
issues, and someone from a department with an outstanding safety
and health record (these people will be invested in getting
things done and have experience from which others can learn).
Include someone to represent employee's interest as well as
supervisors of major departments. It may sometimes be helpful to
call in experts as needed to solve specific problems. These do
not need to be permanent members to be effective.</font></p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="images/check.gif" alt="Checkmark"
        width="15" height="15"></td>
        <td><font color="#008080"><strong><u>Preparing for the
        Meeting</u></strong></font></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>Committees are great for presenting ideas, encourage
understanding and cooperation, and building consensus. However,
everyone recognizes how quickly a poorly run committee can drain
energy and initiative. Most of the energy zappers can be managed
if you set up a structure in advance.</p>

<p>Schedule the meetings for the same time each month (i.e. the
third Thursday at 9 a.m.). If possible, set up tables and chairs
in a circular format. Remember to encourage eye contact-it's
important for successful communications. If there are not enough
agenda items to warrant a meeting, cancel it! Nothing destroys a
good committee faster than the thought that members are wasting
their time.</p>

<p>The meeting facilitator should collect agenda items and
circulate a meeting schedule at least a week in advance. Someone
should be prepared to keep minutes (including who comes and who
is assigned action items). Serve good coffee and healthy snacks
to express how important the committee's work is.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="images/check.gif" alt="Checkmark"
        width="15" height="15"></td>
        <td><font color="#008080"><strong><u>Conducting the
        Meeting</u></strong></font></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>Use the first part of the meeting as a &quot;show and
tell&quot; where members share new safety equipment, videos,
brochures or other resources that are available. This sets a
positive, energetic tone. Don't spend too much time reviewing
minutes and standing committee reports. The bulk of the
committee's time should be spent analyzing data, looking for and
discussing big problems, matching existing resources with needs,
and setting up new policy, procedures, and training. (Julian's
broken electrical outlet should never have made it to the S &amp;
H Committee, that's what the maintenance department's work order
system should cover.)</p>

<p>To avoid the &quot;Talkers not Do-ers&quot; problem, try
keeping a log with all pending big problems listed. A problem
doesn't get dropped from the committee's agenda and log until it
has been resolved. If one problem seems to be malingering and
requires resources beyond the committee, it's time to call in an
expert or the attention of upper management. However, if it's an
individual who seems to be malingering by taking too much of the
committee's time or constantly interrupting and talking over
everyone else, consider creative ways to facilitate group
discussions.</p>

<p>Remember the wooden gavel presidents of community clubs are
presented upon the inauguration? The gavel is the European
version of the Native American &quot;talking stick&quot;-whoever
holds the gavel or talking stick holds the attention of the
group. Try introducing a symbolic object as the committee's
&quot;talking stick.&quot; Whenever Ralph is holding the bright
red stethoscope, everyone is to be attentive and quiet. When he's
through making his point, it goes back in the middle of the table
for the next person to claim. It may seem weird but it works!</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="images/check.gif" alt="Checkmark"
        width="15" height="15"></td>
        <td><font color="#008080"><strong><u>Assign Action Items</u></strong></font></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>Once the committee settles on a course of action, write down
the action points on separate index cards. Lay them in the middle
of the table and ask members to pick up the cards with the tasks
they'll undertake. This may include continuing research or
leading a subcommittee to search for more detail. Any left-overs
(the stuff nobody wants to do) then can be equitably distributed.
Members will claim the types of tasks they enjoy doing and you
can increase the successful use of individual talents. Be sure
there is agreement on when tasks will be completed and how they
will be reported back to the committee. Members should be
encouraged to vocalize their thanks to each other for taking on
and performing tasks. Create an environment of positive feedback.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="images/check.gif" alt="Checkmark"
        width="15" height="15"></td>
        <td><font color="#008080"><strong><u>Dissemination of
        Information to Others</u></strong></font></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>Report, report, report. But, remember to protect corporate and
individual confidentiality when reporting. Joint Commission and
OSHA are not the only audiences for your committee reports. By
writing everything down, you're making sure that each committee
member knows what they've committed to do. By keeping employees
and management informed, you're helping lay the groundwork for
their future participation and support when the committee asks
for it. Good communication is vital to effective group work. A
strong paper trail not only shows where you've been, it points
the way to where you're going.</p>

<p>Where are the bran muffins, the index cards, and that silly
stethoscope? We've got some work to do!</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>