
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B02-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B045-182</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021753 text/html 116196
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:17:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:09:07 GMT
Content-length: 115977
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse - Drug Education</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<p>STAFF PAPER 2 </p>

<h2>Drug Education</h2>

<p>by Patricia M. Wald and Annette Abrams </p>

<hr>

<p>Goals of Drug Education * Techniques of Drug Education for
Students a Total School Involvement * Out-of School
Drug-Education Programs * The National Media * Films and Audio
Visuals &amp; School Curricula * Education for Nonstudents *
Sponsors of Current Efforts </p>

<hr>

<p><b>GOALS OF DRUG EDUCATION</b> </p>

<p>&quot;Prevention through education&quot; has become the newest
panacea of the drug-abuse field. Law enforcement has failed to
stem the supply of illegal drugs, and rehabilitation efforts have
thus far failed to reclaim many abusers. Everyone now talks of
pouring money into education to stop the problem before it
begins. </p>

<p>As of any educational undertaking, the first task of a drug
abuse-prevention program is to define the goals sought. If
objectives are not understood, developing the educational effort
and the techniques to be used is difficult. At present, this is a
major problem of drug education. No one is sure what goals are
realistic or desirable, and proponents of massive efforts cannot
agree on what they hope to accomplish. The most that can be said
is that there are a number of possible objectives for
youth-oriented, drugeducation programs: </p>

<p>Stopping all experimentation with foreign substances </p>

<p>Keeping experimentation at the minimum and limiting it to
relatively safe substances </p>

<p>Preventing casual experimenters from becoming habitual users </p>

<p>Preventing addiction or severe dependence </p>

<p>Reinforcing the anti-experimentation tendencies of those who
have not yet tried drugs </p>

<p>Presenting information for students to use in making drug
decisions for themselves </p>

<p>Increasing student understanding of the complex factors
related to drug use, social attitudes, and policies </p>

<p>For adult audiences, the goals may be somewhat different- for
parents, to give them the best information available, to heighten
their concern about the effects of drugs, to make them less
likely to panic if they find one of their children using drugs,
to encourage them to lobby for more education, treatment, or law
reform, or to teach them to communicate more openly with their
children on the subject. For teachers, counselors, and other
&quot;gatekeepers&quot; the object might be to train them to
create an atmosphere of communication in their classrooms or to
recognize student drug experimenters and abusers, deal with them
sympathetically, and channel them into treatment if necessary.
Teachers might also be equipped with the tools to stimulate
objective discussion of the subject with their students. </p>

<p>The traditional goal of most parents, educators, community
leaders, congressmen, and government officials has been to
discourage young people from experimenting with illegal drugs at
all. In the past, government and privately sponsored education
efforts have tried to do this by emphasizing the horrors of
addiction and lumping all drugs together as leading to the same
ultimate doom. Virtually all experts now agree that such tactics
have not proved effective. Indeed, in many cases, they have been
counterproductive, causing disrespect, skepticism, and resistance
to all advice on drugs. Despite the widespread implementation of
this technique, youthful addiction and experimentation with
illegal drugs have increased. Consequently, within the past few
years there has been a change in emphasis, with more and more
programs concentrating on an honest presentation of accurate,
factual knowledge about the effects of drugs (insofar as such
knowledge is available). The assumption is that drugs are
obviously bad, and that telling the facts will be enough to
convince young people not to experiment. </p>

<p>Although the approach may have changed, the aim of most public
and private antidrug literature remains the same-to discourage
young people from trying marijuana, psychedelics, amphetamines,
barbiturates, and, above all, heroin. The theme of a nationwide
government advertising campaign reflects the traditional
broadside approach: &quot;Why Do You Think They Call It
Dope?&quot; Many of the recent NIMH posters and television spots
are along the same lines: &quot;Will It Turn You On, or Will It
Turn on You?&quot; Most &quot;model&quot; curricula for
elementary, junior, and senior high schools, even when they
present the known facts about drugs fairly, push a strongly
negative attitude toward all commonly abused drugs. The measure
of success of such programs-although few try to measure success
by any formula-is almost always assumed to be total cessation of
drug experimentation and use. </p>

<p>In the late 1960's, however, this viewpoint ran into an
embarrassing problem: no one was able to develop a factual
scientific argument proving that marijuana was harmful. This
development had its greatest impact on programs using the scare
technique, but it also undermined programs based on the premise
that telling the truth was an effective way of discouraging
experimentation. This has put education in a difficult position.
Most drug-education programs are ambivalent. They profess an
honest desire to tell the truth-but only up to a point. When
known facts run out or become controversial, as they almost
certainly do when the subject comes up, the approach reverts to
imposed value judgments, half-truths, or presumptions that the
law is right-devices easily seen through by the skeptical young. </p>

<p>Increasingly, drug experts are coming to the conclusion that
it is the goal that needs to be changed more than the technique,
and that total cessation of all drug experimentation, however
desirable in the abstract, is not a realistic goal for an
education program. Some experts feel strongly that an education
program aimed at stopping drug experimentation of every kind is
bound to fail and so alienate students in the process that they
will not listen to any of it. Drs. Thomas Ungerleider, Norman
Zinberg, and Helen Nowlis, as well as Professor Kenneth
Keniston-to name a few experts-appear to define a different goal
for drug education: to teach youths to make informed decisions
about drugs and indeed about every other kind of chemical
subtance they might ingest. This must include a concentration on
teaching elementary students a fundamental respect for the human.
body and the effects of chemical substances. </p>

<p>Teaching young people to make informed decisions on their own
about illegal drugs is admittedly a more controversial goal than
mechanically urging them to avoid all such drugs. A wholly honest
&quot;tell it like it is&quot; approach may cause a decline in
the use of heroin, amphetamines, and barbiturates, but it will
almost certainly increase the likelihood that youthful listeners
will feel more comfortable about trying marijuana and possibly
some of the milder hallucinogens. Professor Zinberg reports on a
candid talk about drugs to a Massachusetts high school. Before
the lecture, 60 per cent of the students said they would not try
marijuana; after the lecture, the figure dropped to 35 per cent.'
This is not a universal occurrence, of course. For example, a
before-and-after evaluation at a Temple University educational
conference, presenting all points of view, found that attitudes
toward marijuana shifted from favoring legalization to a neutral
position, especially among undergraduates. </p>

<p>A truly factual drug-education program might also influence
attitudes toward commercially advertised and even medically
prescribed drugs. When, for example, people discover that some
legitimate drugs directly cause more deaths annually than do most
abused drugs, they may lose faith in the argument that they
should avoid illegal drugs because there is no official quality
control or pretesting for safety. Another problem with the
factual method involves the source material to be used.
Contradictory statements of &quot;facts&quot; could catalyze a
&quot;your guess is as good as mine&quot; attitude, and this is
an area in which contradictions are common.' Nor are the opinions
of either laymen or experts always based on scientific fact.
Often the opinion comes first and the facts are chosen to fit
it.' An impartial factual approach assumes that an individual
choice will be made on the basis of medical or scientific
evidence regardless of what is forbidden by law. This is a
difficult concept for many to accept, even though some young
people from time immemorial have refused to obey a given law
partly because it is the 'Law or have engaged in -risk-taking
behavior -that appalls adults. Today's climate of individuality
intensifies the likelihood that they will make their own choices
about drugs as well. In some cases, it is precisely the fact that
drugs are illegal and risky that constitutes part of their
attraction. It may be, therefore, that the most useful
educational approach is to give young people the facts upon which
to make that choice, so that they will at least keep their
risk-taking behavior within bounds. Regardless of the educator's
views of what their attitudes should be, effective communication
requires that they be dealt with as they are. One survey of
elementary, junior, and senior high school students in California
concluded that &quot;students feel quite strongly about an
individual's right to make decisions concerning his own use of
drugs.&quot; In the senior high school sampling, 84 per cent of
the users and 76 per cent of the nonusers surveyed responded
positively to the statement &quot;Decision to Use Drugs Is a
Personal Decision.&quot;' </p>

<p>Even if one is willing to accept increased experimentation
with some drugs as the price of decreased damage from other
drugs, there are more serious problems. How, for example, can a
young child be expected to assimilate all the facts about
individual drugs and their effects upon the body and make a
reasonable choice about using them? Experimentation with
ingestion or inhalation of foreign substances is occurring from
age seven on with increasing frequency. How can so young a child
make an informed decision? Might he not lean too heavily on his
emotions, impulses, and peer-group pressure? Clearly, the
&quot;responsible decision&quot; model has its limitations, too. </p>

<p>Other goals for an education program may be identified when
those who are to be educated are involved in the selection
process. It is highly recommended by the U.S. Office of
Education's Drug Education Branch, for example, that young people
share more of the responsibility for specifying objectives. Such
a partnership arrangement tends to enhance the credibility of a
program by &quot;plugging it into&quot; the representative needs
of its target audience. </p>

<p>The unfortunate fact is that we do not know whether an
exclusively factual approach works with the very young, even to
the extent of mitigating the most dangerous kinds of
experimentations. Conversely, we do not know whether a concerted
attempt by schools and media to control the behavior of the
children by propagandizing against drugs and punishing their use
works, either, even if it is justified on the basis that the
child is not old enough to make a rational choice of his own in
so potentially harmful an area. Because of all the problems and
unknowns of the &quot;rational choice&quot; approach, relatively
few programs have adopted it explicitly, even when they concede
the problems of other methods. In general, drug-education
programs at the national, college, high school, and elementary
levels have not faced the difficult issues involved in deciding
among these goals. They have been neither realistic nor frank
with the students or themselves. In most situations, settling on
the goals that are most realistic under the circumstances and
acknowledging those goals to the target group would enhance the
credibility of the drug education program. But even more
importantly, it is necessary to articulate the precise objectives
of any education campaign before it is implemented because they
affect the way in which drug education is taught as well as the
criteria by which its success or failure is evaluated. Until the
precise aims of a program are clear to the sponsor and to the
target population, the methodology cannot be sensitively selected
and the program's effects cannot be accurately assessed. Such a
practice would also allow us to begin to determine which
techniques help to accomplish the objectives and which do not. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>TECHNIQUES OF DRUG EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS</b> </p>

<p>At present, we know almost nothing about how best to reach
students on the drug issue; nor, until recently, have we tried
very hard to find out. Only within the last few years have there
been even rudimentary attempts to evaluate some of the school
programs. Most of the pioneer efforts are very rough, and the
outcomes rarely determine, or even significantly influence, the
planning and allocation of resources. </p>

<p>Although there is now consensus that evaluation is needed, our
lack of knowledge about the effects of existing education
programs is not easily remediable. It is difficult to develop
reliable evaluation techniques for the programs, although many
methods are being tried. In some cases, students are tested
before and after a drug course to see how much of the new
information has been retained. Other surveys use attitudinal
questions about whether participants are more or less willing to
experiment with particular drugs after the program; in still
other cases, selected students are interviewed intensively in an
effort to probe deeply into their attitudes and reactions. Recent
evaluative studies test the effectiveness of several factors
simultaneously by administering varied instruments.
Unfortunately, as Dr. Marvin I. Rosen suggests, existing
&quot;methodologies [are] inadequate for the questions being
asked, and the designs of evaluation studies are inappropriate
for the answers being sought.&quot;' Evaluations are often post
hoc, rather desperate attempts to get information out of a
program that was set up without regard to the need for it. Even
when evaluation is designed into a program, it rarely includes
long-range follow-up to determine the program's effects a year or
more after its termination. </p>

<p>There are other problems. Little of the scant material that
exists on evaluation has been pulled together and published, or
even collected in one place. Valid and interesting work may exist
unknown to almost everyone. In addition, only infrequent use has
been made of the findings of educational-psychology research in
designing learning programs on drug abuse for children of varying
ages, although other areas have attempted to do so. For example,
it is reported that $8 million was spent doing preliminary
research on the psychology of learning before airing the Sesame
Street program, which teaches reading concepts to preschool
children. </p>

<p>Finally, there are institutional obstacles, and dedication to
evaluation is often more froth than reality. The primary concern
of many evaluators is that something be done, and they take a
subjective view of the quality of the effort. Program staffs fear
that objective study of their efforts will place future
activities in jeopardy or believe that they are performing a
service that cannot be measured. Some educators feel that
evaluation produces only statistical data, which they equate with
antihumanism. Program personnel often fail to specify their goals
and the means utilized to attain them. </p>

<p>Dr. Helen Nowlis pointed out in 1967 that &quot;at the present
time there is no standard or widely accepted model for planning
an effective drug-education program. This is an area that
urgently needs research, development and demonstration.&quot;'
This statement is still appropriate several years later. The
underpinnings for a rational drug-education approach do not exist
at the present time. Pronouncements abound on the kinds of
programs that should be undertaken, and model curricula are easy
to find, but hard data on the effect such programs have on
students are virtually nonexistent. Given this situation, the two
major priorities in this field are: (1) Well-designed and tested
evaluation techniques to measure the attainment of specific goals
(once they have been defined) in any school drug-education
program. Different evaluative models would measure different
goals-e.g., decreasing drug use, more information dissemination
among the student body, substitution of less harmful drugs,
rational drug use, less use in school, fewer acute health crises,
more referrals of students to treatment, more use made of school
personnel by students for advice. (2) A formal 'compilation of
what evaluation data exist, which programs have been evaluated,
what criteria have been used, and what results have been
obtained. This information should be widely disseminated to
members of the educational community as well as to those involved
in drug programming (treatment, rehabilitation, intervention). </p>

<p>In the absence of this kind of information, we can only turn
to the opinions of recognized &quot;experts&quot; in the field,
without any real assurance, however, that they are right. Yet,
there appears to be consensus (at least for the present) on the
following points: </p>

<p>The common pattern of having physical education or health
teachers set aside one unit in the curriculum to lecture on the
dangers of drugs is virtually useless. See, e.g., the Report of
the Mayor's Task Force on Drug Abuse Education in Washington,
D.C.: &quot;To this date, most current crisis-oriented programs
cater to the biases of adults, and depend on the faulty theory of
emphasizing information or lecture techniques.&quot; </p>

<p>A program must be ongoing, with the opportunity for recurrent
discussions throughout the year. Even some of the new,
well-motivated programs suffer from a &quot;crisis&quot;
approach. An evaluation of programs conducted in four high school
classes showed that &quot;short-term programs, even though very
sophisticated and intensive, may have little impact on the
attitudes of students regarding the abuse of drugs.&quot; The
study concludes that &quot;the primary value of [the] project is
that it adds a note of caution to those who would set aside a
single day for drug education and be satisfied with the
results.&quot;' Although countless &quot;one-shot&quot; programs
are sponsored nationally, there is little evidence that such
programs have any lasting effect. </p>

<p>Different approaches have to be taken for students of
different ages, cultural backgrounds, and levels of drug
sophistication. The subtle variations among particular
subcultures must be recognized. Drug education of some general
kind needs to begin in kindergarten, or even earlier, and should
focus on the specific drugs of abuse by fourth or fifth grade.
The program for teenage suburban experimenters with marijuana
must be different from the program for ghetto heroin users. Each
target group must be studied to determine what kind of message
will reach it. The information must then be structured so that it
relates closely to the students' sophistication and willingness
to identify with the subject matter. </p>

<p>There must be open and free dialogue between students and the
teacher or discussion leader in an atmosphere of tolerance for
all points of view, free of moralizing and shock reactions. </p>

<p>Use should be made of the comments and experiences of
youngsters who have actually used drugs, with confidentiality
assured. </p>

<p>From junior high school on, students should be involved in
planning and implementing the drug-education program to assure
its relevance to the specific situation in that school. Again,
the students' level of sophistication must be accurately
assessed. Predetermined curricula are to be avoided unless they
are clearly relevant. </p>

<p>Factual material must be absolutely accurate and honest. Where
research does not yet provide clear answers, this must be
admitted. Tobacco and alcohol abuse should be treated along with
illicit drugs as part of the same over-all problem. The dangers
as well as the benefits of legitimate drug use must be frankly
acknowledged where they exist. </p>

<p>The curriculum should not be a passive one, relying solely on
pamphlets, lectures, or films. There should be an emphasis on
actual experimental data that let the students see the underlying
methodology of drug research and the way conclusions are reached.
Where possible, students should view actual experimentation with
the effects of drugs on animals and, at higher grade levels,
conduct these experiments themselves. In Dr. Louise Richards'
view: &quot;The expectation is that deeper understanding of the
CNS [central nervous system] and effects of psychoactive drugs
will result in more profound respect for the hazards of
unsupervised use.&quot;' </p>

<p>Emphasis should be placed on the motivational aspects of drug
use-why people use drugs, what they hope to accomplish and what
they hope to escape, and how they can fulfill these needs in
other ways. Interviews with high school students in California
reveal a strong dislike for repetitive programs focusing on
information alone. The students greatly preferred continuing
discussions on the reasons for drug use.&quot; Again, this is a
way of actively involving the student in the learning process and
making it a two-way engagement. Equal emphasis should be given to
the reasons people do not want to take drugs. Dr. Helen Nowlis
points out that college students often seem less interested in
the legal and medical facts about drugs than in a personal,
philosophical discussion about the limits on an individual's
right to self-discovery and expression.&quot; </p>

<p>Education of any kind will have little or no impact on a
youngster who is already deeply involved with drugs. A survey of
students in nine high schools concluded that &quot;students who
have used drugs are not likely to be favorably impressed or to be
changed by viewing ... drug abuse films. In all nine schools the
pattern was the same: the students, after viewing the films, said
they were likely to continue their behavior as users or nonusers
of drugs.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>Alternative behavior patterns should be provided, for many
users frequently give up drugs for something else. The
&quot;something else&quot; varies but frequently takes the form
of intense personal experiences, often of a religious nature,
deep interpersonal experiences through the use of transcendental
meditation or yoga, participation in sensitivity groups, or
free-school activities. (See Staff Paper 6, below.) Such
alternative programs, in order to be effective, should be
attractive, easily available on a continuing basis, and organized
with advice from the student body. </p>

<p>Given this consensus, however, a fundamental dispute still
exists over whether the purely factual approach to drugs is more
harmful than helpful to young &quot;risk takers.&quot; Some
experts believe that giving specific factual knowledge reinforces
the antidrug propensities of persons not likely to abuse drugs
anyway but actually contributes to the &quot;seduction&quot; of
vulnerable high-risk groups by romanticizing the negativism that
motivates their conduct.&quot; Movies, media advertising, rock
music, underground newspapers, and commercial films that excite
interest in specific drug use transmit the nonverbal message that
users get attention and sympathy. Dr. Paul Blachley espouses a
different kind of education, focusing on underlying behavioral
responses and on why people consciously hurt themselves and those
around them. He would convey the over-all image of the
drug-abuser as a boring, weak-minded, easily &quot;conned&quot;
individual, not as a daring and reckless adventurer. But the
student survey quoted above concluded that none of the six drug
films examined lured anyone into trying drugs who had not already
done so. </p>

<p>Other studies highlight the need for additional investigation
into the effects of drug education.&quot; Studies by Gilbert Geis
(1969) and the California Department of Education (1970)
determined that short-term programs (four weeks or less)
significantly increased student knowledge about drugs and caused
more cautious attitudes toward drug use. However, several studies
conducted at the Pennsylvania State University in 1970-71
&quot;showed consistent relationships between better knowledge
about drugs and pro-drug attitudes; better knowledge and the use
of marijuana; and pro-drug attitudes and the use of
marijuana.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>A still unsettled question is whether drug education should be
integrated into a &quot;life-problem&quot; course that includes
such other subjects as sex and relations with parents and peers.
Dr. Norman Zinberg, for one, espouses the integrated model. There
also appears to be pressure toward this broader model from many
students. Even courses labeled &quot;drug education&quot; very
often take a motivational approach that examines underlying
values and behavioral problems. A comparison of eighth- and
eleventh graders in California revealed that users know less
about drugs and drug-related information than nonusers at the
same grade level. The study concluded: &quot;While the continued
teaching of factual drug information might somewhat lessen
student drug use, it could not do the job by itself, but when
combined with an affective or attitudinal approach could be of
real effect.&quot;&quot; The Coronado Unified School District
consequently led other schools in stressing the need for a
comprehensive program covering values, valuing processes
(decision-making), value orientations, and their possible effects
on human behavior. Advocates of this approach recommend its use
with parents, teachers, and students to increase mutual
understanding and the ability to cope with the problems of
everyday life. </p>

<p>Another fundamental question, especially for schools, is who
should do the drug educating. Are regular teachers or
knowledgeable outsiders more effective? All experts stress that
it must be someone the students like and trust, someone who knows
and will present the facts accurately and who feels comfortable
and free in open discussion. Few teachers in any school fit that
description. It has been observed by some outside speakers that
students' questions dramatically increased in sophistication when
the teacher left the room. In Washington, D.C., the mayor's task
force suggested selecting teachers for drug education on the
basis of a &quot;sociogram&quot; asking students to state
anonymously to whom they would go for consultation or advice on
personal problems. On the other side, several reports and
interviews have warned about the possibly insidious effect of
teachers who themselves actually promote drug use, wittingly or
unwittingly. </p>

<p>Perhaps because of the more personal level of communication
encouraged in primary grades, elementary students stand alone in
preferring the teacher as a source of information. When surveyed,
high school students usually prefer ex-addicts and medical
doctors as resource people. Ex-users were considered qualified
because of their firsthand experience with drugs. Conversely,
doctors were seen as authorities on drug effects but lost
credibility when discussing the &quot;feelings&quot; drugs
produce. Dr. Thomas Ungerleider, of UCLA, reports that, in his
experience, the most successful approach for a medical lecturer
begins with an assurance to the students that he is not there for
the purpose of persuading them to stay off drugs and does not
represent law enforcement, parents, or school authorities, but is
there only to tell them the known facts about drugs and the human
body and to answer their questions. </p>

<p>Any discussion leader must be able to validate his credentials
by showing the students that he knows the facts he states are
true. Many schools have drug-education and rehabilitation centers
run by, or with the help of, former drug users who present
programs consisting of small student group discussions. These are
often supplemented by discussions with faculty and parent groups
as well. PLACE, in Boston, is an example of a drug-information
and service center for hippies, runaways, and drug users, staffed
by graduate students and run by the youthful clients with
professional supervision. They conduct programs for local
schools. </p>

<p>The role of the ex-addict in school programs deserves special
consideration. He is the current fad of drug education, on the
theory that only one who has been there can tell about it
convincingly. There is some truth to this, but apparently
different children receive different messages. The ex-addict is
perceived by some as a self-promoter capitalizing on his drug
experience for admiration or profit. Others get the idea that it
is as easy to get off drugs as it is to get addicted, so that
there is little risk in trying them. A ghetto youth might well
surmise that, if the ex-addict had never become addicted to
heroin in the first place, he would be worse off, probably
jobless, and without the attention and respect he is now
receiving. To some, the ex-addict is a glamorous
&quot;anti-hero&quot; somewhat like a rock singer. In one
California high school, ex-addict visitors were the recipients of
phone calls from girl students seeking after school dates.
Several schools have had unfortunate experiences with ex-addicts
who are not really &quot;ex&quot; and are either pushing or using
drugs. Others are akin to religious converts, uttering rigid
opinions about all drugs, including marijuana, and denigrating
all treatment modalities other than their own. Still others turn
out never to have been serious users at all but are merely
well-versed in the jargon of the users. Reportedly, some
out-of-work rock musicians earn extra money making the school
circuit. And, disturbingly, large numbers of ex-addicts reminisce
about the actual &quot;high&quot; with an exquisite affection not
lost on their young audiences. Some ex-addicts, although off
drugs, are currently abusing alcohol. Others are prey to the same
myths about drugs as nonusers and pass misinformation on to
students. </p>

<p>All this gives the negative side of using ex-addicts, a
practice that is sometimes accepted too uncritically. But this is
not the only side. Ex-addicts can be excellent teachers, able to
speak with credibility and to relate to youngsters, although the
mere fact that they are ex-addicts does not ensure rapport. One
of the very few carefully evaluated school programs showed, for
example, that, while students liked to hear ex-addicts tell of
their experiences, they did not give them so much credence when
they lectured about drugs generally.&quot; Ex-addicts with
natural talent in relating to the young and with some training in
sensitivity and substance may make very good drug-education
teachers, indeed, and their experience may give them extra
effectiveness. A good educator who happens to be an ex-addict may
have a special and valuable feeling for the factors that lead
youths to try drugs. </p>

<p>In ghetto schools, antidrug black-militant organizations often
have a special appeal. The ghetto youngster's need for a role
model may focus on such a symbol of racial pride. Organizations
such as Blackman's Development Center and PRIDE, Inc., in
Washington, D.C., have recently entered the drug education field
and vigorously propagandize against drugs in schools, sometimes
with homemade slides of addiction horrors and appeals to racial
unity against a &quot;white man's&quot; scourge. How successful
they will be remains to be seen. </p>

<p>The difficulty with most school education programs run by
&quot;outsiders&quot; is that they lack continuity in the school
itself. The ex-addicts, the graduate students, and visiting
doctors come and go, while the students' need for information or
help may continue for months. One of the more promising
approaches is that used by a San lose high school, which released
a popular young teacher for several months to learn the drug
scene intimately by going on &quot;buys&quot; with local police,
attending court trials, working with doctors in drug clinics,
interviewing patients at treatment centers, and spending time on
the streets and in criminology labs. On his return, he took on
(apparently successfully) the combined duties of teacher and
counselor to students with drug problems.&quot; </p>

<p>Dissatisfied with past results, many school systems this year
are trying a variety of new preventive-education methods to
discourage drug abuse, involving more direction by the students
themselves. The New York City Board of Education has announced a
trial program in sixteen high schools in which pupils will design
and run their own antidrug programs. In Philadelphia last year,
selected students from seven high schools (accompanied by a
teacher) learned basic drug facts from doctors, treatment
experts, and law-enforcement officials and went on field trips.
They then went back to their own schools to initiate and run
programs of their own choice. Most of them opened counseling
services. With regard to peer involvement, there are indications
that students should be given a voice in basic approach,
curriculum content, and choice of teachers but should not be
saddled with administrative chores, which they abhor and often
perform poorly. Nevertheless, tapping the enthusiasm of
well-selected students can be beneficial in motivating the
student body to seek creative antidrug activities. </p>

<p>The notion that young people relate to their peers better than
to adults has validity but also limits. They relate only to some
of their peers. Rigid social groups exist in many schools, and
students chosen by teachers and school officials may not be the
ones to lead the group that the antidrug program hopes most to
reach. Whenever possible, some student participation in planning
and operating programs should come from the group the program is
trying to reach, whether nonusers, experimenters, or borderline
cases. The student council in an Oregon high school sought the
cooperation of ex-users and faculty in creating a youthful
&quot;Mod Squad.&quot; Teams of experienced students provided
successful peer counseling, assistance in crisis situations, and
referrals to local treatment facilities and otherwise contributed
positively to the school's educational programming. </p>

<p>There is also the &quot;role model&quot; theory that younger
children, between the ages of seven and twelve, will learn from
and relate better to older youth than to children their own age
or adults. &quot;Dope Stop&quot; in Arizona uses high school
students, trained by physicians, psychiatrists, or ex-addicts, to
counsel grades five to eight. One proposal suggests subsidizing
teenaged youth with a reputation for being &quot;in&quot; and
&quot;cool&quot; to work with younger boys against drug
involvement. NIMH drug-information officials say they are also
considering having students of different age groups prepare
education programs for the next-youngest age level. </p>

<p>A study of a junior high school drug-education program that
featured teachers and ex-addicts produced some illuminating
results. The program lasted an entire semester in two junior high
schools in the high narcotics area of the inner city, and
questionnaires were administered before and after the program as
well as in a control school using the traditional lecture method.
The results showed that teachers and ex-addicts were hostile
toward one another, resenting each other's prerogatives and
roles. Teachers resented the time spent on testing for
evaluation, and ex-addicts needed feedback on how the students
reacted toward them. The students in the experimental schools did
better on factual knowledge than those in the control schools.
Parent education efforts failed. The students thought the films
were &quot;no good&quot; and exaggerated the behavior of drug
users, and that the reading material was &quot;cut and
dried.&quot; They wanted more talking and less reading; also, to
hear the ex-addicts relate personal experiences but not to
lecture. The students did not like the personal questions on the
tests and were suspicious that their answers would not be kept
confidential. They wanted more concentration on the drugs used in
their own schools; they wanted to see samples of the drugs in
order to recognize them. </p>

<p>Discouragingly, however, there is no evidence that most of the
new programs being undertaken will be evaluated any more
systematically than the older ones have been. Until that happens,
therefore, we will not know the best way to educate about drug
abuse. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>TOTAL SCHOOL INVOLVEMENT</b> </p>

<p>Once again, as has happened so often with complex social
dilemmas, the schools have inherited America's number-one
&quot;Problem cbild'-the drug-abuse crisis. At present, educators
are joining with related disciplines in defining approaches to
the problem for use in classrooms, libraries, and counseling
offices. Educational institutions have become the testing ground
for diverse preventive alternatives. It has become clear that the
fundamental areas of school involvement must be to provide
relevant educational programs from kindergarten through college
and to serve as an avenue for community action involving
students, parents, faculty, and other local elements. </p>

<p>According to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs: </p>

<p>The schools cannot by themselves be expected to rehabilitate
youth and their neighborhood environments. Sociologists and
others who have worked in the drug abuse prevention field have
pointed out that drug education is not a problem for the schools
alone. It is a community problem and requires total community
effort for its solution. The schools cannot assume the roles of
parents, clergymen, enforcement officers, physicians or
psychiatrists. But they can exercise leadership in facing a
problem that the total community, working together, can try to
remedy. This is education in its broadest and most important
sense. It is making schools relevant to their communities. </p>

<p>An initial effort must be made to formulate school policies
that are sensitive to the needs of all elements of the school
community. There is no point, for example, in expecting
&quot;free&quot; class discussions or adult cooperation when
student informers are widely used throughout the school and
teachers are required to report all suspected users to the
police. If the school intends to act as an extension of civil
authority-to investigate and turn users over to the police-it
must come to terms with the fact that its effectiveness as an
educational force will be substantially reduced. On the other
hand, no school administrator can be expected to sit idly by
while drug traffic flourishes within the school. Therefore, a
major responsibility of school authorities is to give careful
consideration to alternative choices in defining the school's
action policy toward drug use. Once established, the policy
should be clearly explained to students and their parents, as
well as to the school staff. The failure of school administrators
to communicate with students about policies that they will be
expected to obey inevitably creates mistrust of all official
advice and information. By seeking and accepting inputs from
young people and their parents in the formulation of school
policies, school officials not only open up valuable channels of
communication but make it possible to develop policies that are
relevant to the needs, interests, and aspirations of each member
of the school community. </p>

<p>Until recently, schools could do little to deter student use
of drugs, because most of them had no announced policy. More and
more, administrators are moving to establish such guidelines, for
a very good reason: Lacking established policy guidelines, a
school has no standard procedure for providing help or discipline
when a student is found with drugs. A variety of policies is
possible, and it is difficult to say in advance how much
effectiveness in one area should be traded for gains in another.
Some colleges say that what the student does with his own body is
his own business, unless it results in active disruption of
classes, threatens the safety of others, or prevents satisfactory
academic functioning. This laissez-faire policy, however, is less
likely to be acceptable at the high school level. Some schools
have opted for the policy that selling or distributing drugs is
forbidden, and that distributors will be punished while users
will be treated more leniently or ignored. Other schools refuse
to initiate disciplinary action for anything that happens off
school grounds. More cautious institutions have adopted the
theory that drug use spreads in epidemic fashion, and that it is
necessary to quarantine and isolate the carrier. They
aggressively seek out drug users through urinalysis or locker
searches and either expel the users or report them to
law-enforcement officials. Some recent court decisions have made
it difficult for school personnel to conduct searches of a
student's personal belongings, thus imposing limitations on what
a school can do to investigate possible drug dealing. </p>

<p>The optimal relationship between school policy and the law
enforcement system is difficult to determine. Some schools have
worked out cooperative agreements with law-enforcement agencies
in seeking feasible alternatives to arrest (which is viewed as a
last resort). Unfortunately, however, most school officials have
given little thought to methods of diverting student drug
possessors who need help out of the criminal process and into
treatment, as witness a booklet published by the National
Association of Secondary School Principals in 1969: </p>

<p>There is a distorted notion gaining widespread acceptance that
a school or college is a sanctuary. These institutions are a part
of society and are subject to the same laws as the rest of
society. Accordingly, the school authorities have the same
responsibility as every other citizen to report violations of
law. Students possessing or using on school premises drugs
prohibited by law should be reported to the appropriate law
enforcement officials .20 </p>

<p>John Langer, of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,
advises principals to use discretion and judgment in situations
that may involve the violation of federal, state, or local laws.
He emphasizes that teachers and administrators are not
law-enforcement officers but school officials with a
responsibility to carry out school board policy.&quot; </p>

<p>Continuing lines of communication between law-enforcement
agencies and schools (such as the involvement of policemen in
teacher-training and community educational efforts, speakers'
bureaus, and community-relations programs) are often mutually
beneficial in dealing with drug issues. In several metropolitan
areas, these efforts have led to the establishment of counseling
sessions that must be attended by first offenders and their
parents in lieu of a jail sentence. A Hudson Institute study has
suggested specially supervised &quot;drug-free&quot; schools for
all students found to be using drugs. Opponents of this approach,
however, argue that isolation and expulsion will only confirm the
occasional user's alienation and result in his further
identification with deviant behavior. </p>

<p>Students frequently cited the need for a designated person in
the schools to whom they can go for information or help, assured
that their confidence will be kept. Helen Nowlis states,
&quot;Within any institution it should be made clear who will and
can guarantee confidentiality and such guarantees should be
respected.&quot;&quot; Such a person would be an
ombudsman-counselor, able to work with parents as well as
students to solve drug problems. He must be the kind of person
students normally seek out for sympathetic but sound advice. In
addition, he should have thorough familiarity with the drug-abuse
field as well as access to treatment and intervention programs,
so that he can provide referrals in acute situations. (There is
reason to believe that this type of counseling resource can be
more important for schools than traditional educational
programs.) Such a person could also advise the school on general
policies and provide drug-usage information. His expertise would
be invaluable in conducting drug-abuse education classes. </p>

<p>The ombudsman concept must be carefully considered by the
schools. Their wholehearted commitment must be assured, for
nothing could be so damaging as to invite confidences and then
not to be able to honor them. The legal problems raised when a
school official acts in the counselor's role must also be
resolved and cooperation obtained from the authorities to prevent
pressure on individuals who may not enjoy a technical legal
privilege. Because school policies frequently forbid teachers to
honor student confidences, many are hesitant to encourage
personal involvement, which may place the student in jeopardy. </p>

<p>Many believe that the ombudsman-counselor should provide his
services for other kinds of adolescent problems in addition to
those related to drugs-family, sex, alcohol, and so on.&quot;
Classroom teachers often have tremendous influence on students,
especially on those who lack parental understanding. They occupy
a more neutral position than parents and sometimes are better
able to identify behavior requiring special counseling or
referral. </p>

<p>Until now, schools have relied almost entirely on classroom
teachers to assist student drug abusers in finding help. Public
funds earmarked for &quot;teacher training courses&quot; have
rarely included guidance-counseling personnel. It is unfortunate
that schools have failed to take advantage of the position of
those guidance counselors who enjoy the trust and respect of
young people. Recently, the American Personnel and Guidance
Association began developing a national effort to train guidance
workers to deal with the complexities of drug abuse. The program
is being held in abeyance until adequate seed money can be
procured. </p>

<p>Information alone cannot always help a youthful user. The head
of a Mexican-American outreach program in Los Angeles testified
before Congress that a large proportion of youth in his area were
heavily addicted to barbiturates, but that education could not
help when there was no place in the area they could go for
medical aid in withdrawal. Teacher and guidance counselors should
provide the link between the school and treatment resources that
is now lacking in many places. If it is to reach users or
experimenters, a school education program not only must supply
information on where to go for help but also must have an
effective system for getting them there. Teachers or counselors
must know, for example, whether the student-user can receive
treatment on his own (as in California and Connecticut) or must
have parental permission before anyone can treat him (as in most
other states). School counselors should be willing to take the
initiative in getting the student to the treatment service and in
running bureaucratic interference for him. They may even have to
help make parents more sensitive to their children's drug problem
in an effort to prevent them from acting destructively. </p>

<p>On the other hand, treatment facilities in many areas far
outnumber institutions that focus on prevention. Young people who
do not use drugs have legitimate questions but find few places to
which they can turn for answers. The school counselor can act as
an effective source of information. </p>

<p>Any well-balanced school program should harness the support
and cooperation of outside community elements in providing help
to young abusers. The Office of Education's national teacher
training program challenged schools to consider community
motivation as their ultimate long-range goal. OE staff members
report that teachers were often unsuccessful in gaining the
necessary support of politicians, school board members,
principals, and parents in accomplishing this final phase of
their program. As a rule, the attitudes of the communities
precluded the exploration of innovative ways to prevent drug
abuse. What is needed, therefore, is widespread local awareness
of the need for unity in making progress-a recognition that
educational institutions are merely conduits through which
communal efforts must pass. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>OUT-OF-SCHOOL DRUG-EDUCATION PROGRAMS</b> </p>

<p>Education does not take place only in school. As Helen Nowlis
stated before Congress: </p>

<p>It is learning about drugs that should concern us today,
rather than the formal mechanisms for presenting drug
information. Information by itself is not education, education by
itself is not learning. </p>

<p>How do people, particularly young people, learn about drugs
and form their drug-related attitudes? We believe that a series
of influences help shape these attitudes: the atmosphere of the
school, as well as the factual information presented there; the
life-style at home, and the attitude of parents; peer-group
pressures; popular culture, including music, films, magazines and
nationally publicized events; personal experiences with drugs or
drug-related substances; the availability of alternative
mechanisms for carrying out certain kinds of behavior-risk
taking, wish fulfillment, etc .24 </p>

<p>Most of a youth's initial information about a subject comes
from his peers. A survey of Maryland high school students showed
that they got most of their drug information and attitudes from
peers and underground newspapers. In addition, the students most
prone to serious drug abuse are often those who are most
antagonistic to the school climate. There is general agreement
that more out-of-school programs are needed to reach those whom
the schools cannot reach. Unfortunately, antidrug programs run by
private and public organizations outside the school are of
varying quality and totally lacking in evaluation. Nevertheless,
the New York Addiction Control Commission alone spent $1 million
in 1970 on such &quot;preventive education.&quot; </p>

<p>Most prevention programs, besides lacking evaluation, are not
grounded on any hypotheses based on field observations. Dr.
Irving Lukoff, of the Columbia University School of Social Work,
believes that effective prevention programs await basic research
to discover what influences young people in heavily addicted
areas not to take drugs, why some do use drugs, and how drug use
spreads. </p>

<p>The most that can be done at this point is to categorize five
basic kinds of nonschool prevention programs: </p>

<hr>

<p><b>PEER-GROUP PROGRAMS</b> </p>

<p>Many types of teenage peer-group, antidrug programs have
emerged. The following are illustrative: </p>

<p>The members of one national group-the Smarteens-pledge not to
use drugs, wear buttons deriding drug use, and distribute posters
scorning the drug culture. The psychology is to provide support
and reinforcement for youngsters who choose not to use drugs.
Such a technique, however, merely widens the gap between the
&quot;squares&quot; and the drug users and alienates the latter
still further. Those familiar with the group admit it has its
greatest impact in middle-class suburban areas. </p>

<p>Members of Project DARE (Drug Abuse Research and Evaluation),
in the Los Angeles area, do not use drugs, but participate in the
rest of the psychedelic scene-rock music, flashy dress, crafts-so
as to show that one can be &quot;cool&quot; without being
drugged. Other activities include evaluating drug education
films, lecturing to encourage an understanding of today's drug
culture, and stimulating the involvement of youth in the solution
of community problems. </p>

<p>Two New York City ghetto high schools have experimented with a
program in which members of a black youth organization visit the
schools, assess the drug situation, and then
&quot;penetrate&quot; by mixing at the ball courts and other
student gathering places, seeking to identify student pushers and
deal with them, either through persuasion or by reporting them to
the authorities. Identified users are urged to seek treatment.
The organization itself reports a reduction in selling and usage
of drugs, but no official evaluation is obtainable. </p>

<p>Teen Challenge is a private, religion-oriented agency with
centers across the country that offer treatment to anyone over
eighteen. Its premise is that a drug user should be given an
opportunity to undergo a religious experience that can give him
the strength to overcome his destructive desires and habits. </p>

<p>Private businesses often fund programs offering alternatives
to youth. One recently financed a project involving youth groups
from Harlem and Nassau County, utilizing peer-group dynamics as
an alternative to drug abuse. Films, magazines, and educational
materials created by the students are disseminated to schools and
community organizations. </p>

<p>Several treatment and rehabilitation facilities have opened
their doors to youngsters for whom they organize extracurricular
activities. Patients in a Detroit methadone facility have
&quot;hit the streets&quot; to provide speakers, peer and family
counseling, and neighborhood projects to stimulate political
awareness and consumer education. RAP, Inc., a Washington, D.C.,
therapeutic community, encourages neighborhood children to join a
&quot;block club&quot; designed to channel energies
constructively. Tutoring services, speakers, and library
privileges are extended to members of the group. </p>

<p>Some of the more creative programs involve both drug
experimenters and nonusers in activities that seek to explore
ways youth can pursue inward and outward experiences that will
make drug use less desirable. Dr. William Soskin's Project
Community in Berkeley has such a program for 140 youths between
the ages of fourteen and eighteen. Acting on the hypothesis that
home and school have not provided sufficiently satisfying
influences in their lives, the Center seeks to create a
&quot;third force&quot; consisting of a group of peers, under
supervision, who engage in mutual activities a few hours a day.
These activities include inward meditation, body language,
poetry, and even active practical jokes for the more aggressive
members. Rap sessions and encounter groups as well as active
community projects and recreation outings complete the program.
Sympathetic counselors are always available to talk to an
individual about his problems. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>FREE CLINICS AND CRISIS CENTERS</b> </p>

<p>There are a number of free medical clinics for &quot;street
people&quot; providing a range of services on a twenty-four-hour
basis-not only emergency medical or psychological help for drug
crises (bad trips and severe reactions), but also up-to-date
information on the quality and effects of drugs currently being
sold in the immediate area, long-term treatment, and referral.
Their basic purpose is not to proselytize against drugs but to
provide help when people need it most and to disseminate accurate
analyses of the risks of street drugs. In some cases, for
example, there followed a dramatic decrease in the use of
particular drugs or batches of drugs after the clinic staff
spread the word that a particular product was having bad effects
.2' Free medical clinics reach those in or on the edge of the
drug culture, and they enjoy a high degree of credibility. Most
crisis centers cater to a variety of needs, including draft,
abortion, and family counseling. These facilities sometimes offer
temporary residence for runaways and intervention with parents.
Usually, they give medical help to those with drug problems and
provide speakers and materials as well as information to other
community organizations, including schools. Some even provide
employment in crafts and work with delinquent youngsters in the
community. </p>

<p>Most clinics and crisis centers are run by the youths
themselves with professional and medical guidance. Young people
are attracted by their neutral attitude toward drug use. What
preventive effects, if any, the centers have on continued drug
use is extremely speculative, but they fill acute needs for help
in immediate health crises and for accurate information. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>&quot;HOT-LINE&quot; TELEPHONE SERVICES</b> </p>

<p>Anyone can call such a telephone service anonymously with
questions about drug reactions as well as a score of other
problems. Not infrequently, hot-line staffers are asked to locate
lost pets, give advice on domestic squabbles, and make referrals.
It is inherent in the nature of such a service that there is no
way of telling what happens to callers, or whether they make use
of the advice and information given about drugs and treatment
services, or whether, indeed, calls are legitimate. Anonymity
constitutes the service's main attraction. Ex-users often find
positive reinforcement and satisfaction in serving as hot-line
operators. Yet, there are cases where constantly talking about
drug effects has led these people back to drug use. As a rule,
however, their past drug experiences enhance their ability to
deal effectively with crisis situations. In cases of extreme
emergency, trained professionals are consulted. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>AFTERSCHOOL AND INSTEAD-OF-SCHOOL PREVENTION PROGRAMS</b> </p>

<p>As of 1970, New York City's Addiction Services Agency ran
sixteen youth centers in poverty areas to discourage drug use by
nonusers or early experimenters aged nine to nineteen and
referred by parents, schools, police, or courts. Ten centers were
funded by OEO, four by NIMH, but all were to be shifted to local
and state funding. ASA was asking for money to open four more
centers in middle-class neighborhoods. </p>

<p>ASA has estimated that 80 per cent of New York City youths
over twelve have experimented with at least one drug. The
majority, however, reportedly have no deep-seated mental problems
requiring a residential therapeutic community setting. During
1970, about 500 youths were in such afterschool centers at any
one time and some 5,440 in all were served. </p>

<p>The focus is on group therapy and counseling to help the youth
make basic decisions about his values and life goals.
&quot;Disrupters,&quot; seriously disturbed youth, and heavy
opiate users are not eligible. Parent groups also operate out of
the centers, which try to work with the schools, so that teachers
too can play a supportive role. </p>

<p>Centers are open five days a week, each handling 50 youths at
a time. Youths, if attending school, come to the center in the
afternoons, generally for a period of three to six months. If
they are not in school, center activities are scheduled during
the day. Peer-group sessions, role-playing and psychodrama,
individual counseling, recreation, workshops, and seminars are
all used. An attempt is made to establish role-model
identification with staff members. </p>

<p>These centers have not, to our knowledge, been evaluated
systematically. Their aim is to create pressure against the use
of drugs. The agency's own assessment is that the centers have
had difficulty because the youths referred to them need more
supportive services than can be offered. </p>

<p>There have been recurrent proposals for outdoor work or summer
camps for drug-using youngsters. ASA would like to create one for
150-180 youths aged twelve to nineteen, modeled on Outward Bound.
(This is a program that gets youth into the country, where they
increase their wilderness skills in challenging situations, thus
increasing their sense of confidence and selfworth.)
Group-encounter sessions would be combined with regular camp
life. Dr. Gordon Heistad, of the University of Minnesota, has
experimented (successfully, he believes) with a camp model
combining drug education and regular camp life for high school
leaders. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>DRUGMOBILES</b> </p>

<p>These vehicles, which follow street youth into their natural
haunts, to ball games and rock concerts, have been tried in
several cities. Generally, they feature informational exhibits
and ex-addict staffers. Counselors answer inquiries on an
individual basis and ensure anonymity. </p>

<p>Credible staff is quite difficult to retain, since trained
counselors prefer working with more stable programs. In most
cases, these mobile units end up having middle-aged discussion
leaders with good intentions but little facility in
communicating. Many young people suggest that more emphasis
should be put on honest discussions and less on
&quot;clever&quot; exhibits. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE NATIONAL MEDIA</b> </p>

<p>A perpetual dispute in the drug-education field involves the
influence of the national media on drug-abuse-prevention efforts.
What effect do they have? What effect should they have? Some who
work with young drug users believe that television is more likely
to influence them than school programs, because they relate more
sympathetically to the medium; others fear that a high powered
television campaign stressing &quot;risks, thrills, scares,
fantasies, high tragedy and antiheroism&quot; will increase drug
experimentation.&quot; Dr. Norman Zinberg points out that
television may bend growing children in the direction of seeking
experiences that transcend tangible boundaries, such as
mind-altering drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>The role played by the mass media in any comprehensive drug
education effort depends on the specific objectives of that
effort and the methods used to attain them. The current lack of
agreement on these matters, however, makes it difficult to
conceive of the ideal media program and virtually impossible to
predict the benefits to be derived from it. Nevertheless, as the
following review of present efforts will show, everybody is doing
something. </p>

<p>Between 1968 and 1970, the National Institute of Mental Health
conducted a national television campaign against drugs, featuring
spots created by the Grey Advertising Company with famous
&quot;name personalities,&quot; such as Rod Serling and the
Everly Brothers. Air time was donated on a public-service basis,
and eighteen different films were supplied to every major network
station and most independents. Radio stations also aired antidrug
messages, twelve in all. Some fourteen posters and pamphlets were
mailed out to supplement the campaign. No one knows what the
total effect was, aside from generating 22 million requests for
information. Gerald Kurtz, Director of the Office of
Communication at NIMH, has been quoted as saying that the effort,
which was specifically youth-oriented, was not expected to turn
young people away from drugs. Its real purpose, rather, was to
heighten the concern of laymen and private organizations and
create national awareness of the problem of drug abuse. </p>

<p>In 1970, a new national media campaign was begun under White
House sponsorship, based on the same untested assumption that
television can &quot;unsell&quot; drug usage. According to the
prevailing theory, peer pressure against drugs can be created to
reinforce those who have not yet tried drugs or are only very
occasional users. The approach still lumps all drugs together
under the slogan &quot;Why Do You Think They Call It Dope?&quot;
Some black reporters have criticized it as obviously a product of
the white advertising world, both in its content and in its style
of presentation. It was put together by the Compton Agency, which
worked through the Advertising Council. The new campaign started
by directing its programs to the preteen group, then moved to
high school and college audiences, then to blacks, parents, and
the military. While medical hazards are mentioned, the emphasis
is on inculcating the attitude that taking drugs is
&quot;stupid&quot; rather than on presenting factual information.
</p>

<p>Other groups have entered the media fight against drug abuse.
In February, 1971, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting began
airing eight one-hour programs entitled &quot;The Turned-On
Crisis.&quot; The series, intended for general audiences,
includes programs on several facets of the drug problem. For
those more involved in the drug problem, CPB can also provide an
in-service training program of six thirty-minute segments for
teachers and school administrators and an in-class series of
eight twenty-minute programs for junior high school youth. </p>

<p>There are many efforts to develop effective television and
radio antidrug spot ads, but whether any such device can
counterbalance everyday pressures supporting drug use is
doubtful. It has been pointed out that most teenagers listen
incessantly to the radio, while their television viewing is
sporadic, and that radio spots repeated between rock songs are
more likely to reach them than spots on television. But merely
reaching the audience is not enough; the ads must be effective.
Some stations that carry antidrug spots have complained of a lack
of good material but an abundance of poor, ineffective material.
The National Institute of Mental Health has provided funds to the
National Coordinating Council on Drug Education to evaluate radio
and television material; the results are included in a monthly
newsletter, Tune In, distributed to approximately 5,600 radio and
television stations. Included are reviews of spot announcements,
factual programs, interviews, and public-service announcements
available to the media for broadcasting. </p>

<p>A black-audience station in Woodside, New York-WWRL has
adopted a more direct approach: It asks listeners to call in the
names of pushers, which it then submits to the police; the
caller's anonymity is kept, and all tips are investigated. The
station contends that thirty-two arrests have been made in six
months as a result of this campaign. It also broadcasts a
referral telephone number for those who want help with their own
drug problems. </p>

<p>Other radio stations are beginning to use the rock sound in
communicating antidrug messages. Disk jockeys, for example, play
authentic-sounding rock tunes with lyrics describing youthful
deaths caused by overdoses or by the ingestion of poor-quality
street drugs, in the hope that the young will pay serious heed.
But some teenagers resent this attempt to make the scare approach
pleasing to the ear. </p>

<p>The subject of rock music raises another question about the
relation between national media and the drug problem. Some
observers believe that the media are better at aggravating the
problem than at solving it. Songs with so-called drug-related
lyrics were banned from the airwaves by the Federal
Communications Commission because of their alleged potential to
glamorize drug abuse. This action was vigorously opposed by
underground radio stations, record companies, and private
organizations, which castigated the FCC for exercising censorship
and imposing an &quot;establishment&quot; interpretation of music
on the general public. A booklet put out by the Justice
Department's Bureau of Narcotics, entitled Drug Taking in Youth,
declares that, &quot;Numerous entertainers whose records are
played frequently are drug advocates. Many popular songs have
hidden or expressed drug allusions. Underground FM radio stations
late at night reach many young people with 'acid' rock and their
overt or disguised messages about drug use, sources, and
availability. Rock festivals are frequently advertised through
this medium.&quot;&quot; The effects of rock lyrics on an
individual's decision to use drugs still remain a mystery,
however, clouded by the contradictory pronouncements of
government spokesmen and rock-music enthusiasts. </p>

<p>Television has also been charged with contributing negatively
to the drug problem because of its steady advertising of over-the
counter drugs. In 1969, drug manufacturers reportedly spent $13.7
million for television promotion of seventeen brands of sedatives
and stimulants alone. All types of advertising for all
proprietary drugs involved expenditures of $282 million. Messages
that are criticized for &quot;pushing&quot; over-the-counter
medication promise to solve problems and alleviate everyday
stresses. The manufacturer of a popular pain reliever supports a
successful advertising package attributing love, success,
tranquillity, self confidence, health, and so on, ad infinitum,
to its product. Another commercial selling children's vitamins
shows two youngsters floating through the sky on a magic carpet
after chewing the tablets. </p>

<p>Although manufacturers of proprietary (over-the-counter) drugs
deny the cause-and-effect relationship between advertising and
abuse, many public groups are adamant about eliminating mood drug
advertisements. The National Association of Broadcasters, for
example, has proposed content restraints and criteria for the
broadcasting of such messages. Both the FTC and HEW have been
studying the relationship between over-the-counter drug ads on
television and drug abuse. Members of Congress are also holding
hearings on advertising that urges mood alteration through
nonprescription drugs. An HEW-sponsored study concludes: </p>

<p>By and large, advertising, per se, seems to have a relatively
low level of general influence upon students, when compared to
other environmental factors such as home (parents) and school
(peer groups) . This suggests that advertising is not, by itself,
responsible for student behavior toward drugs and/or other
products, substances or activities. </p>

<p>At most, advertising operates within the context of the
student's total environment and cannot be uniquely responsible
for student values, attitudes and beliefs. </p>

<p>Even though advertising, per se, may not be considered
uniquely responsible for attitudes towards legal and illegal
drugs, the students, nevertheless, feel that it is potentially an
influencing agent, particularly on the youngest students.30 </p>

<p>The study, based on interviews with 560 fifth-, seventh-, and
eleventh-grade California students, covered drugs of all kinds,
including Compoz, Contac, Alka-Seltzer, Bayer Aspirin, as well as
Salem and Marlboro cigarettes. Students questioned after viewing
the ads expressed disbelief of the advertiser's claims, as
follows: Cornpoz-46 per cent; Salem-31 per cent; Contac-40 per
cent; Bayer Aspirin-19 per cent; Alka-Seltzer-12 per cent;
Marlboro -11 per cent. The study also found that &quot;users of
illegal drugs tend to be more receptive to proprietary drug ads
than non-users.&quot; Concluding that such ads may be a
&quot;cultural prop in the maintenance of favorable attitudes
toward drug usage among the young, the study suggested that the
industry initiate an examination of&quot; promotional programs
and more government studies of children's receptivity. </p>

<p>No formal report has been released on the FTC study.
Nevertheless, it is the view of a number of FTC staff members, as
well as some scientists and some officials of BNDD, that such a
relationship does exist in certain cases.&quot; In any event,
many lawyers are convinced that the FTC has the power to attack
many of the suspicious ads without necessarily proving the
existence of such a relationship. </p>

<p>A study by four physicians at the University of Southern
California pointed out that high-pressure advertising of
prescription drugs to physicians depends on a technique of
&quot;mystification.&quot;&quot; The ads identify ordinary human
reactions and emotions as symptoms of physical illness and then
prescribe a drug as remedy. Tofranil, an antidepressant drug, is
cited as one example. The ad suggests that parents agonizing over
a runaway daughter might be treated with the drug. The same
technique may be applied to television ads for proprietary drugs
that impel the listener to seek a drug remedy for the relief of
normal tensions arising from interpersonal relations. </p>

<p>Another example is the excessive use of over-the-counter
drugs. Richard Blum reports that those who use such drugs heavily
assert more frequently than others that medicines make a
difference in the way one feels; also, they recall having more
medicines in their childhood homes than do light users. Not
surprisingly, therefore, they are more likely to use drugs to
reduce fear, induce courage, or change mood in social
situations.&quot; Similarly, many youths learn favorable
attitudes about drugs through underground newspapers; yet, these
papers often present accurate reports about specific drug dangers
and effects. This source of information should not be ignored,
even though its ideological slant may be quite different from
that of official sources of drug education. If solid research
shows that a drug has severe toxic effects, an underground paper
may be the quickest and surest way to communicate with those most
likely to be damaged by it. For example, Washington, D.C.'s
Quicksilver Times has printed the pharmacological analyses of
street samples provided by the Washington Free Clinic as a
warning of the unreliability of certain varieties of drugs then
available. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>FILMS AND AUDIO VISUALS</b> </p>

<p>The recent emphasis on school drug-education programs has
produced a receptive market for drug films and audiovisual
materials; in the past few years, the number of these teaching
devices has reached approximately two hundred. The potential
value of visual teaching cannot be disputed-it makes learning
situations more realistic and more acceptable, especially to
television-oriented youth. The problem, however, for any school
or civic group is how to distinguish between effective material
and that which is inaccurate or counterproductive. Certainly,
there ought to be readily accessible, up-to-date evaluations of
drug films by both experienced adult and student viewers,
indicating the content, level of sophistication, target audience,
and goal orientation of the films. Different reviewers may well
come to different conclusions, but the plethora of drug films now
being sold or given away makes a meaningful choice impossible in
the absence of some reasonably reliable guide. </p>

<p>The Educational Products Information Exchange, which de<br>
</p>

<p>spots and films created by young people tend to present
information that is honest and sensitive to the needs of their
peers. </p>

<p>Many evaluators criticize existing films for not conforming to
the life-styles of the viewer, for containing technical
inaccuracies, and for failing to use either black or Puerto Rican
actors or, at least, a Spanish soundtrack. It has been suggested
that students do not identify with actors or even with real
people in a strange setting, and that movies made in the
students' own locale may have more effect. Several drug-treatment
programs are planning homemade movies set against familiar
backgrounds. Such a series was made in Bedford-Stuyvesant by
local talent, under the sponsorship of the Bedford-Stuyvesant
Restoration Corporation, and was shown on New York's Channel 13. </p>

<p>Most problems, however, seem to occur once the film is in the
teacher's hands, ready for use. Fortunately, most film reports
are accompanied by remarks on how to use the materials
effectively. Previewing is the essential first step, preferably
with students as well as with adult screeners. Films should not
be shown if they fail to meet the audience's level of knowledge
and sophistication. Next, creative interaction should take place
between the audience, the educator, and the film. Students should
be allowed to give their own evaluation or to discuss their
feelings about the film's message. </p>

<p>A plethora of commercial films focusing on the youthful drug
culture has flooded the market. As is to be expected, many such
movies sensationalize and exploit the drug-abuse problem. A few,
however, present the cruel realities of drug addiction in a
sensitive manner, thus meriting their use in student and adult
educational programs. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
feels that &quot;recent films directed to youth ... initiate them
into the drug scene.&quot; </p>

<p>The emphasis on student participation has prompted a new
method-videotaping the students' own discussions on drugsthat is
being tried in many classrooms. Educators are able to gain
insights from studying the dynamics of the situation, and
students profit from observing themselves in peer-group settings
attempting to solve problems and make decisions collectively.
Outside the schools, videotapes have been used successfully in
adult training courses, especially those focusing on increasing
the participants' level of communication. For most, the
experience becomes a mirror reflecting strengths, weaknesses, and
limitations in dealing with others. Unlike the passive screening
of drug education films, live videotape replays often enhance the
ability of teachers and parents to relate to young people.
Unfortunately, however, videotape apparatus is too costly for
most schools and civic groups. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>SCHOOL CURRICULA</b> </p>

<p>Paralleling the proliferation of antidrug films has been the
emergence of packaged curricula. Private businesses, state
departments of education, local school systems, publishers,
pharmaceutical manufacturers, professional associations,
consulting firms, and universities have all jumped on the
bandwagon in response to the growing demand for ready-made drug
courses. These vary tremendously in quality, content, and
approach. Some are very useful, while others are aimed merely at
exploiting the commercial market, offering little more than the
basic facts about drugs with a few suggestions about research
projects for students. The better material offers teachers
thoughtful background information on specific drugs, suggestions
for effective course presentation and teaching aids and flexible
lesson plans. </p>

<p>Such publications as the NIMH Resource Book for Drug Abuse
Education and Teaching About Drugs: A Curriculum Guide, K-12,
issued by the American School Health-Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Association, contain excellent background material on particular
drugs. The National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information will
send, on request, eight model curricula from various school
systems, again without endorsement or evaluation of their
appropriateness for different target groups. As a total package,
the booklets provide a valuable diversity of approaches as well
as supplemental resources. A few of the education packages
encourage self-examination by both teachers and students. </p>

<p>The current emphasis on youthful self-evaluation has given
rise to techniques stressing the importance of student values in
making decisions about drugs. Those who promulgate the value
approach contend that behavior and personal values are
inseparable. Richard E. Carney believes that drug abuse can be
prevented, or at least explained, if it is viewed as an
individual's attempt to actualize his values. In one of his
studies, drug users placed significantly less value on such
categories as &quot;power&quot; as it related to participation in
student organizations, clubs, and &quot;politics&quot;;
&quot;affection&quot; and &quot;respect&quot; as they related to
their willingness to become involved in parental conferences on
important personal subjects; and &quot;skill&quot; as it related
to participation in sports and organized activities.&quot; But no
one knows how students come to hold certain values, or why some
values are more prevalent than others. This may explain the
adamant refusal of many schools to consider adoption of the
value-clarifying curriculum until more concrete data are made
available. Channels are opening up, however, and skeptical
educators are becoming more tolerant of &quot;radical&quot;
approaches to education. Several counties in Maryland, for
example, recently adopted a value-oriented curriculum package
developed by Drug Central, a division of Washington, D.C.'s
Council of Governments. As is often the case with new methods,
the Maryland teachers are in need of special training programs to
assure positive results in the classroom. At present, increasing
numbers of schools are adopting this approach and report
favorable responses from students and teachers alike. </p>

<p>Other imaginative innovations in the field are receiving
favorable support from the educational community. The Creative
Learning Group in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has integrated
materials available for elementary and junior high schools
focusing on problem solving and teaching younger children how to
make decisions about life and drugs. A vast array of unique
teaching aids is offered for classes, and teachers are equipped
with a comprehensive manual containing drug-abuse information,
sound medical information for use in emergencies, and suggestions
for generating group discussions. The group's services will be
broadened to include short-term programs, guides for student
counselors, preschool film strips, and materials for inner-city,
Spanish-speaking youngsters. </p>

<p>Macro Systems, Inc., has a complex package consisting of a
self-discovery kit for use by the teacher in finding out his own
position on drugs and exploring his own biases, before proceeding
to lead an objective and probing discussion among his students.
It also contains a consensus map for the classroom that enables
students to plot their own attitudes compared with those of their
peers. </p>

<p>It is encouraging to note that at least one group, New
Dimensions Publishing Company, has responded to the scarcity of
materials for minorities. This New York City firm produces books
in Spanish and English for blacks, Puerto Ricans, and Mexican
Americans at the elementary level. </p>

<p>There are undoubtedly other good materials that we did not
happen to find. As yet, no one can prove that any particular
package or curriculum has an edge over others. There is no
present basis of comparison, since distributors rarely make
provisions for evaluation, student testing, periodical
re-evaluation, or updating of their materials, although the
Office of Education is funding efforts in the area. </p>

<p>For any curriculum, it is essential that teachers be
sensitized to the philosophy, techniques, and goals of the
materials. If the instructors fear the subject and doubt their
ability to teach it, the odds are that they will not succeed with
young people, regardless of the caliber of the materials. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>EDUCATION FOR NONSTUDENTS</b> </p>

<p>Despite massive expenditures on public drug-abuse-education
programs, there is still widespread ignorance of basic drug facts
among the population at large. For instance, a New York Addiction
Control Commission survey of 6,000 persons aged thirteen and up
found that one out of every four regarded drug abuse as among the
top four problems facing the nation. Yet, 67 per cent had no idea
what should be done about it; 60 per cent did not know what state
agencies were at work on the problem; and 50 per cent did not
know what effects heroin or amphetamines had on users.&quot; A
Gallup poll in December, 1970, showed that 64 per cent of the
adults and 39 per cent of the students interviewed thought drugs
were a serious problem in the public schools.&quot; </p>

<p>In most cases, parents, teachers, and community leaders are
more in need of accurate information about drugs than students
are. Parental responses to a student's involvement in drugs can
curb or accelerate further experimentation. It is therefore
unfortunate that most school drug-education programs have not
prepared parents to deal with the complex drug issue. For parents
need not only accurate information but also the ability to
discriminate between the effects of experimenting once with
marijuana and those of heavy involvement with drugs as well as
the ability to establish and maintain lines of honest
communication with their children. Thus, to begin with,
school-education programs should include a parent component.
Several sessions could be designed to encourage adult
participation and interaction with groups of young people.
Community information and education programs sponsored by private
and public organizations could also serve to reach and inform
parents. Even more importantly parents need a place to go for
specific help when they find drug abuse in their own family. As
noted in a newspaper article, &quot;This is sheer panic that
simply cannot wait. If advice is not quickly available, fear,
anxiety, rage or protectivism takes over. If action is taken
during the panic and without advice, irrevocable damage may be
done to the sick victim as well as to the total family structure
and relationships.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>As a general rule, parent &quot;help&quot; programs should
impart sympathy and counseling together with facts. The guilt,
fear, and anger parents are likely to feel when a family drug
crisis occurs should be channeled into constructive action
through effective self-help programs. Parents of drug-dependent
children can also help each other. It is often beneficial to talk
to someone else who has been through a family drug crisis in
trying to approach the situation calmly and objectively. No one
is better prepared to provide this assistance than those parents
who have been forced to deal with their own children's abuse of
drugs. Opinion varies concerning the value of involving parents
in group discussions with their own children. Some planners
insist that direct family interaction is always
counterproductive, while others advocate the confrontation of
familial problems after the initial ice-breaking session. </p>

<p>New York's ASA runs programs for parents and relatives of
serious drug-users and for community residents worried about the
problem in their neighborhood generally. Several school programs
(as in Nassau County, New York, and in Los Angeles) also run
special sessions for the parents of children enrolled in the
schools. In some, parents participate with youngsters (not their
own) in group discussions on why young people use drugs. There
are, of course, a multitude of drug-information programs run by
civic groups, eager to involve parents. (In Miami, for instance,
about two dozen organizations have drug-abuse education
programs.) Many parent-oriented programs focus too heavily on how
to recognize the symptoms of drug usage and may provoke needless
confrontation between parent and child. Many are not prepared to
help in actual cases. Until very recently, most urban centers had
no place where parents could go for balanced personal advice
about what to do when they suspected, or discovered, their child
was using drugs. </p>

<p>Experts do not agree on how a parent should react when
confronted with a drug-abuse crisis. They all begin by urging the
parent not to panic but differ markedly on what should be done in
coping with the crisis. Some suggest that the parent compel the
child to seek treatment, even by threatening to throw him out of
the house. Others counsel the parent to be patient and
understanding in an effort to get at the underlying problems. Dr.
Paul Blachley suggests that relatives of a drug user be told that
&quot;bailing him out&quot; encourages continuation of dependence
and drug use and advises that they not be accessory to the
problem.&quot; Sidney Cohen, former director of NIMH's drug
program, advocates a middle course, urging parents to demonstrate
an attitude of &quot;I love you and I will help you, but I won't
support you if you persist in behavior that I believe to be
detrimental to you.&quot;&quot; He further advises that these
decisions must be made on an individual basis, depending on the
drugs involved, the child's age, and his willingness to seek help
voluntarily. </p>

<p>Of course, other adults who come into contact with youth need
accurate information on drugs-especially teachers, counselors,
policemen, and doctors. How much information is needed has yet to
be assessed. Nevertheless, NIMH recently funded the Bureau of
Social Science Research to study the knowledge levels of
professionals who have contact with the drug scene in Baltimore
and San Francisco. The study will focus on eleven occupational
groups, including policemen, probation officers, pediatricians,
general practitioners, psychologists, social workers, teachers,
school administrators, and counselors. Results should cast some
light on the level of knowledge in the various professions, as
well as on prevailing attitudes, and should indicate methods of
upgrading levels of education. </p>

<p>The current emphasis is primarily on training teachers,
especially through the Office of Education. But other youth
workers deserve attention as well. The National Coordinating
Council on Drug Education points out, with a note of lament,
that, in 1971, half of the administration's funds for drug-abuse
education were spent on teacher training. In contrast, New York
City's ASA would put primary emphasis on a training institute to
prepare a &quot;virtual army of skilled addiction
specialists&quot; to interact with drug-prone youth within the
framework of existing institutionsschools, churches, recreation
programs, settlement houses, block associations, and other
groups. </p>

<p>To enhance the effectiveness of local efforts, the National
Coordinating Council on Drug Education has put out a manual for
community action-Common Sense Lives Here-that sets out a process
whereby interested community people can define their community
drug problem and work together to solve it. Not a &quot;how
to&quot; manual, the pamphlet, together with an accompanying
film, encourage each community to mobilize its own resources and
seek the local causes and cures for increasing drug use before
attempting to formulate a plan of action. It advocates federal
planning grants for communities to finance this preparatory
process. (It is possible that such grants could be made under
Title I of the 1970 Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act.) Also,
it cautions against rushing into any major educational effort
until the nature of the local problem is clearly perceived and
adequate support has been gained. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>SPONSORS OF CURRENT EFFORTS</b> </p>

<p><b>THE FEDERAL GOVERMENT</b> </p>

<p>A number of federal agencies participate in
drug-abuse-education programming, but only five have a
substantial involvement the National Institute of Mental Health,
the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, the Office of
Education, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Their expenditure
levels and basic activities are described in Staff Paper 5. </p>

<p>There is general agreement among these primary agencies that
their present system of program development and funding is
piecemeal, uncoordinated, and inefficient. It involves various
agencies independently supporting different drug-abuse programs
without regard for the resulting duplication of effort and wasted
resources. Ongoing programs, too, are poorly evaluated or not
evaluated at all. Consequently, the agencies have reached a dead
end. They are finding it virtually impossible to judge the
success of programs or even to design cost-benefit analyses
without comprehensive assessments. Only one fact is certain:
Millions of dollars are being spent. just how effectively funds
are being used is still unknown. </p>

<p><b>STATE AND LOCAL EFFORTS</b> </p>

<p>Virtually every sizable community in the country now has at
least one public or private drug-abuse prevention and education
program. The quality of these efforts varies from one area to
another, depending, for example, on the flow of funding
information from Washington, the attitudes and concerns of local
citizens, the fiscal condition of the locality, and the number of
agencies active in prevention programming. State education
administrators agree that there are too many crash programs
concentrating on drug education in isolation; that there is not
enough coordination of effort where many agencies are in the same
field; that there is too much attention to medical and legal
factors and not enough to social and psychological factors; and
that, finally, there is too little an attempt to relate specific
drug use to the &quot;drug culture,&quot; and too much reliance
on one-way education (i.e., handouts, lectures, films, and
speakers). </p>

<p>States also suffer from a lack of support from school
administrators and local political structures. The National
League of Cities/U.S. Conference of Mayors and the National
Association of Counties are responding by planning educational
programs beamed at local office holders. </p>

<p>This chaotic situation is further complicated by the
innumerable commercial firms entering the field, putting out an
avalanche of gimmicks as well as legitimate drug-education
materials, along with model school curricula, films, and cartoon
books. State planners have been inundated by the tide of
mass-produced course materials and usually have been unsuccessful
in sorting the good from the bad. </p>

<p>Different agencies in different states provide drug education
funds in response to the variety of laws. A 1970 compilation by
HEW of drug-abuse education programs supported by state education
agencies shows that twenty-one states have legal requirements for
school drug (and alcohol) education and are &quot;complying&quot;
with them. Four other states have programs in all educational
districts, despite a lack of legal requirements. In eleven states
and Puerto Rico, some, but not all, districts have school
programs. A parallel survey of drug programs supported by state
health authorities, conducted by NIMH in 1970, found that
twenty-two states had such health-related programs, and sixteen
more had them in the planning stages. </p>

<p>A major problem at the state level is lack of effective
coordination. Most states are plagued by a lack of cooperation
between existing programs, by unnecessary overlap and duplication
of effort, and by an insufficient flow of information from the
grassroots level to the legislature to stimulate effective
policies and leadership. A few states, such as Arizona,
California, and now Florida, have statewide councils to
coordinate and give direction to public and private agencies in
the field. California alone has 300 community-based drug-abuse
programs, all of which have sprung up in the past two years. New
York City has 47 identifiable drug-education programs, and New
York State has Community Narcotics Education Centers in sixteen
localities, manned by professionals, as well as 57 local
narcotics-guidance councils to coordinate local programs. </p>

<p>To eliminate the fragmentation that exists among the states, a
National Association of State Drug Abuse Coordinators was
organized recently. Since it is still in the organizational
stages, however, its impact remains uncertain. </p>

<p><b>PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS</b> </p>

<p>A plethora of professional organizations, social-welfare
associations, charitable volunteer organizations, and other
groups also conduct community education programs. Few, if any, of
these programs have been evaluated with regard to their impact on
a target population or their record of accomplishing specific
goals. They rarely assume an action-oriented role, preferring
instead simply to disseminate educational brochures and
audiovisuals. Their programs all look rational and successful on
paper, but no one has any real notion of their effectiveness,
except, perhaps, for a pervasive feeling that nothing they have
done so far has made much difference. In fact, they are often
criticized for jumping into the drug field without first asking
for experienced advice on what their role ought to be. Also, the
huge sums of money they expended on mediocre printed materials
would, according to people involved in delivery of service
programs, be better spent on the treatment and rehabilitation of
addicts. </p>

<p>On the other hand, some private groups do make successful use
of low-key approaches in performing unique and valuable services.
Several minority professional associations, for example, sponsor
clinics that provide dental care for addicts and support halfway
houses that offer counseling, job placement, and training to
hard-core, youthful drug abusers. Undergraduate chapters of black
fraternal organizations educate members of their campus
communities, while their graduate counterparts initiate the
involvement of local groups in educational programs and
&quot;action&quot; workshops. Another case involves student
professionals who spend their summer months working in
interdisciplinary teams, providing improved health-care delivery
(including drug treatment and related legal services) to
inner-city residents. Finally, several organizations whose main
focus is drug abuse not only encourage research and conduct
training sessions for professionals but offer free consultation
to people setting up treatment centers. </p>

<p>Inherent in the structure of national groups is a widespread
network for the dissemination of materials and information. These
expansive communication mechanisms are frequently used to support
legislative reform efforts and to provide information to the
media and the public on the subject of drugs. </p>

<p>Federal money is not being spent to evaluate ongoing
educational programs. As the National Coordinating Council on
Drug Education has testified: </p>

<p>There is a danger from continued massive education programming
without first taking the time to evaluate what has been done,
what needs to be done, and what can be done. Unexamined and
unevaluated information and education programs are certainly no
answer; and it is safe to say that in some instances they may be
as harmful in the long run as no program at all .44 </p>

<p>Most private efforts are limited, and many are local in scope.
A few, however, are important forces nationally. With public
attention being focused on the drug-abuse problem, increasing
numbers of national drug organizations have begun to emerge, and
many of them project coordination as their main function. The
most inclusive of these is the National Coordinating Council on
Drug Education, formed in 1968 as a coordinating group for public
agencies and private organizations involved in drug-abuse
education. The Council's philosophy emphasizes rational
approaches to drug-related issues. Any interdisciplinary
regional, state, or local organization whose purpose relates to
drug education is eligible for membership. National organizations
wishing to cooperate with NCCDE in achieving its goals may also
join. At present, most members are white, middle-class
organizations, although there are a few black groups, again
primarily middleclass. Federal agencies are assured of the
Council's cooperation. The National Coordinating Council has been
financed by government contracts, private foundation funds,
contributions from private industry, and donations from its
members. </p>

<p>NCCDE has been quite independent despite its government
funding. It refused to join in National Drug Abuse Prevention
Week because it felt that such one-shot crash campaigns were
useless; it criticized the national advertising campaign; and it
filed suit against the Federal Communications Commission,
challenging its ban on rock music. Whether it will continue to
receive government support is doubtful. </p>

<p>The Student Association for the Study of Hallucinogens (STASH)
is an independent, nonprofit group run by the students
themselves. It publishes the Journal of Psychedelic Drugs,
provides reprints, issues a bibliography on hallucinogens and
other drugs, and holds regular conferences on drug abuse and
related problems; it has a good (and computerized) library
containing 90 per cent of all the literature in English on
marijuana and hallucinogens and has compiled a directory of
drug-information groups. STASH is objective and scientifically
oriented and, for the sake of credibility, will not accept any
government money. It expects, in time, to support itself totally
from membership and publication fees. </p>

<p><b>BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY</b> </p>

<p>The increasing extent of drug use in industry began to be
recognized during the last year by management and personnel
officials. Nationwide interviews with 6,000 workers in the
automobile industry recently compiled by the Alliance for Labor
Action found that about 46 per cent of the workers interviewed
who were under thirty years of age had used drugs at least
once.&quot; Of approximately 222 major businesses surveyed about
drug abuse among blue-collar workers and alcoholism among
executives, nearly two-thirds saw drug abuse as a major
industrial problem, either now or in the immediate future, and 53
per cent had already discovered some form of drug abuse in their
organization.&quot; </p>

<p>The existence of drug abuse in a business creates serious
problems for an employer. It is legitimate for him to consider
whether the employee's behavior on the job endangers other
workers or consumers, or even the image (or profits) of the
business. He can also be encouraged to understand the underlying
problems that may have led to the drug use, to help the user find
treatment, and to allow him to continue to work under
supervision. Although most businesses still maintain a &quot;find
them and fire them&quot; policy, an increasing number of
executives realize that they cannot find and do not wish to fire
all employees who use drugs. Such employers are instituting
education programs in an effort to wean employees away from drugs
and to teach management how to recognize serious drug problems
and channel workers to helping agencies when necessary.&quot; </p>

<p>Business must also be involved in another urgent problem
providing employment opportunities for ex-addicts who are in or
have completed a treatment program. Long-term rehabilitation
requires that an ex-addict be able to find a job. Governmental
and social-service agencies can contribute greatly to this-the
Vera Institute and the City of New York are pioneering the
employment of patients who are in treatment in specially
supervised work projects-but real progress will depend upon the
tolerance and assistance of far-sighted employers. More
experimental work is needed, of course, to determine the
problems, possibilities, and legitimate expectations of
employment programs. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>CONCLUSION</b> </p>

<p>This examination of current drug-education efforts indicates
that additional money is not the most urgent requirement.
Creative individuals are needed to act as catalysts for the
growth, testing, and support of creative educational approaches.
Evaluation is vital, as is a climate that encourages the
translation of research findings into action. Educational
programming must respond to differences among addicts in
ethnicity, age, and mental set. Finally, concerted efforts to
clarify goals, drug knowledge, and institutional responsibilities
are essential. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>NOTES</b> </p>

<p>1. Norman E. Zinberg. Personal communication. </p>

<p>2. John D. Swisher and Richard E. Horman, &quot;Evaluation of
Temple University's Drug Abuse Prevention Program,&quot; Research
Report Contract J-68-50 (U.S. Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C., 1968). </p>

<p>3. See Lester Grinspoon, Marijuana Reconsidered (Harvard
University Press, 1971), for a discussion of different beliefs
about one drug. </p>

<p>4. See Norman Zinberg and John Robertson, Drugs and the Public
(in press). </p>

<p>5. California State Department of Education, &quot;A Study of
More Effective Education Relative to Narcotics, Other Harmful
Drugs and Hallucinogenic Substances&quot; (a progress report
submitted to the California Legislature as required by Chapter
1437, Statutes of 1968), Sacramento, California, 1970, pp. 16-27.
</p>

<p>6. Marvin J. Rosen, &quot;An Evaluative Study Comparing the
Cognitive and Attitudinal Effects of Two Versions of an
Educational Program About Mind-Affecting Drugs,&quot; San
Francisco, California, Evaluation and Research Associates, July,
1970, p. v. </p>

<p>7. Helen H. Nowlis, Drugs on the College Campus (Garden City,
New York: Anchor Books, 1969), p. 60. </p>

<p>8. John D. Swisher and James L. Crawford, Jr., &quot;An
Evaluation of a Short-Term Drug Education Program,&quot; The
School Counselor (March, 1971), p. 272. </p>

<p>9. Louise G. Richards, &quot;Psychological Sophistication in
Current Drug Abuse Education,&quot; Rutgers Symposium on
Communication and Drug Abuse (October 14, 1969), p. 15. </p>

<p>10. California State Department of Education, op. cit., note
5, p. 26. </p>

<p>1 1. Helen H. Nowlis, op. cit., note 7. </p>

<p>12. &quot;Ten Drug Abuse Films: What Students and
Professionals Think of Them,&quot; Educational Product Report,
III, No. 7 (April, 1970), 16. </p>

<p>13. Paul Blachley, Seduction: A Conceptual Model of Drug
Dependencies and Other Contagious Social Evils (1970). </p>

<p>14. Swisher, Crawford, Goldstein, and Mura (1970); Swisher and
Warner (1 97 1) ; Swisher, Warner, Upcraf t, and Spence (1 97 1).
</p>

<p>15. Richard W. Warner, &quot;Evaluation of Drug Abuse
Programs&quot; (unpublished article), Pennsylvania State
University, State College, Pennsylvania, 1971, p. 6. </p>

<p>16. Herbert 0. Brayer, &quot;A Comparative Analysis of Drug
Use and Its Relationship to Certain Attitudes, Values and
Cognitive Knowledge on Drugs Between Eighth and Eleventh Grade
Students in the Coronado Unified School Districts,&quot;
Coronado, Calif., 1970, p. 53. </p>

<p>17. Gilbert Geis, &quot;Impact of an Experimental Narcotics
Education Program on Junior High School Pupils&quot; (1967). </p>

<p>18. Thomas Ungerleider, &quot;Drugs and the Educational
Process,&quot; The American fournal of Psychiatry, XXV (June,
1969). </p>

<p>19. Louise G. Richards and John H. Langer, Drug Taking in
Youth (Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington, D.C.,
1971), p. 37. 20. The Reasonable Exercise of Authority, National
Association of Secondary School Principals, Washington, D.C.,
1969. </p>

<p>21. John H. Langer, &quot;School-Law Enforcement
Cooperation,&quot; Guidelines for Drug Abuse Prevention Education
(Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington, D.C.,
April, 1970), pp. 13-14. </p>

<p>22. Helen H. Nowlis, op. cit., note 7, p. 66. </p>

<p>23. Thomas Ungerleider and Haskell Bowen, &quot;Drug Abuse and
the Schools,&quot; American journal of Psychiatry, XXV (June,
1969). </p>

<p>24. U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Labor and Public
Welfare, Special Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Narcotics,
Hearings on S. 3562, 91st Cong., 2d sess., March, 1970, pp.
176-77. </p>

<p>25. Montgomery County joint Advisory Committee on Drug Abuse,
Final Report, March 10, 1970. </p>

<p>26. Frederic Meyers, &quot;Incidents Involving the
Haight-Ashbury Population and some Uncommonly Used Drugs,&quot;
journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 1, No. I (Fall, 1968). </p>

<p>27. Robin Nelson, &quot;Dragon Slayers on an Ominous
Crusade,&quot; Marketing Communications (September, 1970), p. 20
(quoting Dr. Nes Littner, Director of the Chicago Institute for
Psychoanalysis). </p>

<p>28. Norman E. Zinberg, &quot;Why Now?: Drug Use as a Response
to Social and Technological Change,&quot; lecture, Aspen,
Colorado, August 29,1970. </p>

<p>29. Richards and Langer, op. cit., note 19, p. 29. </p>

<p>30. Donald L. Kanter, &quot;Pharmaceutical Advertising in
Youth: A Monograph Reporting upon a Quantitative Pilot
Study&quot; (mimeograph), December 30, 1970, p. 15. </p>

<p>31. Henry Lermard et al., &quot;Hazards Implicit in
Prescribing Psychoactive Drugs,&quot; 169, Science 438 (1970).
The authors cite examples of such statements as follows: </p>

<p>1. &quot;The epidemic of drug abuse is rapidly becoming a
national emergency. Part of the responsibility for this must be
borne by the drug industry, radio and television. just as
cigarette commercials made smoking romantic, manly, relaxing,
smart, and 'in,' drug advertising has helped'turn on' our
civilization, especially our youth. We are constantly bombarded
by people on television with an easy solution to any of our
troubles, most of it half truth or lies. The continuous selling
of drugs on television and radio must be stopped. All drug
advertising should be prohibited from the mass media, a small
step toward regaining our children.&quot; (Letter from Robert A.
Levine, M.D., to the editor, 282 New England journal of Medicine,
pp. 1378-79 [1970].) </p>

<p>2. &quot;Our technology provides us with highly potent
synthetic materials and through the mass media means to inform
any person who can read, listen, or look about these dangerous
substances. In this situation it is all too easy for anyone of
any age who does not like the way he lives to try a drug'high'in
search of a mystique of esoteric meaning, of euphoria, or of
oblivion.&quot; (Stanley F. Yolles, M.D., &quot;The Drug
Phenomenon,&quot; NS10 journal of American Pharmaceutical
Association, p. 403 [1970].) </p>

<p>3. &quot;Our culture and communications media teach children
that one solves almost all problems by 'turning on@-drugs for
headaches, constipation, sleeplessness, 'nerves,' and for
whatever other maladies beset us.&quot; (Allen Y. Cohen, Ph.D.,
&quot;Inside What's Happening: Sociological, Psychological, and
Spiritual Perspectives on the Contemporary Drug Scene,&quot; 59
American journal of Public Health, pp. 2090,2093 [1969].) </p>

<p>4. &quot;The impact of mass media advertising . . . tends to
create a psychological dependence upon drugs as a palliative for
the strains and stresses of contemporary society.&quot; (Dr.
Donald C. Brodie, Drug Trade News, June 15, 1970, p. 8.) </p>

<p>32. Ibid. </p>

<p>33. Richard Blum et al., Society and Drugs, I (San Francisco,
California: Jossey Bass, Inc., 1969), 262. </p>

<p>34. Educational Product Report, op. cit., note 12, p. 16. </p>

<p>35. &quot;99 Films on Drugs +,&quot; University of California
Extension Media Center, Berkeley, California, 1970. </p>

<p>36. Drug Abuse Films, 2d ed., National Coordinating Council on
Drug Education, Washington, D.C., 197 1, p. vii. </p>

<p>37. Richards and Langer, op. cit. </p>

<p>38. Herbert 0. Brayer, op. cit., note 16, pp. 54-55. </p>

<p>39. Glaser and Snow, &quot;Public Knowledge and Attitudes on
Drug Abuse,&quot; NACC (1969). </p>

<p>40. Washington Post, December 10, 1970. </p>

<p>41. New York Times, April 27, 1970. </p>

<p>42. Paul Blachley, op. cit., note 13. </p>

<p>43. Sidney Cohen, &quot;The Drug Dilemma: A Partial
Solution,&quot; Resource Book for Drug Abuse Education, National
Institute of Mental Health (October, 1969), p. 15. </p>

<p>44. U.S. Congress, op. cit., note 24, p. 176. </p>

<p>45. Alliance for Labor Action (ALA) is an organization
representing the United Auto Workers and the Teamsters Union
whose &quot;Drugs in Industry&quot; survey results will be
available early in 1972. </p>

<p>46. Harold M. F. Rush and James K. Brown, &quot;The Drug Abuse
Problem in Business,&quot; Conference Board Record (March, 1971).
</p>

<p>47. Carol Kurtis, Drug Abuse as a Business Problem: The
Problem Defined with Guidelines for Policy (New York: New York
Chamber of Commerce, January, 1971).<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>