
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B16-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000321-B004-196</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/budget/budget4.html 205.168.79.27 19970114195406 text/html 13509
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:54:01 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:46:06 GMT
Content-length: 13334
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>


<HEAD>


<title>DOE EREN - Clean Power for a Sustainable
Economy</title>


</HEAD>


<BODY bgcolor="#FFFFFF" vlink="#843131" text="#000000"
link="#323294">


<center>


<IMG SRC="/picts/eren.gif"></a>


<P>


<H1>"Clean Power for a Sustainable Economy"</H1>


<P>


<IMG SRC="/picts/topbar.gif">


</center>


<P>


<BR>


<P>


<b>Office of Utility Technologies</b>


<P>


<I>What would life be like if your family had no electric
power?  A pre-electric life is 


difficult for most Americans to imagine, but it is reality
for more than 2 billion people in 


the world today.  During the next decade, developing nations
are expected to invest a 


trillion dollars in electrical generation capacity to raise
the living standards of their 


people.  A critical question arises:  How will the
developing world provide this energy 


without dramatically increasing global emissions of carbon
dioxide and other 


greenhouse gases?  U.S. renewable energy technologies are a
large part of the 


answer.  The Department of Energy is working with American
companies to develop, 


produce and export solar, geothermal, wind, biomass and
other renewable power 


technologies that produce clean energy.  The potential
benefits are high: better 


environmental quality worldwide, new jobs for American
workers, and overseas sales 


that lead to mass production of renewable energy systems,
making them a less 


expensive alternative for clean power here in the United
States.</I>


<P>


The Office of Utility Technologies leads the Federal
government's effort to help 


America's electric power producers develop clean, renewable
and more economical 


forms of energy.  The Office has two principal missions:


<P>


<MENU><li>To develop new technologies to produce electric
power from renewable 


resources, including solar, wind, geothermal and biomass
energy.<BR>


<li>To work with the power industry to develop advanced
technologies needed to 


integrate renewable technologies into the utility grid and
to demonstrate and 


market renewable electric power generators to the domestic
and international 


markets.


</menu>


<P>


<b>Fiscal Year 1997 Highlights</b>


<P>


<I>Energy for Today and Tomorrow</I>


<P>


The <B>Photovoltaic Energy Technology Program</B> works in
partnership with 


U.S. industry to foster major advances in photovoltaic (PV)
technology and 


economically competitive use by utilities, with a goal of
500 megawatts installed 


worldwide by the year 2000.


<P>


Increased funding in Fiscal Year 1997 will restore DOE's
support for core research and 


for key development efforts such as <B>PVMat</B> and
<B>PV-COMPACT</B> -- 


heavily cost-shared collaborations with industry to improve
technology for 


manufacturing PV cells and to pave the way for greater
commercial use of PV. Fiscal 


Year 1997 activities will produce world records in cell and
module performance, and 


encourage more than 15 megawatts in new power supply
installations.


<P>


The <B>Biomass Power Program</B> is partnering with U.S.
industry and 


agricultural interests to demonstrate and deploy integrated
power systems that are 


economically competitive and environmentally sustainable. 
The program has three 


primary focus areas: a core research and development
program; biomass gasification 


demonstration  projects that will validate high-efficiency
U.S. biomass technologies; 


and the <B>Biomass Power for Rural Development</B>
initiative, a collaborative 


effort with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to
demonstrate the feasibility of 


integrated feedstock production and advanced power
conversion systems.  In Fiscal 


Year 1997, this program will initiate at least  two more
integrated rural biomass power 


projects with USDA and  will continue existing projects.
These projects will firmly 


establish the technology viability of a broad base of U.S.
developed systems and 


provide substantial benefits to rural America.


<P>


The <B>Geothermal Electric Power Program</B> has set a cost
target of 3 cents per 


kilowatt hour for geothermal electricity by 2005.  The 
program is working toward an 


international market share for the U.S. geothermal power
industry of over $10 billion. 


These goals are pursued by R&D projects and partnerships
aimed at improving 


technologies used to locate, map and drill geothermal
reservoirs and at improving the 


efficiency of geothermal electric power plants.  Fiscal Year
1997 activities will increase 


U.S. geothermal generating capacity by about 30 megawatts,
improve U.S. process 


efficiencies by 5-30% at existing plants, and restore at
least 50 megawatts of 


productive steam capacity at The Geysers in northern
California.  The Geothermal 


Program is also a key sponsor of  the <B>Geothermal Heat
Pump Consortium</B>, 


an industry-led group that seeks to increase market share
for these devices to 12% of 


the U.S. space conditioning market by the year 2000.  


<P>


The<B> Wind Energy Program </B>is built on four key
activities: applied research 


aimed at addressing fundamental wind energy engineering and
technology issues; 


turbine research, a coordinated effort with industry and
utilities to help develop the next 


generation of wind turbines; cooperative research and
testing involving partnerships 


with industry and the National Wind Technology Center; and
technology deployment to 


help introduce the utility sector to advanced wind
technologies.  These research and 


development activities will enable wind technology to
provide electricity for 2.5 cents 


per kilowatt hour in 15 mph winds by the year 2000.
Increased funding in Fiscal Year 


1997 will support research critical to making the next
generation turbines a cost-


competitive reality, provide technology assistance to U.S.
companies competing for 


global markets, and restore the successful, highly leveraged
Turbine Verification 


Project. 


<P>


The <B>Climate Challenge Program </B>demonstrates an
alternative to government 


regulation by using voluntary agreements with individual
electric utilities to reduce 


greenhouse gas emissions.  By February 29, 1996, utility
participation represented 


over 60% of the industry in terms of total utility
generation.  In addition to a significant 


pledge of over 43 million metric tons of carbon equivalent
emissions reductions by the 


year 2000, Climate Challenge has prompted hundreds of
millions of dollars in utility 


industry investments, including two new energy venture
capital funds now at $52 


million.


<P>


The<B> Solar Thermal Electric R&D Program</B> works with
manufacturers, 


developers, and users of solar thermal electric technology
to develop reliable and 


efficient power tower, dish/engine, and parabolic trough
systems that can compete in 


electric utility markets in the next decade.  Fiscal Year
1997 will see important 


advances in solar thermal electric technologies as the 10
megawatt Solar Two Power 


Tower moves into its second operating year.  Five 25
kilowatt dish/Stirling systems are 


deployed at a grid-connected site in the Mojave Dessert to
validate the design and 


performance of the systems.


<P>


The <B>Hydrogen Research Program</B> works with industry and
a scientific 


advisory panel to develop safe, practical and competitive
hydrogen technologies to 


meet energy needs.  The program achieves benefits from and
coordinates with other 


programs in the Department of Energy to develop the
necessary infrastructure for 


hydrogen, including fuel cells for buildings and
transportation use. In Fiscal Year 1997, 


the program will complete proof-of-concept of a low
temperature (150 ) metal hydride 


storage and delivery system on board a utility vehicle.


<P>


DOE leads the national effort to capture the energy-saving
potential of <B>High-


Temperature Superconductivity</B>--the ability of certain
materials to carry 


electricity without resistance energy losses. A key element
of the effort is the 


<B>Superconductivity Partnership Initiative</B>, an
industry-DOE collaborative 


intended to speed the commercialization of superconducting
products. The program 


already has produced several world-record R&D advances. In
FY 1997, industry 


teams working with DOE will provide the expertise and
experience necessary to exploit 


these breakthroughs in electrical wire fabrication by
developing electric motors, 


transformers and other electric power devices.


<P>


<B>Market Profile:  Electric Power</B>


<P>


<MENU><LI>Electric and gas utilities represent a national
capital investment portfolio of $790 


billion.<br>


<LI>Utilities provide roughly $260 billion each year in
energy services to homes, 


businesses and industries.  This is 55% of total U.S. energy
consumption and 


5.2% of the GNP, an average expenditure of $235 per month
for each household 


in America.<br>


<LI>The production and consumption of energy by utilities
has a significant impact 


on the environment, including one-third of total carbon
dioxide emissions.<br>


<LI>Renewable energy systems use domestic resources, have
low environmental 


impact and, once installed, are independent of price
fluctuations.<br>


<LI>The United States is expected to invest as much as $200
billion in new electric 


generation capacity in the next decade to replace aging
power plants and to 


keep up with rising demand.<br>


<LI>Electricity is a crucial element in economic development
worldwide.  Nations are 


expected to spend an estimated $1 trillion over the next
decade to provide 


electricity to their people.


</MENU>


<P>


<B>Benefits:</B>


<P>


<B>Energy Savings:</B>  Total primary energy contributions
of 0.4 quadrillion 


BTUs by the year 2000; 1.2 quadrillion BTUs by 2010; and 3.0
quadrillion BTUs by 


2020.


<P>


<B>Cost Savings:</B>  More than $700 million in annual fuel
cost savings by the year 


2000 (in 1992 dollars); more than $3 billion by 2010; and
over $12 billion by 2020.


<P>


<B>Pollution Prevention:</B>  5 million metric tons of
annual carbon equivalent 


emissions savings by the year 2000; 23 million metric tons
by 2010; and 75 million 


metric tons by 2020.


<P>


<table border=1 width=100% cellpadding=0>


<caption><b>Office of Utility Technologies
($000)</b></caption>


<tr><TH width=40%>Program<TH width=15%>FY
1995<br>Appropriation<TH width=15%>FY
1996<br>Appropriation<TH width=15%>FY 1997<br>Request<TH
width=15%>Change<br>1996-1997</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Photovoltaics<TD width=15%
align=right>$83,834<TD width=15% align=right>$61,559<TD
width=15% align=right>$86,994<TD width=15%
align=right>$25,435</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Solar Thermal<TD width=15%
align=right>23,531<TD width=15% align=right>19,246<TD
width=15% align=right>23,750<TD width=15%
align=right>4,504</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Biomass Power Program<TD width=15%
align=right>14,197<TD width=15% align=right>20,562<TD
width=15% align=right>35,350<TD width=15%
align=right>14,788</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Wind Energy<TD width=15%
align=right>45,031<TD width=15% align=right>31,551<TD
width=15% align=right>49,650<TD width=15%
align=right>18,099</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Renewable Energy<br>Production<TD
width=15% align=right>4,659<TD width=15% align=right>662<TD
width=15% align=right>3,489<TD width=15%
align=right>2,827</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Solar Deployment<TD width=15%
align=right>28,869<TD width=15% align=right>14,671<TD
width=15% align=right>8,509<TD width=15%
align=right>(6,262)</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Geothermal Power<TD width=15%
align=right>45,437<TD width=15% align=right>33,392<TD
width=15% align=right>35,600<TD width=15%
align=right>2,208</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Hydrogen Research<TD width=15%
align=right>8.940<TD width=15% align=right>14,500<TD
width=15% align=right>11,012<TD width=15%
align=right>(3,488)</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Superconductivity<TD width=15%
align=right>17,748<TD width=15% align=right>22,585<TD
width=15% align=right>23,050<TD width=15%
align=right>465</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Energy Storage<br>Systems<TD width=15%
align=right>4,792<TD width=15% align=right>2,000<TD
width=15% align=right>4,000<TD width=15%
align=right>2,000</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Electromagnetic Fields<TD width=15%
align=right>13,064<TD width=15% align=right>9,699<TD
width=15% align=right>8,000<TD width=15%
align=right>(1,699)</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Climate Challenge<TD width=15%
align=right><br><TD width=15% align=right><br><TD width=15%
align=right>1,000<TD width=15% align=right>1,000</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Other Programs<TD width=15%
align=right>15,594<TD width=15% align=right>3,942<TD
width=15% align=right>5,000<TD width=15%
align=right>1,058</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%><B>TOTAL</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$305,696</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$234,369</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$295,404</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$60,935</b></tr>


</table>


<p>


<IMG SRC="/picts/erenbar.gif">
<center>
<pre>
</pre>
<p>
<H4>Return to <A HREF="/">EREN Home Page <IMG ALIGN=bot
SRC="/picts/return1.gif" ></A></H4>
<p>
<IMG SRC="/picts/erenbar.gif">
</center>
<P>


Please send comments to:<br>


<A
HREF="mailto:webmaster.eren@nrel.gov">webmaster.eren@nrel.gov</A>


<P>


</BODY>


</HTML>


</DOC>