
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B032-228</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/GHANDI1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122110553 text/html 31241
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:05:42 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:50 GMT
Content-length: 31023
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action </h1>

<p> <b>By Mary Sibley</b> </p>

<p> February 1995 </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>PREFACE </h2>

<p> I have prepared this description of the political action
technique of M.K. Gandhi at the request of Dave Hall for
distribution to the DrugReform Coordination Network (DRCNet) and
other drug policy reform advocates who may have an interest in
Gandhi's technique. I have read much about Gandhi's technique and
know that I still do not fully comprehend its application and
implications. My knowledge is especially scanty in the area of
organizational structures through which Gandhian campaigns were
conducted, although I surmise that Gandhi's campaign
organizations were highly structured. I am currently seeking
texts describing and analyzing Gandhi's organizational
structures. If anyone has such a text, I would appreciate access
to it. If anyone has studied Gandhi's life and work and reads
something within this that seems to be wrong, misleading, or a
misinterpretation, I would welcome suggestions. In addition, I
would be glad to participate in further discussion. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>CREDITS </h2>

<p> For assistance in organizing my thoughts, I give credit to
Joan V. Bondurant, whose book &quot;Conquest of Violence: The
Gandhian Philosophy of Conflict&quot; (second edition, 1965,
Princeton University Press) I consulted occasionally while
writing this. In the text that follows, annotations are sparse.
If anyone is interested in reading more about a particular topic,
let me know and I will provide references. INTRODUCTION </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>How this Discussion Is Organized </h2>

<p> This discussion is organized into three sections. The first
section discusses the cultural context and other conditions under
which Gandhi conceived and conducted political campaigns. The
second section discusses the fundamental principles of a Gandhian
campaign. The last section discusses the steps in a Gandhian
campaign and includes my opinions about the similarities between
these steps and steps that have been taken by drug policy reform
advocates. A Short Definition of Gandhi's Political Technique
Gandhi's political technique is a process of creatively engaging
with others to transform an unjust cultural, economic, social, or
governmental system into one that is more just. Scope of Gandhi's
Technique Gandhi is most famous for his political activism with
respect to ending British rule in India. He used the technique
not just to work toward reform and ultimately removal of British
rule in India, but also in many conflict situations between
Indians only. For example, he organized and led programs designed
to change how the upper class Hindus treated the lower class
Hindus. Gandhi himself considered his most important work the
constructive programs designed to remove the underlying causes of
poverty and to rebuild strong local economies in impoverished
areas. Without this work, poor Indians would not have had the
sustenance needed to participate in the many campaigns that led
to home rule. Martin Luther King applied techniques similar to
Gandhi's in the United States when working to end civil rights
injustices based on race. Many of King's programs, speeches, and
writings strongly resemble Gandhi's, with terminology and other
specifics tailored to the issues and systems at hand. Another
20th century leader who has successfully used similar techniques
when engaging a cruel and conscience-less government is Vaclav
Havel. The injustices that these leaders were working to overcome
occurred in widely varying cultures, social systems, and
governments. Because I assume that most readers are specifically
interested in political strategies with regard to changing unjust
laws in the U.S., the following discussion focuses on the
application of Gandhi's techniques in conflicts with governments.
</p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>SECTION 1. CONTEXT AND CONDITIONS </h2>

<h3>The Cultural Context in which Gandhi Developed His Techniques
</h3>

<p> India is multi-cultural with most cultures based on
religions. The Hindus are the largest group, followed by the
Muslims, who constitute a large minority. Then come a much
smaller number of Sikhs. Many other religious groups exist, but
they are very small in numbers. People of these religions had
lived side-by-side in relative peace for thousands of years when
the British arrived. As the British became established
economically, they started an insidious campaign to divide the
Indian people along religious lines, especially by planting in
Muslims fear of discrimination from Hindus should the British not
keep the Hindu influence in check. The British were quite
successful in promoting disunity between the Hindus and Muslims,
a legacy that to this day engenders hatred and bloodshed. The
Sikhs were selected to be the native component of the
British-controlled police force. The Sikhs were a large enough
minority to provide enough police for British purposes, and yet a
small enough group that Sikh police were patrolling and
incarcerating primarily Hindus and Muslims. After a couple of
hundred years of British encroachment on the cultures,
inter-cultural fear and suspicion that had not existed before the
British became the norm. </p>

<h3>Gandhi's Starting Place in Society </h3>

<p> Gandhi was born a Hindu. The Hindu society is stratified
(some say &quot;calcified&quot;) into classes referred to as
castes. The caste into which one is born determines the jobs one
may have, the education one may pursue, the privileges one is
allowed, the places one may gather water, the people with whom
one may eat, etc. The highest caste is the Brahmans; the lowest,
the untouchables. Outside of these are the outcastes. The
outcastes are those who violated the rules of their caste to the
extent that the authorities within the caste cast them out.
Thereafter, they are to be shunned by others in the caste--no one
may help them, they are not allowed to work within the caste,
etc. Gandhi was a member of the Bania caste, which participated
in business and government in his home state. Gandhi was publicly
ordered an outcaste when he was in his late teens because he went
to Britain to study law; his caste's leaders said it was against
the religion to leave the country. The leaders actually went so
far as to inform the caste members that if they saw him off when
he left for England, they would be fined! Gandhi wrote in his
autobiography, &quot;The order had no effect on me, and I took my
leave . . .&quot; ( M.K. Gandhi, &quot;An Autobiography: The
Story of My Experiments with the Truth,&quot; Part I, Chapter
XII, [1927] translation by Mahadev Desai, published in the U.S.
in 1957 by Beacon Press, Boston). </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>SECTION 2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES </h2>

<p> Gandhi adhered to four fundamental principles familiar to the
Westerner. Three are truth, non-violence, and self-suffering. The
fourth is concerned with means and ends. All campaigns conducted
under his guidance were consistent with these principles
(occasional errors arose due to the experimental nature of the
technique and limitations in campaigners' previous experience).
These fundamental principles are summarized below. </p>

<h3>Truth </h3>

<p> Gandhi did not fully define the &quot;truth&quot; but instead
said that he was seeking after it. He was seeking after it
through socio-political action, just as others might seek after
it through a mystical or spiritual path, the study of
mathematics, or the creation of art. I gather from my readings
that the goals of most his contemporaries were much more
immediate and concrete (like a cost-of-living increase for
workers in a textile mill, the right for untouchables to walk
past a temple used by Brahmans, the replacement of British rule
with home rule, etc.). The replacement of British rule was a
mighty goal. Those who held it accepted the need for a large
number of intermediate goals that they collectively agreed (often
after long and arduous debate) would contribute directly or
indirectly to achievement of the mighty goal. Some of the
intermediate goals included things that even the most uneducated,
illiterate, and impoverished could grasp immediately, like: (1)
Having all Indians weave their own cloth rather than buy British
cloth (most Indians made their own clothing) and (2) Repealing a
salt taxation and regulation scheme that drove the cost of salt
so high that the poor could not afford it. Salt is an essential
dietary element in India's climate and can be collected from
India's ocean beaches or retrieved from inland deposits by anyone
after a bit of instruction. The salt laws brought the British
significant revenues. Enforcement of the salt laws included fines
and incarceration for those who were caught making or collecting
salt for personal use and most especially if the person was
producing and distributing marketable amounts outside of the
government's regulatory structure. </p>

<h3>Non-Violence </h3>

<p> Gandhi maintained that no human or group of humans could know
the complete truth. No matter how close one thinks one might be
to the truth, one could be in error either wholly or in some
lesser way that is not immediately apparent. Because of this, he
maintained that no one could use violence toward others to press
his or her view of the truth forward. This principle excluded all
acts of violence, and Gandhi's definition of violence was broad.
As one might expect, physical violence could not be used against
an opponent. He also maintained that there should be no violence
in one's expression and words. The non-violence principle
required that an opponent be treated with utmost respect. Smear
campaigns aimed at defamation of character were not in his
political action toolbox, just as murder of lawmakers, judges,
bureaucrats, and police were not in his toolbox. Gandhi's
non-violence is a full antonym for violence. Not only does
non-violence refrain from destructive acts, it is aggressively
and provocatively constructive. Thus, Gandhi's campaigns did not
seek to defeat an opponent, but instead to convert the opponent
to a more just position and to challenge the opponent to act upon
the new position. In addition, Gandhi held that there must be an
opportunity for an opponent to save face, so long as no
fundamental principle or aim of the action was thereby
compromised. </p>

<h3>Self-Suffering </h3>

<p> Self-suffering is an integral element of Gandhi's technique
and a necessary corollary to provocative non-violent action.
Self-suffering can take the form of material and social
sacrifice. For example, loss of employment, property, or income
as a result of holding to one's view of the truth is a form of
self-suffering. Self-suffering reaches its personal extremes in
incarceration, physical injury, and the sacrifice of one's life.
Gandhi wrote: &quot;Suffering injury in one's own person is . . .
of the essence of non-violence and is the chosen substitute for
violence to others.&quot; (M.K. Gandhi, &quot;Non-violence in
Peace and War,&quot; 2nd edition, Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1944, p.
49). He also wrote, &quot;Non-violence in its dynamic condition
means conscious suffering. It does not mean meek submission to
the will of the evil-doer, but it means the pitting of one's
whole soul against the will of the tyrant.&quot; (M.K. Gandhi, in
&quot;Young India,&quot; August 11, 1920 ). Self-suffering is
preferred over submitting to humiliation and pr ovides a way to
preserve one's personal dignity in the face of those who would
treat one unjustly. Throughout his writings and campaigns, Gandhi
emphasized that inviting self-suffering is something that must
not be done lightly. One who invites self-suffering must be
prepared for the fullest possible sacrifice that may result from
one's actions. </p>

<h3>Means and Ends </h3>

<p> Gandhi believed that means do not serve ends, rather means
create ends. Thus, to attain an end that is positive and
truthful, one must use means that are positive and truthful. This
philosophy can be summarized by his statement, &quot;the means
are the ends in the making.&quot; Means that create ends have two
interesting implications. First, one cannot define a just,
non-violent end and then use unjust and violent means to attain
it--for the end will be in character with the means used. This
view precludes taking actions under the philosophy summarized in
the statement &quot;the ends justify the means&quot;--a
philosophy that seems to permeate current U.S. policy-making.
Indeed, the &quot;ends&quot; being created by current government
policy with regard to some drugs are very different than the
officially stated goals. </p>

<p> A second implication is that, while one must always be moving
toward a goal of pure truth and justice, the end cannot be
defined precisely in advance. Each action one takes creates the
next action and that one, the next, each action always in keeping
with the last and moving progressively closer to truth and
justice. Through actively engaging with fellow activists and the
opponent, one grows in understanding of what must be done, a step
at a time, to create the most just and truthful end. </p>

<p> The technique becomes dynamic when it succeeds in provoking
internal change in the opponent. Thus the knowledge and
understanding of both the activist and the opponent grow
simultaneously toward truth and justice. However, the technique
is not self-propelling; it is usually used in a context of a
stagnant, inert, or deliberately destructive force and requires
tremendous energy. The activist must constantly reassess the
opponent's comprehension and adjust the program so that it is
more than reactive to the opponent's change--every change must be
viewed as an opportunity to press the campaign further forward. </p>

<h3>What Gandhi's Contemporaries Thought About the Fundamental
Principles </h3>

<p> A few of Gandhi's contemporaries adhered to the fundamental
principles as inviolable guides by which to conduct one's
personal life as well as one's social or political actions.
However, the majority of his contemporaries accepted the
fundamental principles as policies. They recognized the success
of the principles in empowering the disempowered and realized
that, even if viewed as policies, the principles were the key to
winning &quot;home rule&quot; with an unarmed and impoverished
army of the disenfranchised. </p>

<p> This acceptance as policy rather than principle caused Gandhi
some dismay. When the activists with whom he was working rejected
these even as policy, he would leave the political sphere and
return to his constructive work toward remedying the devastating
economic problems in the villages of India. Eventually, his
contemporaries always asked him to return to the political
sphere. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>SECTION 3. STEPS OF A GANDHIAN CAMPAIGN </h2>

<h3>The Progress of a Campaign </h3>

<p> Upon discovering an opportunity for reform or change, a
campaign is conducted through several steps. Each step is a
necessary prerequisite to the next, for each must fully develop
the context in which the next occurs. The early steps develop the
public stage upon which later steps, if they become necessary,
can be played out. Some of the steps initiated early in the
campaign, especially education, continue throughout the campaign.
The progression is designed to maximize early in the campaign all
opportunities for the opponent to make positive changes and save
face without campaigners moving to more provocative measures. The
careful progression provides fullest opportunity for the
campaigners to adjust their position if they discover that they
have inadvertently violated a fundamental principle. It gives
campaign leaders the opportunity, through engaging with the
opponent early in relatively low-risk situations, to
realistically assess their own strengths and weaknesses and those
of the campaigners and to determine what more provocative steps
can and cannot be taken successfully. </p>

<p> A Summary of the Steps of a Gandhian Campaign </p>

<p> The steps of a campaign are: </p>

<p> -- Investigation of the facts, situation, and conditions </p>

<p> -- Education of the campaigners, the public, and the opponent
</p>

<p> -- Negotiation and arbitration </p>

<p> -- Preparation of the campaigners for more provocative
measures </p>

<p> -- Agitation </p>

<p> -- Issuing of an ultimatum </p>

<p> -- Economic boycott and forms of strike </p>

<p> -- Non-cooperation </p>

<p> -- Civil disobedience </p>

<p> -- Creation of alternate structures </p>

<p> In India, these steps eventually led to the establishment of
a parallel government in some places, which provided Indians with
some of the experience needed to assume self-government when
British rule was removed. </p>

<p> The steps of a campaign are described in the paragraphs
below. In brackets I have mentioned my current opinion of where
drug policy reform advocates have made the most progress.
Investigation of the Facts, Situation, and Conditions A Gandhian
campaign is founded on an objective assessment of the facts. All
facts are considered; none are rejected or downplayed if they do
not fit the expectations of the campaigners--to do so would be to
move away from the complete truth. The situation of campaigners
and those experiencing the injustice are examined. As full an
understanding of the situation as possible is developed among all
involved. The conditions at the time--public awareness and
opinion, the situation of the opponent, and other relevant
factors are all considered and weighed. </p>

<p> [Drug policy reform advocates seem to me to be strongest
here. The only difficulty I've seen is the occasional attempt to
reject or downplay a pertinent fact that doesn't quite
&quot;fit,&quot; but this is usually remedied through discussion
among reform advocates.] </p>

<h3>Education of the Campaigners, the Public, and the Opponent </h3>

<p> With the facts in hand and the situation and conditions fully
examined, education begins. All who join the campaign must be
educated; they become representatives through their association
and must be fully informed. The public is often unaware of or
misinformed about injustices; they must be educated to understand
why change is needed. Many opponents are similar to the
public--they are unaware or misinformed. Gandhi felt that there
were only a few pponents who would actually want injustices to be
perpetuated or continue. Gandhi was an optimist and believed even
those few could be converted. [Drug policy reform advocates are
weak here, but getting stronger. At the International Conference
for Drug Policy Reform last November, attendees recognized the
need to raise public awareness about injustices of the drug war.
I understand that organizations like NORML are following up with
activities geared toward education of the general public. The
Washington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) was started by a
group of marijuana policy reform activists in Washington State
who recognized the need for education. My personal experience has
been that many of the people who join W.H.E.N. recognize the
injustices and are looking for the facts. Others join because
they have much knowledge and want opportunities to educate and
persuade others. Some relish entering the opponents' sphere and
educating! Also, Cliff Schaffer's persuasive strategies provide
an excellent example of guidelines that have been tailored to
move the opponent toward the truth given an opponent's entry
position in a discussion. Such guidelines must be assessed and
modified periodically to ensure that they keep pace with the
inevitable progress the opponents will make when so persuaded.] </p>

<h3>Negotiation and Arbitration </h3>

<p> Remedy for the injustice is sought first through established
channels within the existing system. Petitioning for change of
unjust laws, challenging unjust laws in the courts, and other
legislative or legal methods fall under this step. </p>

<p> [Drug policy reform advocates working on reform of marijuana
laws have done plenty of negotiation and arbitration at the
federal level and in many states. I am not aware of as high of a
level of negotiation effort for substances like heroin, cocaine,
etc.] </p>

<h3>Preparation of the Campaigners for More Provocative Measures </h3>

<p> Immediately upon recognizing the existence of a conflict
situation that might lead to more provocative measures, Gandhi's
technique calls for intense preparation. The motives of
campaigners are examined, weaknesses of the group are identified,
and exercises in self-discipline undertaken. The goal of this
step is to assess and develop the campaigners' ability to adhere
to fundamental principles and to continue action in the face of
significant risks. There is much discussion of the issues at
hand, the current situation and conditions, and of the potential
results of various courses of action. [I have not heard of drug
policy reform advocates undertaking such self-examination and
participating in mutually agreed upon exercises in
self-discipline. I have heard discussions and analyses about
potential actions that fall under subsequent steps.] </p>

<h3>Agitation </h3>

<p> Agitation includes legal high-profile activities such as
rallies and picketing. Such events are opportunities for the
leaders to assess the group's readiness to proceed with higher
profile and more difficult steps without deteriorating into
violence. Mass gatherings also provide an opportunity to begin
instructing campaigners who have not been trained previously in
the fundamental principles, to communicate developments in the
campaign, and to explain the next step. </p>

<p> [I haven't heard much about this kind of agitation. Agitation
I have heard about has involved small numbers of people and, as
far as I know, it has not been part of a sequence of steps such
as described here. I do not believe that Hemp Fests, even if no
one smoked, would meet the criteria by which Gandhi defined
agitation because they are not part of a highly focused political
campaign and do not have a strong educational focus.] </p>

<h3>Issuing of an Ultimatum </h3>

<p> A strong appeal is made to the opponent. The appeal is quite
explicit. It states the problem, identifies a constructive
solution and the responsibilities of each party in the solution,
and explains what the campaigners will do if the opponent does
not participate in the solution. The ultimatum should include
provision for the opponent to save face within the scope of the
fundamental principles. The opponent is fully informed about the
next step. In fact, from this step forward, every single step
taken is preceded by a full advance disclosure to the opponent of
what will be done, when, and where. Before each step commences,
the opponent is offered the opportunity to change. </p>

<p> [If drug policy reform advocates started a Gandhian campaign
today, I believe that they would be years from being able to
issue ultimatums that actually carried any weight.] </p>

<h3>Economic Boycott and Forms of Strike </h3>

<p> In India, Indians boycotted foreign cloth with such success
that they had a significant impact on the mills in Britain.
Strikes have been used extensively in the U.S. for in all kinds
of reform campaigns A scene in the movie &quot;Gandhi&quot; shows
the power of a nationwide strike. [To conduct an economic boycott
requires economic alternatives for the boycotters. To conduct an
effective strike, a campaign needs great numbers of campaigners
and who have economic alternatives. As far as I can tell, drug
policy reform advocates are generally dependent on the dominant
economic structures and so are weak on this point.] </p>

<h3>Non-Cooperation </h3>

<p> Non-cooperation involves refusal to support the portions of
the system that require reform or accept benefits from the
system. For example, during the campaign to remove British rule,
Indians resigned from government posts, removed their children
from government schools, returned awards and medals that they had
received from the government, and so on. Economic boycott and
strikes described in the previous step can be regarded as forms
of non-cooperation. [The judges who refuse to try drug cases are
engaged in non-cooperation. People who refuse to provide urine
samples as a condition of employment are engaged in
non-cooperation.] </p>

<h3>Civil Disobedience </h3>

<p> Civil disobedience extends non-cooperation to the active and
open breaking of selected laws. Gandhi set complete and voluntary
obedience to laws as a prerequisite for civil disobedience. Laws
to be broken were selected very carefully for their position at
the heart of the problem or for their symbolic value. Civil
disobedience involves a deliberate courting of arrest and, upon
arrest, no defense is offered in the courts. In fact, full
admission of guilt is required. The prosecutors, juries, and
judges are challenged to see the injustice of the law that they
are defending against the civil disobedient and to cease their
cooperation with the injustice. In mass campaigns involving civil
disobedience in India, prisons filled up very quickly. Very
often, the leaders were arrested in an attempt to dishearten the
campaigners and end the campaign. Sometimes they were arrested
upon delivery to the authorities of their notice of intent to
disobey! Other times, the government ignored them completely
which, of course, encouraged more people to join the campaign. If
the government ignores the first civil disobedients, the
provocative nature of increasing numbers of civil disobedients
eventually compels the government to act. And compelling the
opponent to act is the point of civil disobedience. Two important
organizational points must be mentioned here. Every campaign in
which the leaders may be arrested must provide succession of
leadership. A succession procedure must be planned in advance so
that civil disobedience continues apace no matter how many
leaders have been arrested. The second point involves support for
the families of the civil disobedients. There must always be
people who are willing to forego civil disobedience and remain
free to take care of the children, the aged, and the ill. Support
people should be identified in advance and should, under no
circumstances, court arrest. </p>

<p> [Medicinal marijuana suppliers and users come to mind as a
possible example of civil disobedients, although an analysis
would reveal that very few of these civil disobedients actually
meet all of the criteria set forth by Gandhi.] </p>

<h3>Creation of Alternate Structures </h3>

<p> If, after all of these steps, the existing system fails to
become more just, an alternate means of ensuring justice must be
developed. This is especially important when the existing system
is so corrupt that people are disobeying it not just as part of a
campaign, but simply because they find themselves unable to
conduct their lives peacefully without disobeying it. Such a
system is approaching inevitable collapse by virtue of its
inherent flaws. Alternate structures must be built in advance not
only to provide for immediate needs, but also to prevent (or at
least mitigate) the potential release of destructive,
anger-driven energy that often follows an oppressive system's
collapse. [Medicinal marijuana buyers' clubs provide an example
of an alternate structure.] </p>

<h3>Demands of Gandhi's Technique on Campaigners </h3>

<p> Gandhi's technique exacts a great deal from a campaign's
leadership and those who follow them. They must tirelessly plan
and monitor the progress of the campaign, reassess their position
and the position of the opponent, and respond creatively and
provocatively to events as they unfold. Leaders must be flexible
enough to respond to change. </p>

<p> At the same time, they must have the insight to know which
potential responses might lead to stagnation of the campaign or
will compromise a fundamental principle--for either will lead to
setbacks. </p>

<p> Leaders must be consummate communicators: with the opponent,
the public, potential supporters, and those who have joined the
campaign--else misunderstandings and misinterpretations can arise
as the campaign is adjusted to changing conditions and events.
Leaders must have an ability to organize, inspire, and use fully
the talents of an extremely diverse group of people who volunteer
their services to a campaign. People with widely varying
perspectives and beliefs must be transformed from a disorganized
scattering of supporters in conflict not just with the
government, but often with each other, to a coherent, responsive
unit that can target its actions and responses with great force.
Finally, all in the campaign must have an ability to manage or
dispel the tension and anger that can arise when their efforts
appear to be frustrated, when there are disagreements among
campaigners, and when they directly confront an often-hostile
opponent. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>CONCLUSION </h2>

<p> Many drug policy reform advocates have been using political
action techniques similar (though not identical) to the steps
described above. But drug policy reform advocates have not
catalyzed into a dynamic, coherent group that can act
synchronously to achieve a clearly defined goal. I believe that,
if reform advocates' efforts were synthesized in a Gandhian
sequence with an underpinning of the fundamental principles,
success would be inevitable. </p>

<p> --Mary <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>