
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B37-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B018-120</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev20.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003444 text/html 37235
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:32:49 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:12 GMT
Content-length: 37048
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev20.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 4, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS & TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(356 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISED&nbsp;FOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES&nbsp;SAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLY&nbsp;SOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(695 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTE&nbsp;VOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(741 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS&nbsp;COULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATION&nbsp;FOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARD&nbsp;FOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGE&nbsp;ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(394 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLE&nbsp;OF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVAL&nbsp;AFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(571 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASE&nbsp;RECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLES&nbsp;TO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SLANTS & TRENDS


SUPERFUND TAKES A HIT - EPA shut down the federal Superfund
program this week because the agency was unable to pay
nearly 2,000 of its employees in that program along with
8,000 contractors who perform remediation work. The
Superfund was not affected immediately by the shutdown of
the federal government because most of those employees are
paid directly from the fund, rather than from budget
appropriations, said Jim Mathews, deputy assistant
administrator for EPA's Office of Solid Waste and Emergency
Response.

     Although Congress has not reauthorized the program or
issued its allotment for the current fiscal year, Superfund
had operated since October from a surplus in last year's
fund, Mathews explained. That money ran out Jan. 2, and the
agency began shutting down the program. Only emergency
personnel will continue working, reducing the agency's
program employees from more than 3,000 to 80. Several
Superfund sites will continue cleanups during the shutdown,
although many will be forced to stop operations, he said.
Contact: Jim Mathews, EPA, (202) 260-4610.

* * *

IN ONE POCKET, OUT THE OTHER - EPA has fined the Department
of Interior's (DOI), National Parks Service for violating
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by storing
hazardous waste at the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. The
facility stored hazardous waste without a RCRA permit
between March and October of last year, EPA said. The waste
contained acetone, chromium, lead, xylene, phenol, arsenic
and mercury, EPA contended. EPA also cited DOI for storing
waste in rusted, leaking containers. EPA fined the DOI
facility $243,800 and ordered it to develop a hazardous
waste management plan.

* * *

EPA BACKS BACT - Proposed new source review (NSR) rules
under development by EPA probably will recommend a "top
down" approach for determining the best available control
technology (BACT) such as technology used to control
emissions from landfills, EPA officials said. The rules also
will give states some flexibility in determining which
control method to use. The proposal, EPA officials said,
will allow states to develop their own BACT determination
criteria as long as they consider the leading technologies
currently available.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISED
FOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS


     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronounced
growth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing
69 percent to $2 billion, and that trend should continue,
according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, a
financial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.

     In general terms, the report said, acquisition growth
accelerated over the past 12 months. The top 13 solid waste
companies are expected to increase their revenues by 21
percent, with a major revenue component driven by
acquisitions, the report also said.

     The report cited USA Waste's recently announced merger
with Western Waste for $530 million (SWR, Dec. 21, 1995, p.
391). If completed, this transaction would raise USA Waste
to third ranking by size in the U.S. solid waste market,
Raymond James noted.

     In addition, the report said, considerably improved
financing costs over the past year made the financing
environment for solid waste companies, particularly smaller
growth companies, better than any time in the past.

Smaller Companies Cited

     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish to
stress that the improvement in the cost of financing has
been most notable for the smaller waste service companies. A
longer track record leading to enhanced credibility has
enabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs of
capital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from the
access to longer term financing and attractively priced
equity."

     Those financing options were "very limited" as recently
as 15 to 18 months ago, Raymond James explained.

     However, the document also noted that presently, "The
low financing costs clearly provide more attractive dynamics
for public companies to pursue acquisitions."

     In general, the analysis said, long term financing
rates for all companies, as represented by 30 year Treasury
bonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdrop
for continued aggressive acquisition.

     The report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-Sized Companies Lead
Industry in a Torrid Acquisition Pace, is available from
Raymond James. Contact: William Fisher, (800) 237-5643.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
SAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT


     Communication problems between business and
environmental staff members can prevent companies from
successfully managing corporate environmental issues,
according to a survey of major U.S. firms.

     In its primary finding, the survey done by Arthur D.
Little Inc. reported a "green wall" that blocks
communication exists in many companies. For example,
managers for environment, health and safety programs at the
185 corporations Arthur D. Little surveyed often cited their
failure to convince management that environmental programs
are important to their firm's success.

     Numerous company officials responded that environment,
health, and safety functions are often viewed as an outside
operation with a sole mission of "keeping the company out of
trouble," Arthur D. Little also reported. More than 70
percent of those responding cited either a lack of
acceptance of environmental issues, or a separate
environmental "culture" as blocking integrating
environmental functions into their firms' business plans.
Contact: Diane Millikan, (617) 498-5896.

* * *

     Norton Performance Plastics Corp., Wayne, N.J., has
introduced a line of plastic tubing the company said can be
incinerated without creating hazardous by-products. Contact:
Jackie Swartzberg, (201) 696-4700.

     Oracle Environmental Corp., Houston, is offering a
brochure and technical data sheets explaining information
management solutions for environmental compliance issues.
Contact: Larry Orecklin, (415) 506-9229.

     Scepter Recycling Inc., Bicknell, Ind., has acquired
Alumax Recycling's recycling centers in Houston and
Arlington, Texas. Scepter also acquired Alumax's interest in
Metales Ligas Especiales S.A., C.B., a recycling company in
Mexico. Contact: Larry Neal, (812) 735-2500.

     Solvent Kleene Inc., Peabody, Mass., has introduced its
"D-Greeze 1000" non-toxic, non-flammable degreaser/cleaner
that the company claimed is also non-hazardous. Contact: Tom
Kutai, (508) 531-2279.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLY
SOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS


     Although they are not always the most economically
viable systems, state and local governments increasingly use
material recovery facilities (MRFs) for managing municipal
solid waste (MSW), according to a new study (SWR, Dec. 14,
1995, p. 383).

     "I suspect the reason is [the] public press for
recycling," said Philip Shepherd, coauthor of the report,
Environmental, Economic, and Energy Impacts of Material
Recovery Facilities, in making a personal assessment of
interest in MRFs.

     The report, by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), EPA
and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
evaluates the economic, energy and environmental aspects of
MRFs by studying six facilities.

     Although the report found nothing revolutionary, said
Shepherd of NREL, it is designed to be a decision-making
tool that helps solid waste managers weigh the outcomes of
different management options. The primary objectives of the
evaluation were to understand the effects of MRFs'
operations on public health and the environment along with
occupational health and safety functions, the document
explained.

     If the study found anything noteworthy, Shepherd said,
it was that MRFs do not use a significant amount of energy
when compared to other components of an integrated solid
waste management system (ISWMS). The fuel use associated
with collecting various recyclables, however, dominates the
overall energy consumption of MRF operations, the government
study also reported.

Environmental Effects

     The document details the six MRFs' effects on ambient
air quality, receiving waters and community noise levels.
The health and safety evaluation section addressed exposure
to chemicals, biological and energy aspects of MRFs based in
South Holbrook, N.Y.; Montgomery County, Md.; Albuquerque,
N.M.; Hartford, Conn.; Rice County, Minn.; and Orange
County, Fla.

     MRFs do not pose significant threats to either public
health or the environment, according to the study. Nuisance
conditions, such as fugitive dust and excessive noise, can
be easily mitigated through roadway maintenance and
enclosing equipment. Potential health and safety hazards for
workers can be controlled by implementing the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) worker protection
programs, the study also concluded.

     The agencies also did a case study of the multi-purpose
recycling facility in South Holbrook owned and operated by
the Islip (N.Y.) Resource Recovery Agency. That facility has
the capacity to handle 240 tons of recyclables during an
eight-hour shift, including newspapers, corrugated
cardboard, mixed paper, metals, tin cans, plastics, flint
glass and aluminum. On alternate Wednesdays, vehicles
deliver either newspapers or mixed recyclables to the MRF.
The recyclables are then hand-sorted from conveyor belts.

     The federal evaluators found no air pollution levels
exceeding the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)
at the Islip MRF. Values for carbon monoxide and mercury
vapor were considerably lower than the applicable OSHA
limits, the report also said. Measurements of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) resulted in concentrations no
greater than 10 ug/m3, with the exception of three compounds
in the range of 1 to 60 ug/m3 range at a site upwind of the
facility.

Worker Exposure Low

     OSHA's portion of the evaluation there measured
workers' exposure to nuisance dusts, silica, and metals by
collecting breathing zone samples from selected workers
taken periodically over their eight-hour shifts. The highest
total of respirable dust levels were found on the tipping
floor, a total of 3.39 mg/m3 for all dust and 0.55 mg/m3 for
respirable dust. All exposure levels, however, were
considerably lower than the federal permissible exposure
limits (PELs), according to the report.

     Airborne and surface bacteria and fungi samples were
collected inside the building. Levels were relatively
consistent among locations inside the facility, with no
specific areas exhibiting unusually high or low levels.
However, OSHA has not yet established PELs for either fungi
or bacteria, the study noted. To determine the ergonomics
factors involved in the facility, the evaluators videotaped
several operations in the facility's picking booth.

     They found only one potential ergonomics risk factor:
the work station's configuration, which required workers to
reach across the full width of the conveyor for picking and
sorting various recyclable items. The report is available
from the National Technical Information Service, U.S.
Department of Commerce, 5285 Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA
22161. Contact: (703) 487-4650.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTE
VOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES


     Several local governments in North Carolina have
lowered the amount of solid waste generated by up to 30
percent through charging customers for the volume of waste
they generate, rather than assessing a fixed fee, according
to the North Carolina Recycling Association (NCRA).

     The association surveyed several local governments in
that state that have converted to charging customers
variable rates based on the volume of waste they generate.
However, NCRA also reports there are several problems with
charging by the weight of solid waste generated.

     For example, Yadkin County, N.C., adopted a sticker-
based program in 1994 in which customers deliver trash in
their own 30-gallon bags to one of seven sites, NCRA said.
For additional trash, they can buy a 50-cent sticker for
each bag, and recyclables are accepted without charge.

     Yadkin County officials reported 30-percent reduction
in solid waste. Motine Kenney, solid waste coordinator for
that local government, said, "We did a countywide survey,
and people in the county said they'd rather go with a unit
price program than pay for someone else's garbage."

Wilmington Reports Waste Reduction

     In another example, the city of Wilmington, N.C.,
charges $12.90 per week to pick up a 90-gallon can of refuse
and $9.90 weekly for picking up a 40-gallon can. Excess
waste can be disposed of in 33-gallon bags that each cost
$1, and residents also can get twice weekly pickup of the
90-gallon can for $27.50.

     Wilmington officials reported a 10 percent reduction in
solid waste going to landfills, and a 42 percent increase in
both recycling and yard waste, NCRA said. However, NCRA also
reported the system there has created administrative
problems. In areas near low-income housing projects,
residents often dumped excess garbage in streets and into
commercial dumpsters, they said.

     Even after dropping the program for those low-income
housing projects, illegal dumping has increased in
Wilmington, according to Bill Reed, superintendent for
operations for Wilmington's solid waste department. "If you
institute a variable-rate program, be sure you have an
adequate enforcement mechanism set up," Reed cautions other
local governments.

     In another case cited by the state association, Jones
County in eastern North Carolina has operated a variable-
rate program based on volume since 1972. Under that system,
bags are sold wholesale to area businesses and then resold
to residential consumers for $1.25 each.

     The county has since added pickup of recyclables, which
are collected along with residential waste and stored in a
separate trailer towed by the refuse truck. Then, crews take
all materials collected to a transfer station, where the
waste is sent to a landfill and recyclables are sold.

     "It's been a good system for us," according to County
Manager Larry Matthews. "It's clean and it's well accepted
by our citizens. This was our first solid waste system, and
our first recycling system, so we can't really do a
comparison. But I'm sure it's an incentive to reduce and
recycle."

     However, those successful systems are based on the
volume of waste, rather than on its weight, NCRA stressed.
In addition, the association noted, there are several
drawbacks to charging residents by the weight of waste, so
there has been little interest in using that method.

     A primary obstacle to weight-based pricing has been
developing truck-mounted scales that can meet standards
developed by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), NCRA explained. For a typical residential
refuse can, NIST requires scales accurate to within a half
pound to two pounds, which can be difficult standard for
some local operations.

     Using those scales also adds to the processing time for
handling refuse, NCRA noted. In addition, those units cost
approximately $16,000 to retrofit per processor, NCRA said.

High Interest Level

     Despite some problems local governments have reported
with variable-rate systems, interest in those systems
remains high, the association also reported. Beth Graves, of
the North Carolina Office of Waste Reduction, said she
frequently gets calls from local governments interested in
pursuing  variable-rate programs and 80 North Carolina
officials participated in a satellite conference held on
those systems by EPA, NCRA noted.

     In addition, more local governments will consider using
variable-rate disposal fees as cost-cutting moves continue,
NCRA predicted. "I believe that unearthing the costs from
the general tax fund will provide tremendous incentives for
people to reduce their wastes," according to Craig Barry,
NCRA's Executive Director. Contact: NCRA, (919) 851-8444.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS
COULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS


     Up to one-fourth of EPA's staff may be laid off by
spring unless congressional Republicans substantially
increase the agency's long-term funding that is independent
of the current federal shutdown, according to EPA
Administrator Carol Browner. That means it may take longer
for the agency to act on solid waste issues.

     About one-third of the employees who promulgate
regulations, issue permits and perform inspections could be
laid off if Congress eventually prevails on the EPA
appropriations bill vetoed by President Clinton, agency
officials also said.

     Researchers and employees involved in environmental
cleanups would not be cut. The statement is a break from
previous announcements, where EPA said it could not predict
the depth of the personnel reductions.

Bond Defends Cuts

     At a press conference, President Clinton said he vetoed
the $5.7 billion spending bill - that called for a 21
percent decrease from fiscal 1995 allocations - because
environmental enforcement would be cut 25 percent, safe
drinking water aid to local governments would be slashed 45
percent and the air would become more polluted. The cuts
also would condemn "10 million children under the age of 12
to living near toxic waste sites that might not be cleaned
up for years," Clinton said.

     The spending bill (H.R. 2099) contains six policy
riders designed to prevent EPA from acting in several areas,
along with a 50 percent cut in funding to implement the
Montreal treaty for protection of the ozone layer.

     In response to earlier attacks by Democrats on EPA
funding cuts, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), chairman of the
appropriations subcommittee that handles the agency's
funding, said cuts in the agency's funding were based on
recommendations from several organizations, including the
National Academy of Public Administration.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATION
FOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION


     Key Senators on the Environment Committee support fine-
tuning the Clean Water Act (CWA) - and not the major
rollback of the law approved last year by the House.

     In the first of a series of hearings on reauthorizing
the CWA, Chairman John Chafee (R-R.I.) said he favors a
modest bill with a limited agenda. The Senate would be hard
pressed, he said, to pass a more ambitious package for
changing the CWA, such as H.R. 961, which the House approved
May 16, 1995.

     The CWA is a "major success story," said the panel's
ranking Democrat Max Baucus of Montana. House efforts to
"gut" it were "shortsighted, misdirected and wrongheaded,"
he said. "No CWA reauthorization would be better than the
one the House suggested."

     A frequent critic of environmental laws, Sen.
Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), said the CWA helped rehabilitate
the Mississippi River. Water quality has improved over the
past two decades, Bond said. Bond said he plans, however, to
"fix" CWA stormwater provisions he considers "broken." Local
entities and states should not be forced to spend exorbitant
sums, Bond added.

     "We have cities spending upwards of $650,000 to obtain
[stormwater discharge] permits. This expenditure does not
result in cleaner waters...Assessing humungous [CWA] fines
against small communities with limited resources is probably
the dumbest thing you can do if you want to improve the
environment," Bond said.

     Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.) urged the committee to
consider his bill, S. 1390, that would allow CWA fines to be
invested in local pollution prevention and remediation.

     In order to make $2 billion in loans to states annually
for the next 30 years, $10 billion needs to be invested in
the wastewater state revolving fund (SRF) over the next
seven years, said Robert Perciasepe, head of EPA's water
office. President Clinton requested $1.59 billion in fiscal
1996 to support the SRF program.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARD
FOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING


     Actress Joanne Woodward will appear in a television
documentary and in radio and television public service
announcements (PSAs) to urge consumers to buy products made
from recycled materials and save landfill space, according
to the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF).

     EDF said Woodward has made a half-hour documentary
describing for consumers the life cycle of recycled products
and how to find recycled goods in their local supermarkets.

     EDF said it will make the documentary and PSAs
available to broadcasters, and also will provide the
documentary to schools and community groups. Contact: EDF,
(202) 387-3500.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGE
ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS


     Both political parties share the blame for Congress
failing to pass meaningful reform of the nation's
environmental laws last year, including those that regulate
solid waste, according to an analysis done by Paul Portney,
president of Resources for the Future (RFF).

     Writing in the organization's publication, Resources,
Portney said the national debate over reform to require more
risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis for major federal
environmental statutes, including key parts of the safe
Drinking Water Act and the Clean Water Act, was framed
inaccurately. One side claimed the effort to require those
laws was an "heroic attempt to rescue the U.S. economy from
a welter of rules" made by unelected bureaucrats, Portney
said.

     The other side, led by congressional Democrats, argued
that the Republicans were making "thinly veiled effort" to
undo 25 years of environmental gains "just to benefit fat-
cat corporations," Portney's analysis said.

Both Sides Seen At Fault

     Portney contended that the Republicans "undermined
their own efforts" at regulatory reform by cutting EPA's
budget and tacking riders onto an appropriations bill to
prohibit the agency from enforcing some air and water
quality regulations.

     "If Congress thinks that particular regulations are
ill-advised, it can and should openly debate and change the
laws that gave rise to those regulations - not use the
appropriations process to make 'stealth' amendments," he
wrote.

     The Democrats, Portney added, also "bear responsibility
for the failure of regulatory reform" because they opposed
other measures backed by Republicans in the Senate and House
that would not have eliminated environmental regulations.

     Actually, he said, only the Senate bill would have
subjected existing regulations to any review at all, and
"even then, it would direct regulatory officials to undo
regulations only when they could not satisfy themselves that
their rules did more harm than good."

     Portney also wrote, "With the many possible advantages
of and reasonable concerns about the use of cost-benefit
analysis in regulation, the congressional debate ought to be
clear and focused."

     "Rather," he said, "the debate has been dominated by
false claims that regulation is strangling the economy or
that popular safeguards will be wiped off the books by
reform legislation."

     "We deserve and should insist upon more, though the
smart money is probably best wagered on more cartoon
caricatures," Portney concluded. Contact: RFF, (202) 328-
5025.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLE
OF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS


     Wastes generated by one company could become useful raw
materials for a nearby firm under the concept of an "Eco-
Industrial Park" (EIP) now in the planning stages in
Baltimore.

     According to the Cornell Center for the Environment,
the concept being developed in an industrial area of
Baltimore would allow one firm to acquire a new source of
profit while reducing its waste disposal and transportation
costs, while a nearby company gets a convenient source of
raw materials with the additional benefit of reducing its
costs for transporting those materials.

     The area has been designated as a demonstration site by
the President's Council for Sustainable Development.
Cornell's environment center proposed the project and is
involved in its planning and implementation through its Work
and Environment Initiative (WEI).

     According to a study done by WEI, petroleum-based
industries in Fairfield must dispose of a waste mixture of
oil and water, which then could be separated into usable oil
and water. In addition, construction and demolition debris
from industries there could be reprocessed into aggregate
for asphalt production, or refining landscape mulch from
wood.

     In turn, WEI said, those waste materials could be used
by new industries as part of their production process. WEI
said the project could attract more than $1 billion in new
investments and thousands of new jobs to the area. The
incentives for that investment, WEI said, would be
inherently high-performance companies, several modes of
transportation, and skilled workers. WEI said the project
could provide "a high return on assets for employers, an
improved local eco-system for the community and sustainable
high quality jobs."

     Edward Cohen-Rosenthal, WEI's director, said the
project had the potential of "marrying high workplace and
environmental practices" and increasing profits while also
decreasing waste and pollution." Contact: Edward Cohen-
Rosenthal, WEI, (607) 255-8160.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVAL
AFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE


     Environmental officials in Indiana anticipate full EPA
approval of the state's solid waste program under Subtitle D
this summer, after years of delay.

     When severe budget cuts hit Indiana's solid waste
program in 1993, the U.S. EPA notified the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) officials that
approval of their state's Subtitle D program was contingent
on the Indiana agency finding sufficient funds to support
the program (SWR, Nov. 18, 1993).

     Funding dried up that year after IDEM ended the state
solid waste division's permit application and operation fee
programs because they resembled a water management program
fee structure that had been invalidated by a state court.

     Having straightened out funding problems, IDEM plans to
submit the application for complete approval of the Subtitle
D program this spring, and hopes for approval by summer,
according to Scott Dinwiddie, an official of the Indiana
Office of Solid and Hazardous Waste (OSHW).

     Meanwhile, OSHW has done considerable work to prepare
for that approval. Since 1994, the state has closed 10
municipal solid waste landfills (MSWLs), leaving the total
at 50.

     At the same time, the number of transfer stations has
grown to 48, according to the 1995 edition of the OSHW's
Summary of Indiana Solid Waste Facility Data. The state has
10 construction-demolition landfills, 17 restricted-waste
landfills, two incinerators and 49 composting facilities,
according to the government report. Except for a sharp
increase in 1992, the combined total annual disposal for all
landfill types remained fairly stable from 1991 through
1994, the document added.

     Despite the closing of several landfills, the total
remaining capacity at MSWLs has stayed fairly stable since
1991 because of landfill expansions, according to the
report. Indiana should have another decade of adequate
disposal at current facilities, OSHW predicted.

     Long-haul imports of trash, primarily from New York,
New Jersey and Pennsylvania, have declined since 1991, the
summary explained. However, OSHW said, total waste imports
from the bordering states of Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and
Kentucky have remained fairly steady, and exceed long-haul
imports. Waste shipments from Illinois comprise 75 percent
of Indiana's total waste imports. By 1994, 97 percent of the
waste imported to Indiana came from bordering states, the
state document also explained.

Recycling

     Indiana's laws require reducing materials going into
landfills through waste diversion, source reduction, reuse,
recycling and composting.

     The laws also require Indiana to reach an overall recy-
cling goal of 35 percent of the waste stream by Jan. 1,
1996, and they establish a goal of 50 percent due before
Jan. 1, 2001.

     OSHW's Dinwiddie said figures from 1995 are not
available on whether Indiana has met its recycling goal of
35 percent. By 1994's end, the state reached a 19 percent
waste reduction rate, he said.

     Copies of the report may be obtained from IDEM's Office
of Solid Waste Management, P.O. Box 6015, Indianapolis, IN
46206-6015, (317) 233-5156, or (317) 232-8885.


Profiles in Solid Waste Management, Volume III, a
compilation of all 50 state profiles - that provides a
comprehensive report on the most pressing problems faced and
most innovative programs developed in 1995 - can be
purchased by subscribers for only $77. You'll save $21 off
the regular Price Of $98. Let Swr Do The Job. Save Valuable
Time While Staying Up-to-date On Other States' Solid Waste
Management PraCtices. Order Your Copy Today! Call (800) 274-
6737.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASE
RECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING


     Recycling aseptic packaging, or those "drink boxes," is
increasing as the paper recycling process of hydrapulping
grows in use, according to reports from the Aseptic
Packaging Council (APC) (SWR, Dec. 14, p. 383).

     Since a pilot drink box recycling program began in
1990, the number of U.S. households recycling those
containers through curbside programs has grown to 5 million,
according to APC. Drink boxes are collected along with other
polyethylene-coated (laminated) paper products such as milk
cartons. Those products are then recycled using the
hydrapulping process.

     Hydrapulping separates the paper, which makes up 70
percent of the packaging, from the plastic and the aluminum.
The hydrapulper operates much like a large household
blender, says APC. The machinery is filled with water,
aseptic packages and milk and juice cartons, and large rotor
blades stir the water. The motion beats the paper fibers
away from the layers of polyethylene and aluminum foil.
Contact: APC, (703) 351-5062.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLES
TO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS


     Huffy Sports (HS), manufacturer of home basketball
systems, is the first backboard producer to include post-
consumer materials in its products, according to the
company.

     Composite Technologies Corporation (CTC) of Dayton,
Ohio, produces the Polymer Fiber Matrix - a compression-
molded thermoplastics recycled resin - used in the boards.
CTC also manufacturers highway signs and walls for sound
barriers from Polymer Fiber Matrix.

     Recycled products used in the Polymer Fiber Matrix
include: PET soda bottles, milk jugs and industrial
plastics. HS plans to produce the majority of its backboards
from recycled materials by the end of 1996. Contact: Wendee
Puccetti, Celtic Advertising, (414) 789-7630.

* * *

     CALIFORNIA - The Alameda County Waste Management
Authority (ACMA) has approved about $400,000 in grants to
seven local cities and a waste district for waste reduction,
recycling and public education programs. Allocations
include: $50,000 for a Garden Patch Greening Resource Center
in Berkeley; $12,500 for an enhanced green waste publication
campaign in Dublin; $80,770 for a yard-waste public
education program in Oakland; and $63,633 for the
development of a multi-material recovery facility in Union
City. Contact: Bruce Goddard, ACWMA, (510) 614-1699.

     NEW JERSEY - Environmental Resources Management (ERM)
recently completed its first full-scale installation of a
system based on its patented Advanced Fluidized Composting
(AFC) technology at a remediation site in Trenton, N.J. AFC
is a process technology used to treat high-strength organic
or biodegradable inorganic waste streams, or sludges. The
technology combines autothermal biological treatment of
high-strength organic waste streams with a proprietary
oxidation step. The result is a highly efficient rate of
organic destruction with little or no generation of waste
sludges commonly associated with most biological processes,
the company also explained. Contact: ERM, (800) 544-3117.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>