
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B23-106</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA017-000187-B027-71</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.comptia.org:80/StdVol.htm 198.115.138.17 19970106104638 text/html 18947
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Purveyor Encrypt Domestic/v1.2.3 Windows NT
MIME-version: 1.0
Content-type: text/html
Date: Mon, 06 Jan 1997 11:18:44 GMT
Last-modified: Sunday, 27-Aug-95 05:00:54 GMT
Content-length: 18724
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>
stdvol.htm
</TITLE>
<META NAME = "GENERATOR" CONTENT = "Live Markup from MediaTech">
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR = "#8080FF" LINK = "#800000">
<P></P>
<CENTER><IMG SRC = "http://www.comptia.org/!ctiapro.gif"></CENTER><HR>
<CENTER><H1>Standards/Voluntary Guidelines</H1></CENTER>

<CENTER><H2>Recommended Voluntary Standards Policy for Return 
Authorization Hardware and Software Returns</H2></CENTER>

<PRE>

It is the goal of the computer industry to not only maximize profits 
but customer satisfaction as well. Other industries have addressed the 
product returns problem by allowing their customers to return product 
within a reasonable timeframe after purchase. Since manufacturers are 
in a better position than the reseller/distributor channel to absorb 
and/or recoup costs associated with product returns, they must provide 
the leadership and reasonable policies toward minimizing this problem. 
At the same time, resellers must ensure that their customers/end users 
are not only well-versed on product features, but are well-informed on 
the manufacturers’ product return guidelines as well.

The computer industry as a whole experiences several problems 
surrounding the return of product which are being addressed in this 
document by focusing on the following six categories.

A.	Inventory adjustments
B.	DOA returns
C.	Damage and packaging
D.	Opened and incomplete product
E.	Discontinued product
F.	Warranty replacement

Within the current environment, the disposition of these issues is 
often unique to each manufacturer. Such lack of standardization 
results in excessive overhead, customer dissatisfaction and general 
confusion in the channel. The following standards are proposed to 
address these concerns.

There must be some mechanism under the product return program that 
allows the originating entity to retain adequate records and allow for 
the verification of only discrepancies that may exist from the 
original quantity, quality and condition of merchandise for which the 
RMA (Return Merchandise Authorization) was issued.

A.Inventory Adjustments (Stock Rebalancing): 

Resellers/distributors may return eligible products to the 
manufacturer or distributor, depending on the point of purchase. In 
consideration of frequent price changes and the generally consistent 
use of price protection within the industry, returns will be credited 
at the lower of the price paid or the current price. The recommended 
procedure is as follows:

     1. The manufacturer should issue a returns authorization to the 
          reseller/distributor within 48 hours of the return request.

     2. The reseller/distributor should return the product to the 
          authorized returns center within 30 days of receiving the 
          returns authorization. 

     3. The manufacturer should issue credit within 30 days of receipt 
          of returned product, less any expenses required to return 
          the goods to merchantable condition. The Master reseller 
          (franchiser)/distributor must, in turn, issue credit to its 
          retailers/Value Added Resellers/dealers within seven (7) 
          days of receipt of credit.

     4. Software returns by end-users are primarily due to one or both 
          of the following reasons:  
          a) The product does not meet their needs and expectations; 
          b) The product is technically incompatible with their 
               system. End users must be made aware by the resellers 
               of the problems and conditions associated with software 
               returns. Resellers/distributors must return product in 
               remarketable condition. Only those items authorized 
               will be accepted for return. 

     5. Software returns must be undamaged and in the original package 
          and contents must be complete.

     6. Transportation cost for all returns to the manufacturer must 
          be prepaid by the reseller/distributor.

Stock balancing:  It is noted that manufacturers that allow stock 
balancing have higher levels of reseller/distributor satisfaction. The 
guidelines would allow the reseller/distributor to return a percentage 
(10%) of the prior quarter’s purchases without a restocking fee. Stock 
Balancing RMA Request should be offset by a matching purchase order, 
where appropriate. Returns above the established guidelines would be 
subject to a pre-approved manufacturer’s restocking fee.

B. DOA product: This refers to products that are found (or perceived) 
to be “dead on arrival” or defective before the customer has ever been 
able to realize the benefits of purchase.

     1. Manufacturers and resellers share the responsibility to 
          minimize the number of inappropriately categorized DOAs by 
          providing documentation inside the box and telephone support 
          to assist end-users with initial set up.

     2. There is agreement that 30 days from date of sale by a 
          reseller to the end user is a reasonable timeframe for 
          identifying a DOA product. There may be exceptions (i.e., 
          Christmas and major corporate projects) where more than 30 days 
          go by. These should be handled as exceptions

     3. Customers have no desire to interact with a manufacturer or 
          service center for the return for DOA product. Customers 
          prefer a “one stop” shop and as such should be able to 
          return any DOA eproduct to their reseller/retailer for full 
          credit or, if they desire, replacement.

     4. In turn, channel(s) require a clean process by which they can 
          return DOA products to the manufacturers.

     5. Manufacturers, in turn, can and should differentiate between 
          resellers that perform basic diagnosis to verify their 
          product is DOA and/or perform warranty repair work versus 
          those passing the “customer declared DOA” back to the 
          manufacturer without inspection. The differentiation can be in 
          terms of either credits or charges. 

     6. Either way, the DOA/RMA process needs to be understood and 
          agreed to at contracting time, including specifying the timing and 
          return process including what documentation will be required.

C. Damaged returns: Product can incur box damage or real damage 
virtually anywhere in the channel. To minimize the loss potential, the 
following responsibilities are recommended: 

     1. Manufacturers are responsible for ensuring appropriate carton 
          and pallet protection to minimize in transition exposure.

     2. “Risk of loss” and “damage in transit” are generally the 
          responsibility of the organization paying for the freight, 
          unless the terms of the sale are FOB reseller.

     3. Manufacturers should develop programs to send back product 
          with cosmetic damage regardless of the cost (for a fee).

     4. Where repackaging is not possible/practical, a reasonable 
          processing fee (e.g.: $10-50) would be charged for each unit 
          returned in damaged packages.

     5. To minimize the amount of hardware returns for box damage 
          only, manufacturers should submit standard guidelines 
          surrounding the ordering of new boxes and other necessary 
          repackaging materials. These guidelines should include as a 
          minimum: telephone contacts and numbers, models and part 
          numbers, pricing and delivery times for packaging.

     6. Repackaging materials should be provided to resellers at no 
          charge or minimum charge.

D. Opened product: This category involved products that have been 
opened and/or “powered up” by either a reseller or end user and then 
found to be wrong or undesirable.

     1. Misorders, misunderstandings, buyers’ remorse and general 
          customer satisfaction can all result in perfectly good 
          products being returned to the point of purchase.

     2. In order to provide for timely identification of “used” 
          product in the resale channel, it is incumbent upon the 
          manufacturer to provide a mechanism to the reseller for 
          identification of used products and standardization of the 
          term “factory seal”, i.e., internally sealed versus external 
          box seal.

     3. Manufacturers should allow approximately up to 2% of total 
          purchases to be returned  “opened” for free and charge for 
          any amount above that. Both hardware and software returns 
          should be complete (diskettes, power cords,  documentation, 
          etc.).

     4. To minimize the amounts (i.e., by using repackaging) and the 
          number of incomplete returns, manufacturers should provide 
          “in box contents” listings for all products, focusing on 
          primary accessories required for operation of the product 
          and the ability to purchase any missing items if necessary. 
          As the reseller/distributor is not equipped to perform a 
          detailed inspection of all products, such “in box” 
          information should apply only to those components and 
          accessories readily visible within the box. Thi uld provide 
          the reseller/distributor with the ability to efficiently 
          scan the products for completeness upon receipt from the 
          customer and prior to return to the manufacturer. In cases 
          where excessive abuse is observed, this should be dealt with 
          quickly on an individual basis.

E. Discontinued product: It is recommended that manufacturers follow 
some or all of the guidelines listed below for minimizing problems 
related to this issue:

          1. Provide resellers/distributors 30 days notice on product 
               discontinuance.

          2. Provide options to return discontinued product within 60 days 
               from date of discontinuance.

          3. Provide market development funds (MDF), reduced prices, 
               rebates or other special incentives to move 
               discontinued product out of inventory.

          4. Provide a means to exchange or upgrade discontinued product at 
               no additional cost to the reseller/distributor.

All standard warranty and return policies should remain in effect on 
discontinued products.

F. Warranty Replacement: Many items, today, are being sold with 2 
year, 3 year, and often ‘lifetime’ warranties. The manufacturer needs 
to assume responsibility for handling warranty replacement of these 
items. Many manufacturers deal with multiple distributors, as do many 
resellers. In the industry today, with the proliferation of resellers, 
the customer often deals with a reseller who did not originally sell 
that product to them.

          1. Since there is a ‘lifetime’ or long-term replacement, 
               these should be handled directly by the manufacturer.

          [NOTE:  With the changes now occurring in the channel, a 
               document such as this requires that the uniqueness of 
               each channel segment be specifically addressed.  
               Because the policies of manufacturers, distributors and 
               resellers are becoming more segmented, a generalized 
               framework or baseline, such as these voluntary 
               Guidelines, must portray this reality. Therefore, the 
               next iteration of these Guidelines is already being 
               worked on and this further revised document will be 
               customized to reflect the realities in each channel 
               segment.]



These Guidelines are published by The Computing Technology Industry 
Association 450 E. 22nd St., Suite 230, Lombard, IL  60148 phone:  
(708) 268-1818;  fax: (708) 268-1384

(revised 10/94)

 </PRE> 
<HR>
<H1><CENTER>Streamlining the Co-op Claims Process </H1>
<H2>The $20 Million Solution</H2></CENTER>
<PRE>
“The computer industry as a whole has worked aggressively to reduce 
costs on everything we do – accomplishing this in a variety of ways, 
including inventing new technologies and investing in automation and 
infrastructure. Certainly, driving out operating inefficiencies has 
been one of the primary themes in our industry.  Yet nobody has put a 
lot of time and attention into the way we manage co-op administration 
and costs,” declares Karen Fuller, chairman of the Co-op Task Force 
for the Lombard, IL-based Com puting Technology Industry Association 
(CompTIA).

In fact, Fuller wonders why has it taken so long to address the huge 
expenses involved in the area of co-op claims administration – 
estimated at about $20 million annually.  It was a search for this 
‘$20 million solution’ that led Fuller and her Task Force to develop a 
new co-op/MDF reimbursement process and claim form that they hope the 
industry will adopt. Fuller, who is vice president of marketing at 
Merisel, and her Task Force have been working on taking an additional 
level of costs out of the industry’s business processes since January 
of 1994.  

According to Fuller, more than 30 leading industry companies are 
regular participants in the Co-op Task Force, with another two dozen 
or so that want to be kept up to date on all activities.  “There is a 
very high level of interest from the reseller and manufacturer 
communities in Task Force activities.  It’s a pro blem near and dear 
to their hearts,” Fuller states.

After surveying industry companies, the CompTIA Task Force found that 
manufacturers pay an average of $100 per co-op claim; while resellers 
and distributors pay about $176 per claim.  Cost factors on the vendor 
side included:  cost of 3rd party claim processors; manufacturer’s 
personnel needed to administer the co-op claims process; claim form 
printing costs; and the time it takes sales reps to administer these 
programs.  

On the Distributor/Reseller side, cost factors included: co-op 
accounting personnel needed to administer claims; training time for 
personnel; duplicating and mailing costs (for copies of proof of 
performance and invoices); and write offs incurred because a vendor 
says something is missing on the form and refuses to pay the claim.

The group then spent several months trying to get their arms around the scope 
of the problem, Fuller said.  “We wanted to redefine what an efficient co-op 
claims handling process would be – one that would still meet the needs of 
resellers, distributors and manufacturers,” she stated. 

Among the problems that the CompTIA Task Force had to address were 
what Fuller terms the ‘policing mechanisms’ – the mounds of paperwork 
and proofs of performance – that vendors built around the co-op claims 
process to ensure that their co-op/MDF dollars were spent on effective 
marketing activities and not wasted. Fuller points out that these 
mechanisms, which vendors felt were necessary because of past abuses 
of funds, created a bureaucratic nightmare for resellers and 
distributors.  In fact, Fuller notes, over the years the tightening 
of these procedures was often perceived by the reseller community as 
‘proof’ that manufacturers were trying to find ways to not spend the 
funds with them.

With an eye on streamlining current co-op reimbursement processes, the 
CompTIA Co-op Task Force has developed a process and form that it has 
dubbed Marketing Expenditure Agreement Letter (MEAL).  (See diagram 
below).  Called by some a ‘MEAL ticket’, the form outlines a common 
set of informational items that the Task Force believes is reasonable 
for manufacturers to expect when they agree to give co-op/MDF dollars.  
The MEAL becomes the prior approval agreement for manufacturers and 
the contractual document for distributors and resellers.

Utilizing the new system, Fuller explains, requires the use of only 
two invoices and the MEAL – thereby eliminating the pounds of 
paperwork that was required in the past, including proof of 
performance and backup documentation. With the new system, those items 
remain with the distributor and/or reseller unless specifically 
requested for examination by the manufacturer. 

In addition, the process that CompTIA is developing will also help 
ease the cash flow burden heretofore put on distributors and resellers 
by allowing for a proposed 50 percent prepayment of marketing/ 
promotional expenses in a timely manner. Fuller also stresses that the 
Task Force thoroughly reviewed the proposed Voluntary MEAL with the 
Association’s legal counsel to verify that it would not violate any 
provisions or rules of the FTC, Robinson-Patman Act or IRS 
regulations. 

As part of the goal to streamline the Co-op/MDF claims process, the 
Task Force has been working with Lotus Development to help automate 
the process.  Robert Caggiano, Distribution Channel Manager for Lotus 
Development, commends the efforts of CompTIA in attempting to solve 
this problem for the industry. He further states that Lotus has been 
working on this issue internally for the past year with its own MDF 
program.  Caggiano has offered on Lotus’ behalf a copy of Lotus Notes 
and the Lotus d eveloped MDF app lication in generic form to any 
reseller or manufacturer that adopts the proposed CompTIA process. 

Fuller goes on to say, “We believe that CompTIA has put together a 
viable and effective process that will enable the industry to cut out 
millions of dollars in wasted expenses.  Of course, the challenge now 
is to communicate the benefits of this process and get it adopted by 
manufacturers, distributors and resellers alike.” 

Concludes John A. Venator, CompTIA’s Executive Director and CEO, “This 
effort will only be successful if there is widespread adoption of it. 
We anticipate that within the next few months – due to the efforts of 
good industry citizens such as Karen Fuller – all of the major 
distributors and master resellers will be adopting this process and 
asking manufacturers to do likewise. And, while such guidelines can 
only be voluntary on an industry-wide basis, we hope that the industry 
will move quickly to adopt them to help ensure the continued success 
of all players.

<HR>
<CENTER><A HREF = "http://www.comptia.org/home.htm">Return to our Home Page</A></CENTER> </BODY> </HTML>
</DOC>