
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B38-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA074-000493-B040-104</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi107.html 205.156.212.5 19970122010042 text/html 39423
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:58:46 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:31 GMT
Content-length: 39236
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi107.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
E.U. FINANCIAL INDUSTRY MONITOR via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>COMMISSION INVITES COMMENT SECOND BANKING DIRECTIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4550 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>MORE DETAILS ON NEW APPROACHES TO THE HARMONISATION OF ACCOUNTING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1042 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>COMMISSION CONSUMER DG PLANS DATABASE OF BANKING PRICE STRUCTURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(297 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>COMMISSION PROPOSES NEW LIST OF EXCLUSIONS FROM BANKING DIRECTIVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(164 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
E.U. FINANCIAL INDUSTRY MONITOR via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

COMMISSION INVITES COMMENT SECOND BANKING DIRECTIVE

THE DECEMBER issue of European Banker, in the article Freedom or
fallacy?, discussed some aspects of the Commission communication on
interpretation of the Second Banking Directive, highlighting different
Member State interpretations of the Directive and quoting some initial
reactions to the communication by national banking associations. EU
Financial Industry Monitor readers may be interested in more details on
this text of major importance.

The Commission published its text, strictly speaking a Draft
Communication entitled "Freedom to provide services and the interest of
the general good in the Second Banking Directive", in the Official
Journal No C 291 of 4.11.95.

An introductory passage states that the Draft is "the Commission's
contribution to the discussions under way on the problems associated
with freedom to provide services and the interest of the general good"
under the Second Directive. It points out that the discussions have so
far been restricted to the Member States in the Banking Advisory Group
and the Working Party on the Interpretation of the Banking Directives.

The Commission, however, "takes the view that the broadest possible
consultation should be held on its interpretative work" and so invites
interested parties to submit comments on the Draft by 4.3.96. After
consideration of any such comments, the Draft will, if appropriate,
become a Commission interpretative communication which will give banks
an idea of how the Commission will view particular problems brought to
its attention.

This is a most unusual step. First of all, it is very rare for the
Commission to issue interpretative communications on directives. It has
done so in the case of several of its own regulations, for example in
the competition policy field, but very seldom in the case of Council
directives since they have to be implemented through national law.

Secondly, although the Commission has certainly consulted interested
parties in the past on the interpretation of EU legislation, it has
never published a draft interpretative document with an invitation to
the world to comment on its intended interpretation.

The reason for taking this unusual step is very honestly stated in the
introduction to the Draft Communication:

"In the course of its contacts with numerous economic operators, the
Commission has come to realise that continuing uncertainty with regard
to the interpretation of basic concepts, such as freedom to provide
services and the interest of the general good, has seriously undermined
the workings of the machinery set up by the Second Directive and is
such as to deter certain credit institutions from exercising the very
freedoms which the Second Directive sets out to promote."

It is also worth emphasising that this Draft Communication may be only
the first in a series. The Commission has tipped off the specialised EU
press that it considers it premature to issue such Drafts for the
"third generation" insurance directives and the Investment Services
Directive but that it is already reflecting on the problems of
interpretation of these measures and is committed to the coherence of
the positions adopted for all financial services.

This is hardly surprising, given the great reluctance of certain Member
States to open up their insurance and securities markets to services
provided cross-frontier and their alleged use of the general good
provisions of directives to make life difficult for institutions from
other Member States.

The Commission's approach

Only the European Court of Justice can give a final, definitive
interpretation of EU law. The Commission, therefore, makes it clear in
its Draft Communication that the contents are without prejudice to any
European Court of Justice interpretation of the Second Banking
Directive.

What the Commission has done is to restate the principles laid down by
the Court of Justice in giving judgment in cases involving the freedom
to provide services and the interest of the general good in other areas
of EU law and to examine the application of these principles to the
Second Banking Directive.

In a key passage which is implicitly revelatory of the restrictive
position of some Member States, the Commission states that its
interpretations of the Directive "do not necessarily represent the
views of the Member States" but then makes a threat:

"However, in accordance with its duties as guardian of the Treaty
reserves the right to exercise the powers vested in it by the Treaty
(Article 169)."

In other words, the Commission is warning the Member States that,
although they may not agree with how it interprets the Directive, if
they go against that interpretation the Commission will not hesitate to
start Treaty infringement proceedings against them. The Draft
Communication takes up thirteen-and-a-half Official Journal pages and
is both discursive and legalistic.

Freedom to provide services

Under the single licence system, a bank authorised in a Member State is
entitled to provide services without an establishment in any other
Member States after going through the sole formality of notifying its
home Member State regulatory authorities of its intention to do this.

The Commission's Draft Communication addresses:

1) the services covered by the Directive, 2) commencement of the
provision of services.

The first of these is sub-divided into: a) nature of services; b) forms
of provision of services; c) provision of services; and d) nature of
the notification.

Nature of services

Article 20(1) of the Second Banking Directive states that:

"Any credit institution wishing to exercise the freedom to provide
services by carrying on its activities within the territory of another
Member State for the first time shall notify the competent authorities
of the home Member State of the activities on the list in the Annex
which it intends to carry on."

This makes it clear that only the "core banking activities" listed in
the Annex to the Second Banking Directive are covered by the freedom to
provide services. It is equally clear that the notification procedure
only applies where services are to be provided for the first time.
Article 23(2) of the Directive explicitly states that rights acquired
by credit institutions which provided services before the Directive
came into force are not affected.

The Draft Notice then examines the questions of: 1) whether the fact
that an activity has only been carried on once or a few times be
considered enough to confer acquired rights; and 2) how far back in
time should one go to find evidence of past activity.

For the Commission it would be "absurd to set a quantitative limit . .
institution has acquired rights if it provided a service at least once
in another Member State, regardless of when. However, the Commission
adds that:

1) this activity must have been carried on lawfully, that is, in
conformity with the law in force in the host Member State at the time;
and

2) the institution must be able to provide, if necessary, evidence of
its past activity.

It also adds that institutions with acquired rights cannot be subjected
by their home Member State authorities to more onerous procedures than
were applied before the Second Directive came into effect. For example,
they will not have to notify the authorities of their intention to
continue providing the services under Second Directive terms. The
notification procedure only applies to services to be supplied for the
first time.

Forms of provision of services

Article 20(1) of the Directives requires notification for services to
be provided "within the territory of another Member State". On the
basis of European Court of Justice interpretation of the Treaty
provisions on freedom to provide services, the Commission Draft
Communication addresses the provision of services when there is
"movement" and also addresses rules on advertising.

The bank providing a service may move, in the sense that staff may go
to the other Member State for the purposes of providing the service.
The Commission considers that this situation is "undoubtedly" covered
by freedom to provide services.

Conversely, the receiver of the service may be the person to move, that
is, he/she comes to the Member State where a credit institution is
established without this being the result of canvassing by the
institution. No notification to the home Member State authorities is
required in that situation.

Nevertheless, an institution which before the Second Banking Directive
came into effect and only provided services to clients from other
Member States in that way, would have to notify if it intends to start
seeking new clients through canvassing in other Member States or by
travelling to them.

The third situation is where the service itself moves, that is, where
the service is provided by post or by modern communication method such
as telephone, fax, telex, electronic mail. In this case, the Commission
makes a distinction between whether the service is provided at the
customer's initiative or whether it follows canvassing by the credit
institution. In the first case, the institution is exempt from
notification but, in the second, the canvassing is proof of an
intention to provide a service in another Member State and notification
is, therefore, necessary.

It follows that the notification procedure should be completed before
the credit institution and its customers establish "commercial
relations". The Draft Communication points out that, where a credit
institution subsequently wishes to offer services not covered by its
initial notification, an additional notification would have to be made
first.

Advertising in another Member State

When does advertising amount to an intention to provide services in
another Member State and so create the obligation to notify? The
Commission's starting point is that:

"It is only where, by its very nature, the advertisement constitutes
commercial canvassing, ranking as an actual invitation, issued at a
distance, to enter into a contract, or where it precedes a physical
journey by the supplier, that it constitutes an intention to provide a
service within the territory of another Member State, within the
meaning of Article 20."

Two scenarios then arise. The first is where the bank which places an
advertisement does not intend to go subsequently to the consumer's
Member State of residence. In this case, the Commission considers that
notification of the intention to advertise is required when two
conditions are both met:

1) the advertisement contains sufficient information for the consumer
to make up his mind (for example, interest rate, duration, cost); and
2) the contract can be concluded at a distance, that is, by reply slip,
letter, telephone etc, without the bank and the customer having to
meet. If, however, the contract cannot be concluded without the
consumer going to the Member State where the bank is established,
notification is not required.

The second scenario is where the bank intends to go to the consumer's
Member State of residence to conclude a contract for a service which
has been advertised. Notification is required in this case. There may
be difficulties of classification. The Draft Communication takes the
example of advertisements in Europe-wide publications or TV channels.
The Commission considers that notification would only be necessary if
such an advertisement were directed at a specific Member State, for
example, if it appeared in a national edition of an international
newspaper.

Provision of services compared to establishment

The case law of the European Court of Justice makes a clear
distinction. When a service is provided in a host Member State, the
presence there is temporary. Establishment, in contrast, implies the
existence of permanent premises in the host Member State.

The Court has also ruled that, in the case of an activity carried out
temporarily but frequently, the Member States may apply their rules for
institutions which are established there if an institution invokes the
freedom to provide services abusively, so as to avoid the local rules
for established institutions.

The Draft Notice then considers some cases where it is difficult to
draw the line between provision of services and establishment -
electronic machines, recourse to independent intermediaries and the
permanent presence of the institution's own staff in another Member
State.

Electronic machines

Electronic machines capable of performing Second Directive core banking
activities may be covered by the concept of establishment.

A machine is unlikely to be a credit institution's only place of
business in another Member State. In the normal course of events, a
machine would be attached to a branch, agency or some other form of
establishment and so would not be "an entity in its own right". As a
result, it would be subject to the rules applicable to the
establishment to which it is attached.

In the unlikely event of an electronic machine being a credit
institution's sole presence in another Member States, then, in the
Commission's view, the machine would be deemed to be a provider of
services. As such, it would have to be notified, subject to the "first
time" rules already described.

As a provider of services, a machine would be subject to the general
good rules of the host country. In that respect, the Draft
Communication gives as an example the need for a machine to show a
telephone number in the host country.

Independent intermediaries

In its discussion of whether an intermediary used by a credit
institution to do business in another Member State is or is not to be
regarded as a permanent establishment, the Commission's Draft
Communication quotes extensively from the case law of the European
Court of Justice. It concludes that the links between a credit
institution and an independent intermediary in another Member State
amount to the institution having a branch in the second Member State
when the intermediary meets three cumulative criteria:

- he has received an exclusive brief from that credit institution and
from no other;

- he is empowered to negotiate on the credit institution's behalf and
to bind it;

- he operates on a permanent basis.

This raises the question of the intermediary who acts on behalf of more
than one credit institution and here the Commission distinguishes two
scenarios.

Where the intermediary acts exclusively for a group of credit
institutions which have jointly called on his services, all of them are
deemed to be established in the form of a branch, assuming that the
other criteria are met.

The other situation is where the intermediary acts for a number of
credit institutions which have not jointly called on his services. In
that case, the first of the branch criteria - receiving an exclusive
brief - is not met. Therefore, the instructing credit institutions are
not established in the second Member State and are providing a service
through an intermediary. Notification is required.

The Draft Communication then examines the situation in those Member
States which require intermediaries to be given mandates by the credit
institutions for which they act.

Without giving explicit answers, the Commission states that it would
have to examine the extent of the mandate, the credit institution's
ability to control the intermediary, the possibility for the
intermediary to commit the mandating credit institution.

Finally, the Draft Communication considers the situation where the
intermediary is itself a credit institution. If the intermediary offers
its customers the products of another credit institution, the latter
would have to notify its intention of exercising the freedom to provide
services in its intermediary's Member State unless, of course, it is
covered by the acquired rights provision.

If, on the other hand, the intermediary provides accommodation to a
branch of the other credit institution, there would have to be
notification of the intention to exercise the freedom of establishment.

Permanent presence of staff

Under this heading, there are two situations - either a credit
institution's staff in another Member State carry on a banking activity
or they do not.

If they do carry on a banking activity, they constitute a branch. Since
1.1.93, a branch start-up has required prior notification under the
Second Directive. If it was operational before that date with any
authorisation required by the host Member State's legislation, it
enjoys acquired rights under the Directive and so notification is not
required. If it was operational before that date but without the
necessary local authorisation, it requires notification as it had not
started operations "in accordance with the provisions in force in (its)
host Member State".

The presence in another Member State of a credit institution's staff
who do not carry on a banking activity - in other words a
representative office - does not, in the Commission view, constitute a
branch and so does not require notification. That does not, however,
prevent the host member State requiring the institution to inform it of
the opening of the office and to go through "a registration procedure
that would have to be a mere formality". The host member State would
also be at liberty to carry out "a simple, unsystematic check to
ascertain whether the office is not, in fact, engaged in banking
activities".

Nature of the notification

This is dealt with very simply in the Draft Communication. For the
Commission, the Second Directive's notification procedure:

"pursues a simple objective of exchange of information between
supervisory authorities and is not a consumer protection measure."

The Draft Communication continues by stating that notification cannot
be considered "a procedural condition underlying the validity of
banking contract". In other words, a bank which has not fulfilled a
notification requirement can be penalised for this failure but the
contracts it has entered into the second Member State cannot be
annulled on the grounds of non- notification.

In the Commission's view, that would be contrary to the Community law
principle of proportionality and would negatively affect the legal
certainty of contracts entered into in good faith.

Commencement of the provision of services

Article 20(2) of the Second Banking Directive states:

"The competent authorities of the home Member State shall, within one
month of receipt of the notification mentioned in paragraph 1, send
that notification to the competent authorities of the host Member
State."

The Draft Communication contrasts this provision on the freedom to
provide services with the corresponding provision on freedom of
establishment. The latter (Article 19(5) of the Directive) requires the
credit institution to wait for receipt by the branch of a
"communication" by the host Member State authorities.

In the absence of any such communication after a period of two months,
it can start operating. The Draft Communication points out that when
the proposed Directive was being examined in Council the idea of
applying that rule to both freedom of establishment and freedom to
provide services was rejected.

The Draft Communication continues: "In the Commission's opinion, the re-
introduction, by way of interpretation, of formalities which the Member
States did not wish to see in the definitive version of the text
adopted by the Council is neither desirable nor in keeping with the
spirit and letter of the Second Directive."

In other words, a credit institution can start exercising the freedom
to provide services in another Member State once it has notified its
intentions to its home Member State authorities, which have one month
in which to notify the host country authorities. The credit institution
may well ask the host country authorities to confirm receipt from the
home country authorities of the institution's notification but that
confirmation cannot be a prior condition for starting to provide
services. Making confirmation a pre-requisite "is unacceptable and
constitutes an infringement of the Second Directive".

The general good in the second banking directive

The general good part of the Draft Communication discusses firstly the
notification of conditions to be met in the interest of the general
good and, secondly, the applicability of rules adopted in the interest
of the general good.

Notification of conditions to be met in the interest of the general
good

This section of the Draft Commission discusses the interpretation of
Article 19(4) of the Second Directive which provides that:

"Before the branch of a credit institution commences its activities the
competent authorities of the host Member State shall, within two months
of receiving the information mentioned in paragraph 3, prepare for the
supervision of the credit institution in accordance with Article 21
and, if necessary, indicate the conditions under which, in the interest
of the general good, those activities must be carried on in the host
Member State."

It appears that uncertainty has arisen regarding the words "if
necessary". Some Member States have considered that this imposes an
obligation to indicate the general good conditions to a branch. Others
have read the words as merely giving an option or a "moral obligation".

The Commission considers that it is an option. Its principal reason for
stating this is that the text says nothing about the form and content
of notification of general good conditions. That being so, it would be
impossible to verify whether the "obligation" had been complied with.

In addition, there is no detailed, harmonised definition of "the
general good". It may vary from one Member State to another and may not
apply in the same areas in host and home Member States. Also, "there is
no way of knowing in advance what the credit institution wants to
obtain".

In conclusion, it is up to a credit institution which wishes to operate
in another Member State to establish the situation, either by its own
efforts or by asking the host Member State authorities.

Even if these authorities were to refuse to give the information, there
would be no breach of Community law, although any harm suffered might
be subject to a remedy under the national law.

Applicability of rules adopted in the interest of the general good

Services

The case law of the European Court of Justice has already laid down a
number of requirements on the national provisions which may be applied
to undertakings exercising the freedom to supply services. These must
not only be in the general good but also be:

- non-discriminatory;
- objectively necessary; and
- proportionate to the objective pursued.

In addition, the interest of the general good must not be safeguarded
by rules to which the service provider is already subject in the Member
State of establishment (non-duplication).

Finally, any restrictions on the grounds of the general good must be in
fields which are not the subject of EU-level harmonisation.
Harmonisation by Directive has already established what the Commission
calls the "Community general good". Thus, for example, national
measures on own funds, the solvency ratio, deposit guarantees or large
exposures cannot be justified on general good grounds because of the
Directives on these issues.

The Draft Communication then states that the Second Banking Directive
adds nothing new to this case law as far as freedom to provide services
is concerned.

Establishment

The European Court of Justice case law is essentially the same in the
field of establishment, with the additional rule that a national
provision which is discriminatory against branches of institutions of
other Member States may be justified on the grounds of public policy,
public security and public health.

The case law has recognised a number of areas as being covered by the
concept of the general good. Those relevant to the financial services
sector are:

- protection of recipients of services;
- protection of workers;
- protection of consumers;
- preservation of the good reputation of the national financial
  sector;
- the prevention of fraud;
- social order;
- protection of intellectual property;
- the cohesion of the tax system.

This list could be added to by the Court of Justice.

Measures in these areas would have to be justified on the grounds of
the interest of the general good and also respect the principles of
Community law already cited under services, that is, non-
discrimination, non-duplication, necessity and proportionality.

There then follows a rather theoretical and legalistic discussion
leading to the conclusion that:

"depending on the circumstances, the same restriction applied in the
interest of the general good could be adjudged proportionate in respect
of a branch, but disproportionate in respect of a service provider."

That is followed by a long and equally legalistic passage on the link
between rules governing the interest of the general good and law
applicable to banking contracts.

By determining the law applicable to a banking contract, it is possible
to establish the law applicable to the service proposed by the bank.
This raises the relationship between the mutual recognition provisions
of the Second Banking Directive and the rules laid down in the 1980
Rome Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations.

There is, of course, an important issue here. If the Rome Convention
has the result that the law applicable to a banking contract is that of
the home Member State, can the host Member State then apply its general
good rules to the bank's operations on its territory, as it should be
able to do under the Second Directive?

The Commission's answer to this is that the Directive's mutual
recognition principle should be given effect through a three- stage
process:

- the law applicable to a banking contract should be established on the
basis of the Rome Convention;

- it should then be established whether the result of that first step
constitutes an obstacle to mutual recognition;

- if there is no obstacle, then the host Member State law would apply
to the banking contract without further ado. If there is an obstacle,
the host Member State law would only apply if that can be justified by
the general good and if the European Court's criteria for application
of general good measures are met.

Conclusions

The Draft Communication ends with three conclusions.

Firstly, the Commission does not believe that a banking activity can be
carried on under the same conditions in home and host Member States,
whatever the circumstances. Host country civil, criminal, tax or labour
laws will apply to the branch or foreign service provider as these are
not affected by the Second Directive.

Secondly, non-discriminatory restrictions applying to the service
itself must, however, satisfy the general good test (and the
accompanying principles of proportionality etc) regardless of whether
the banking service is provided through a branch or from another Member
State under the freedom to supply services.

Here, the Commission makes specific reference to restrictions applying
to:

1) the intrinsic features of the service such as cost, interest rates,
duration, contractual terms and conditions;

2) the underlying financial techniques; and

3) the way the service is marketed, such as advertising, canvassing
etc.

Finally, application of the proportionality principle to measures
justified in the interest of the common good will produce varying
results for credit institutions operating in another Member State under
the freedom to supply services or through a branch.

Draft Commission Communication: Freedom to provide services and the
interest of the general good in the Second Banking Directive: Official
Journal C 291 of 4.11.95.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
E.U. FINANCIAL INDUSTRY MONITOR via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MORE DETAILS ON NEW APPROACHES TO THE HARMONISATION OF ACCOUNTING

THE NOVEMBER 1995 issue of EU Financial Industry Monitor reported
comments by Commissioner Mario Monti on the possibility of adopting a
new approach to accounting standards. Since then, he has obtained from
his Commission colleagues approval for a Communication entitled
Accounting harmonisation: a new strategy vis-a-vis international
harmonisation. This is essentially a discussion document, although it
sets out fairly clearly what the Commission intends doing.

The Communication starts by setting out the reasons for a new strategy:

- the known shortcomings of the existing EU legislation. The
derogations and Member State options which have detracted from
harmonisation under the basic Fourth and Seventh Directives - on
company accounts and consolidated accounts respectively - have been
carried forward into the Bank Accounts Directive and the Insurance
Accounts Directive;

- the absence of progress on harmonisation since these measures were
adopted and the unlikelihood of new legislation. The Communication
reports that a conference in 1990 brought out a clear preference for
not adopting new legislation in the near future;

- the problems faced by large European companies seeking capital on the
international markets. In particular, companies seeking capital on the
New York Stock Exchange have to draw up separate accounts according to
US Generally Accepted Accounting Practices since accounts drawn up
according to European standards are not accepted in the US, although
the reverse is the case;

- the importance of the international harmonisation process and the
danger that in the present situation Europe can contribute little to
this process and then face problems of compatibility between its
standards and international ones.

After setting out these problems, the Commission Communication briefly
cites several solutions which have been aired with the Member States:
amending the Directives so as to exempt large listed companies and let
them follow other rules, negotiating a mutual recognition agreement
with the US, setting up a European Accounting Standard Setting Body.
All of these are rejected for one reason or another.

The Communication then sets out the Commission's proposed approach,
which will have to gain the explicit support and agreement of the
Member States. It emphasises that this new approach does not involve
the EU abandoning the field of accounting harmonisation but, on the
contrary, strengthens "its commitment and contribution to the
international standard-setting process, which offers the most efficient
and rapid solution for the problems of companies operating on a world-
wide scale".

The Commission's proposed approach consists of four steps.

Checking the conformity of existing international accounting standards
with the accounting directives

This is a priority, given the urgent issue of European companies
seeking listings on international capital markets.

The Contact Committee on the Accounting Directives, set up by the
Fourth Directive, would examine the compatibility of the IAS with the
Directives. Conformity is an essential first step if the Member States
are to allow their large companies to prepare accounts on an IAS basis.

The Communication points out that the Member States would have to go
through the same exercise for their national laws because of the
options in the EU Directives. An IAS could be compatible with the
Directives but not with national law.

Inconsistencies between the Directives and IAS would have to be
examined case-by-case so as to resolve conflicts. The International
Accounting Standards Committee could be asked to change the standard in
question (the IASC executive has expressed its willingness to consider
changes) but, if necessary, the Commission would propose changes to the
Directives. To that end, the Commission believes that serious
consideration should be given to an accelerated procedure for amending
the Directives by a committee.

European contributions to the work of the IASC

To ensure EU input to the IASC, the Contact Committee should examine
IASC Exposure Drafts and try to reach agreed positions on them. The
agreed positions would be sent to the IASC. In this way, the Commission
believes that the EU can build up a position of influence, possibly
even extending to IASC agenda fixing.

This would involve enlarging the role of the Contact Committee and the
Commission favours the setting-up of technical sub- committees.

Priority would be given to consolidated accounts for two reasons.
Firstly, it is those companies which prepare consolidated accounts
which are most exposed to the problems described in the Communication.
Secondly, a general approach covering individual company accounts would
be more likely to raise problems with the Member States because of the
link between company accounts and taxation.

Improving the comparability of accounts

The Contact Committee should increase its efforts in this area by
dealing with practical problems in the application of the Directives.
For its part, the Commission will co-operate with the Contact Committee
with a view to improving coordination among the Member State bodies
involved in standard-setting.

The Commission might, for example, incorporate the advice of the
Contact Committee in interpretative communications or recommendations.
Where appropriate, it would publicise the work of the Contact
Committee.

The Directives under the new approach

The new approach can only operate within the limits laid down by the
Directives. Therefore, if it proves necessary, the Commission will
propose amending directives, although it would clearly prefer to avoid
that course and hopes that legislation can be avoided in most instances
by "effective technical co- operation" in the Contact Committee.

To that end, it is essential that all institutions involved in
accounting standard-setting are involved in Committee's work.

Similarly, the Commission considers that there should be co- ordination
between the Committee and the Accounting Advisory Forum, which
represents users and preparers of accounts and which at present is
purely consultative.

Contact Committee members could attend Forum meetings and the Forum's
expertise could be "associated" with the Committee's technical work.

The Communication ends with a conclusion that"The Union needs to move
promptly to offer the users and preparers of accounts a clear prospect
that companies seeking listings on the US and other world markets will
be able to remain within the EU accounting framework and that the US
GAAP, over which they and their governments can exercise no influence,
is not the only option".

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
E.U. FINANCIAL INDUSTRY MONITOR via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

COMMISSION CONSUMER DG PLANS DATABASE OF BANKING PRICE STRUCTURES

THE COMMISSION'S Directorate-General for Consumer Policy (DG XXIV)
plans to set up a database to compare the national price structures of
banking services and follow their evolution. It published an invitation
to tender for a study to this end in the Official Journal C 233 of 7
September.

The invitation to tender, in its description of the proposed study,
states:

"Some banking services which were in the past apparently free of charge
for consumers are now explicitly charged and some are becoming rather
expensive. On the basis of information from several Member States, the
price of these services is increasing faster than the rate of
inflation. The introduction of a single currency will also imply a new
cost structure for some of these services (for example, cross-border
transactions)."

DG XXIV, therefore, aims to create an instrument to compare Member
State price structures and to follow their evolution. The instrument
will be set up before the end of this year and updated annually. It
will cover the management of consumer bank accounts and related
operations in all 15 Member States.

The first stage of the study will be to determine for each of the
Member States the typical use of a bank account by the consumer or
group of consumers and to establish the average cost to these consumers
of the typical use.

Since national habits vary - the relative use of cheques, bank
transfers, debit cards, credit cards, etc - the study will have to
ensure comparability of study results.

All costs borne by consumers will be covered by the study, including
annual administration charges, transaction fees, interest lost through
deferred value dates, consumer credit linked to credit cards and
overdrafts.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
E.U. FINANCIAL INDUSTRY MONITOR via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

COMMISSION PROPOSES NEW LIST OF EXCLUSIONS FROM BANKING DIRECTIVES

THE 1977 First Banking Directive contains in its Article 2(2) a list of
institutions which are definitively excluded from the field of
application of the Directive.

Article 2(2) provides for amendment of the list by the Council on a
proposal from the Commission after consultation of the Banking Advisory
Committee.

On November 11 last, the Commission submitted a proposal for amendment
at the request of Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Spain, the Netherlands,
Portugal and Finland, all of which wish deletion from the Article 2(2)
of specific institutions whose exclusion from the scope of the
Directive is no longer justified.

Austria, on the other hand, requested an addition to the list.

The Commission has consulted the Banking Advisory Committee and the non-
European Union countries of the European Economic Area (Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway), since the Banking Directives are binding on
them also. (see table on page 8 in the hard copy)

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>