
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B36-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B015-294</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev27.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002153 text/html 36989
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:19:54 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:11 GMT
Content-length: 36802
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev27.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 12, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS AND TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(473 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDS&nbsp;FOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(451 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>OSHA PROVIDES GUIDANCE SOFTWARE&nbsp;ON AGENCY'S ASBESTOS STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(186 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>LBP STUDIES POINT TO LACK OF RESEARCH&nbsp;ON DANGERS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(521 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEAD-SAFE HOUSING&nbsp;PUBLISHES SERIES OF LEAD HANDBOOKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>HAZWASTE-BURNING CEMENT KILN WAS&nbsp;SOURCE OF LEAD IN BLOOD, STUDY SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>BALTIMORE RESIDENTS FILE LAWSUIT OVER&nbsp;FORTHCOMING LEAD-PAINT REGULATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(819 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>BLOOD-LEAD MONITOR IN CONNECTICUT&nbsp;MAY BE APPLIED WITHIN OTHER STATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(238 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>DAMNING DOCUMENTS SINK OCF&nbsp;AS FIRM'S APPEAL FALLS SHORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(699 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>NEWSBRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(650 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CONTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

SLANTS AND TRENDS


   GOOD BUDGET NEWS - Researchers and health officials
working on lead issues received good news Jan. 5 when
Congress passed a bill that will fund the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) through Sept. 30, the end of
the fiscal year. This means NIH and CDC now can disperse
grants and carry out disease surveillance and other
programs. NIH received $11.9 billion, a 5.7 percent increase
over its fiscal 1995 budget. CDC, which supports a variety
of lead education and other programs, was essentially flat-
funded at $2.1 billion. The two agencies were the only ones
to be fully funded, although the targeted appropriations
measure (H.R. 1358) also allocated money for specific
federal programs such as Black Lung benefit payments. H.R.
1358, however, does not clearly define how NIH should divide
the appropriations among its 24 institutes, centers and
divisions. The House intended for the institutes to be
funded at levels close to those detailed in H.R. 2127, which
the House passed Aug. 4, committee staff said. But NIH may
be able to make some adjustments, staff said, adding the
White House Office of Management and Budget is reviewing the
question.

   However, EPA and the Occupational Health and Safety
Administration (OSHA) were not so lucky. Separate continuing
resolutions (H.R. 1643 and H.J. Res. 134) sent employees
back to work but allocated funds only through Jan. 26.
Republican Whip Sen. Trent Lott (Miss.) said Jan. 10 the GOP
will not force a third government shutdown. Instead,
Congress likely will pass targeted appropriations. "We'll
fund the programs we think are important, and we won't fund
programs we don't think important," said House Budget
Committee Chairman John Kasich (R-Ohio Jan. 14. EPA and OSHA
consistently have been targets of the GOP's frustration with
government. "[T]he Republican leadership does not care about
EPA; does not care about consumer protection; does not care
about OSHA...Corporate interests are going to have a field
day," said Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.), referring to the
omission of these programs from the recent targeted
appropriations.


   LOOPHOLE NEARLY CLOSED - Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge (R)
is pushing to close a regulatory loophole benefiting
asbestos-removal companies that has long frustrated state
officials. Of the five states in the Environmental
Protection Agency's Region III, Pennsylvania is the only one
with no method to target and prosecute unscrupulous
contractors, said John Curries, spokesman for the state
Department of Labor and Industry (L&I). Pennsylvania began
the effort in 1990 when the state legislature created an
advisory committee made up of government, academic and
industry representatives to determine whether the state
should enact a licensing system. The committee endorsed the
idea and in April 1995, the L&I drafted language to turn the
recommendation into law. Ridge plans to approve the plan and
seek a legislative sponsor.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDS
FOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS


   Newer municipal waste combustors (MWCs) will be required
to install a combination of high-efficiency pollution-
control equipment starting Jan. 29, if an EPA final rule
does not draw significant negative comments. While the rule
enables EPA to reduce several pollutants, including lead,
simultaneously, it is expected to impose substantial capital
costs.

   The maximum achievable control technology standard will
affect existing and new MWCs capable of combusting more than
35 metric tons daily. It establishes emissions limits for
dioxins, furans, cadmium, lead, mercury, particulate matter,
hydrogen chloride, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and
fugitive ash. Stricter performance standards apply to MWCs
with capacities greater than 225 metric tons a day.

   The rule, published in the Dec. 19 Federal Register,
mandates that MWCs built after Sept. 20, 1994, or modified
after June 19, 1996, will be subject to new, more stringent
performance standards. MWCs built between Dec. 20, 1989 and
Sept. 20, 1994, or modified before June 19, 1996, will
remain subject to MWC performance standards for plants built
after the 1989 date. This provision was promulgated Feb. 11,
1991. The dates were set to avoid same MWC plants being
subject to overlapping rules.

   EPA says there are about 307 operating MWC units at 128
plants, providing a total combustion capacity of 94,000
metric tons per day. It says that 179 MWCs will be affected
by the rule; about 100 are publicly owned. Costs for the
updated standard exceed those for the 1991 standard by $156
million for capital investment and by $43 million for annual
operations. Total capital costs from investments mandated by
both rules approach $780 million, or an added $13 per metric
ton of solid waste combusted.

   The agency says the benefits include annual emissions
greater than the 1991 rule: 3,000 fewer metric tons of SO2
and 4,000 fewer metric tons of hydrogen chloride. For most
categories there is less than a 10 percent improvement, but
for mercury, the new standard will eliminate 200 percent of
the amount removed by the 1991 rule. In total, the rule
expects to reduce emissions of several hazardous air
pollutants by about 110,000 tons per year, EPA says.

   If a facility combusts less than 10 metric tons per day
of solid waste, regardless of capacity, it is exempted from
the rule. Tire-burning facilities are exempted from the
performance standard but not recordkeeping requirements. And
small independent-power producers, cogeneration facilities
and metals recovery facilities are not subject to the MWC
standards.

   The regulation, simultaneously released as a direct final
rule and a proposed rule, takes effect Jan 29 unless
significant adverse comments are received by Jan. 18. For
more information call Walter Stevenson, emission standards
division, (919) 541-5264.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

OSHA PROVIDES GUIDANCE SOFTWARE
ON AGENCY'S ASBESTOS STANDARDS


   Customized guidance on compliance with Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards on
asbestos is available for free from the agency.

   The OSHA Asbestos Advisor - interactive computer software
that can provide building owners, contractors, consultants
and others with quick answers to technical questions about
complying with the standards - is available from the
Department of Labor electronic bulletin board, LABOR NEWS
and the Compliance Assistance Section of the OSHA home page
on the internet World Wide Web.

   "This powerful new tool is another example of how OSHA is
using technology to make compliance with worker protections
easier," said OSHA Administrator Joseph Dear. "Not only will
it help improve compliance, it should be a great help to
employers in reducing costs."

   In addition to being on the Internet, the Asbestos
Advisor will be added to the next edition of OSHA's CD-ROM,
which can be purchased through the Government Printing
Office.

   The program can be accessed through the OSHA web page at
http://www.osha.gov/. It also is available from LABOR NEWS
at (202) 219-4784. For more information, contact: Edward
Stern, (202) 219-7283.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

LBP STUDIES POINT TO LACK OF RESEARCH
ON DANGERS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS


   State and federal officials are not sufficiently
protecting construction workers from the hazardous effects
of lead-based paint (LBP), according to two studies. Each
report recommends officials pay greater attention to worker
safety as infrastructure repair work is performed on steel
structures and bridges.

   The two LBP studies were conducted separately by the
Alliance to End Childhood Lead Poisoning and by the New York
State Department of Health in conjunction with the Mount
Sinai Medical Center.

   Years of neglect and oversight have resulted in an
increased effort on infrastructure repair, Deborah Nagin,
industrial hygienist and researcher with the New York
Department of Health, told the annual convention of the
American Public Health Association (APHA). She said more
than 90 percent of these bridges and structures needing
repair are coated with LBP.

   In addition, state and federal authorities provide
minimal protection for workers who must repaint and repair
steel structures and bridges containing LBP, said Pierre
Erville, director of environmental and housing policy for
the Alliance to End Childhood Lead Poisoning, also speaking
at the APHA convention. The alliance is taking an active
interest in worker safety because it believes inadequate
safety practices on the job can spread lead contamination to
others.

Widespread State Effort Needed

   The two research efforts analyzed worker safety standards
in California, Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland,
Michigan, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Texas and Washington.
Erville's alliance targeted the scientific procedures used
to prevent lead exposure, the rate of infrastructure repair
and the state of current occupational lead poisoning
prevention procedures.

   Only five states - Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York,
New Jersey and Maryland - have passed specific legislation
to protect workers from lead exposure, Erville said. He
pointed specifically to New York transportation authorities,
who require detailed reports on medical testing for workers
exposed to lead from contract bidders and who also require a
lead exposure control plan. The result of these protections
are that contractors bidding on construction projects will
not attempt to underbid a contract and then make up for the
financial loss by ignoring health and risk prevention
programs.

   Because most states do not have specific legislative
requirements on worker protection, the U.S. Department of
Transportation should take the lead in educating and
training state authorities on the risks of lead exposure,
Erville said. One method he suggested is a system where
contractors who bid on projects gather for "pre-bidding"
conferences where the specific level of lead content is made
known to help contractors make accurate bids and prepare for
the necessary level of worker protection.

   Erville also called upon state officials to: explicitly
list lead poisoning prevention provisions in their
contracts; consult with industrial hygienists with lead
prevention expertise; and ensure a level of contractor
training and worker training programs are developed and
implemented. He also urged that contractors be required to
establish a worker blood-lead level reporting system to be
submitted to state officials.

   Following up on that point, Nagin said many of these
types of requirements already exist. The specifics of the
rules and regulations, however, vary widely among states,
she said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEAD-SAFE HOUSING
PUBLISHES SERIES OF LEAD HANDBOOKS


   The National Center for Lead-Safe Housing, Columbia, Md.,
has released several new publications dealing with lead
issues.

   Among the new reports: A seven-volume study on dust lead,
the Rochester Lead in Dust Study; a review of the scientific
evidence on interim controls, Does Residential Lead Paint
Hazard Control Work?; a guide explaining finance options,
Financing for Lead Hazard Control: Descriptions of Programs
that Work; a "white paper" on insurance-related issues,
Major Issues Affecting the Availability and Affordability of
Liability Insurance for Housing Which May Contain Lead-Based
Paint Hazard Exposures.

   To obtain copies of these reports or for more
information, contact: Evelyne Bloomer, National Center for
Lead-Safe Housing, 10227 Wincopin Circle, Suite 205,
Columbia, MD 21044; or call (410) 992-0712.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

HAZWASTE-BURNING CEMENT KILN WAS
SOURCE OF LEAD IN BLOOD, STUDY SAYS


   A hazardous waste-burning cement kiln in Alpena, Mich.,
contributed 75 percent of the lead found in the blood of
nearby residents, according to researchers with Rutgers
University.

   In 18 of the 24 residents living near Lafarge Corp. and
whose blood was sampled, the levels of lead in blood were
the result of exposure from the cement kiln dust. The blood-
lead levels in most of the residents were under the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention's warning level of 10
micrograms per deciliter (ug/dl), though one resident showed
blood-lead levels of 11.87 ug/dl.

   The researchers said they aimed to trace where the lead
came from rather than the levels of lead the exposure
caused. The Association for Responsible Thermal Treatment -
a trade group of commercial hazardous waste incinerators who
compete with cement kilns in the waste burning market -
sponsored the study, performed by Gene Hall in Rutger's
chemistry department.

Seven Households Sampled

   The researchers used samples of people living in seven
households close to the Lafarge facility, with one other
household located farther away from the plant used as a
control. The study also collected samples of cement kiln
dust at Lafarge and samples of paint, tap water and house
dust from the sample households.

   Currently, cement kiln operators are allowed to store
piles of dust anywhere on their property. The Rutgers
conclusions could take on added importance as EPA still is
contemplating how and if cement kiln dust will be regulated.
In 1994, EPA sent a report to Congress recommending that in
some circumstances, cement kiln dust could be regulated
under Subtitle C regulations in the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA).

   Most hazardous waste incinerators are fully permitted
under RCRA, with incinerator ash considered a hazardous
waste to be disposed of in Subtitle C landfills with triple
liners, ground water monitoring requirements and leachate
controls. EPA currently is working to unify emission limits
for hazardous waste incinerators and boilers and industrial
furnaces, which include cement kilns. A proposed rule that
accomplishes such a goal now is being reviewed by the White
House Office of Management and Budget.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

BALTIMORE RESIDENTS FILE LAWSUIT OVER
FORTHCOMING LEAD-PAINT REGULATIONS


   Three Baltimore residents filed a class action suit this
month in a challenge against Maryland state lead-paint
regulations slated to take effect next month. The suit
argues the regulation favors landlords and will result in
child poisoning.

   The suit calls for an injunction prohibiting the Maryland
Department of the Environment from implementing and
enforcing its lead-paint removal and cleanup regulations,
which were adopted in November 1994 and scheduled to begin
Feb. 24. When passed, the law sought to prevent childhood
lead poisoning while being sensitive to the state's
decreasing supply of affordable housing. Disputes and
disagreements between childrens' advocates and property
owner representatives over how to implement the bill have
stalled it thus far.

   Joseph Espo, an attorney to the tenants who filed the
suit, said the way the forthcoming law is structured,
landlords would get immunity from lawsuits in the event a
child was poisoned in the lead abatement effort. Officials
from the Maryland Department of the Environment and the
Property Owners Association of Greater Baltimore declined to
comment on the suit. D. Robert Enten, with the Property
Owners Association, did say, however, that the legislation
in question seeks to strike a balance between the business
community, the maintenance of affordable housing and the
prevention of child lead poisoning.

   Landlords are willing to combat the lead problem, but
they also want protection from increasing numbers of
lawsuits filed by former tenants who claim their children
were poisoned. The property owners say this litigation will
soon drive them out of business with any controls.

   Under the bill, owners of pre-1950 rental housing must
reduce lead-poisoning risks on their properties by removing
and repainting surfaces that are flaking and peeling paint.
In return, the landlords would be immune from lawsuits if
any children living on the property become poisoned.

   The bill require landlords to follow some safety
precautions during abatement, and tenants may be forced to
vacate the unit while work is done. At issue, however, are
exemptions to the safety requirements when doing electrical
or plumbing work, or if repairs are performed on a painted
space in a room less than 25 square feet.
Fat Intake Could Increase Blood-Lead
Absorption in Children, Study Shows

   Children exposed to lead will absorb less of it if they
eat less fat, a new study suggests. Certain nutrients have
long been known to affect the rate at which the body takes
up lead, which can retard children's development, lower
their IQs and damage their hearing, according to
researchers.

   In a study of 296 inner-city preschoolers, 9 months to 3
years old, the researchers found that those with high levels
of fat in their diet were more likely to have dangerous
levels of lead in their blood. Dietary calcium and iron are
known to block lead absorption, but the effects of many
other nutrients have not been explored. The researchers also
learned that poor children are the most likely to be
exposed.

   The researchers said if further study supports their
findings, it "would further strengthen the recommendation of
a low-fat diet as a healthy one for children." Federal
health officials recommend no restrictions on fats for
children under 2 because it might harm their growth.

   Lead levels among the children ranged from 1 to 55
micrograms per tenth of a liter of blood, and averaged about
11. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says
anything above 10 can cause lead poisoning in children. The
quantities of fat in the children's diets were not
estimated; the researchers used only relative intakes based
on questions asked of parents.

Calories May Increase Absorption

   The study also found that higher levels of calories - not
just fat - were associated with higher lead absorption.
However, this point is disputed by a longtime lead
researcher, who expressed doubt that higher calorie intake
is linked to higher lead absorption.

   Kim Dietrich, a developmental psychologist at the
University of Cincinnati School of Medicine who has studied
lead for 15 years, said lead is more readily absorbed on an
empty stomach. That is one reason doctors see higher lead
levels among poor children, he said. He agreed, however,
that higher fat consumption is related to higher lead
levels, possibly because the fat increases absorption of
lead in the intestine.

   The research was led by Susan Lucas of the Department of
Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine at the University of
Maryland School of Medicine. The findings are reported in
the January issue of the journal Pediatrics, published by
the American Academy of Pediatrics.

   Lucas warned children can be exposed to lead through
dust, dirt and drinking water, along with toys and houses
painted before 1975, the last year lead-based paint was
used. Water can be contaminated if it flows through lead
pipes, and children may eat paint flakes or inhale or lick
lead dust, which tastes sweet.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

BLOOD-LEAD MONITOR IN CONNECTICUT
MAY BE APPLIED WITHIN OTHER STATES


   A program to monitor levels of lead in blood in
Connecticut that also includes worker protection measures
has been so successful in lowering blood-lead levels that
efforts are underway to expand the program to other states,
according to a report in the Dec. 15 issue of Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, published by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

   The program, the Connecticut Road Industry Surveillance
Project (CRISP), began in 1990 in an effort to reduce lead
exposure, contamination and toxicity in bridge workers in
the state. In order to comply with the program, contracts
must carry health and safety language, and medical
management of workers with centralized data reporting and
intervention is required.

   The CDC report shows, by contrast, that blood-lead levels
continue to afflict bridge workers even in states with
regulatory lead requirements and workplace safety and health
standards. Among bridge workers from eight states, a quarter
had levels of blood lead above 40 micrograms of lead per
deciliter of blood.

   Connecticut, however, had only 2 percent of workers with
elevated blood-lead levels, which owes to the state's worker
protection measures incorporated into road construction
contracts, the CDC report said.
THANKS FOR STAYING IN TOUCH: Asbestos and Lead Abatement
Report appreciates comments, news and story ideas from
readers. Contact: Erich Shea, Editor, Business Publishers
Inc., 951 Pershing Dr., Silver Spring, MD 20910-4464, (301)
587-6793, ext. 3050; fax: (301) 587-1081.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

DAMNING DOCUMENTS SINK OCF
AS FIRM'S APPEAL FALLS SHORT


   Documents are critical to successful litigation against
asbestos manufacturers. The paper trail often leads to the
all-important answers to the questions of what did the
company know of the dangers of their product and when they
knew it.

   A case in point concerns asbestos giant Owens-Corning
Fiberglass Corp. (OCF), which recently appealed a judgment
by arguing in vain that the trial court should have excluded
damaging documents about the company. Three men who suffered
asbestos-related diseases after exposure to OCF products
received a total of $3 million in compensatory damages and
$500,000 each in punitive damages due to the company's
failure to warn them of asbestos' hazards.

   The documents that led to the verdict included since-
declassified Navy reports from World War II detailing the
dangers of asbestos as well as internal OCF communications.
In its appeal, OCF said the court improperly admitted these
documents. OCF argued the Navy reports should have been
excluded from trial because - as classified documents - the
company could not have known the findings they contained.

   As for the company memoranda, OCF said the plaintiffs had
altered their copies to highlight damaging statements to
inflame the jury. However, the Texas Court of Appeals in
Houston Jan. 4 rejected OCF's argument, saying the company
had access to the same information in the Navy reports and
knew the contents of its own corporate memoranda.

Navy Documents Admitted

   The court also noted that, in a failure-to-warn case,
what the company knows of its product's dangers is sometimes
less relevant than what other experts in the field know. "It
does not matter whether a manufacturer was aware of
information regarding the dangers of asbestos use at the
time of exposure and marketing because an asbestos
manufacturer is charged with the duty to know the dangers of
asbestos products," the court ruled. "If the dangers of
asbestos were known by other manufacturers or by the Navy at
or before the time of the plaintiffs' exposure, the same
risks were scientifically discoverable by OCF."

   In any event, the internal OCF documents introduced at
trial indicated OCF had information - at about the same time
the Navy did - on the hazards of asbestos, the court said.
"As early as the 1940s, OCF had in its files documentation
about shipyard insulation workers who had developed
asbestosis," the court said. "It had copies of public health
bulletins about the effect of inhalation of asbestos dust.
In letters to OCF, doctors conducting tests on Fiberglass
repeatedly made reference to the dangers of asbestos."

   OCF cited markings on the plaintiff's exhibit and argued
the trial court had improperly admitted into evidence
doctored copies. However, the Texas appeals court agreed
with the trial court that the markings - if indeed the
plaintiff made them - were harmless.

Court Admits Photocopies

   "The documents about which OCF complains are
photocopies," the appeals court said. "OCF does not assert
that the photocopies do not accurately reproduce the
originals; instead, it complains about marks made on
duplicates after reproduction .... However, we have reviewed
the documents and we agree that the markings on the
documents are not significant."

   The Navy report and OCF documents were only a sampling of
the documents the plaintiffs brought to trial on asbestos.
Much of the damning evidence that had been allowed at trial
was struck from the record before jury deliberations. For
example, the plaintiffs introduced the testimony of a Dr.
Irving Selikoff at an Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) hearing in 1984. "The asbestos disease
disaster which we now face largely unsuccessfully bears
witness to our failures," Selikoff said. "We have
consistently greatly underestimated or ignored warnings of
disease and death."

   Saying the testimony should have been excluded as
hearsay, the trial judge told the jury to disregard
Selikoff's testimony before OSHA. OCF urged the judge to
declare a mistrial, arguing there was no way for the jury to
ignore such testimony. The judge rejected the company's
request, and the appeals court agreed that the instruction
to the jury to ignore the testimony was sufficient. [Owens-
Corning Fiberglass Corp. v. Malone, 1996 WL 3563
(Tex.App.-Hous., 1 Dist.)]




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

NEWSBRIEFS


   Paint Contamination Control - The Institute of
Environmental Sciences seeks voting members for Working
Group (WG-029) in its Contamination Control Division, which
is writing a Recommended Practice (RP) on "Contamination
Control Considerations in Paint Spray Applications." A
"home-stretch" draft will be issued for discussion at the
institute's annual technical meeting May 12-17, in Orlando,
Fla. The RP is intended to provide guidelines for controlled
paint spray environments and related operations. The goal is
to establish a uniform basis for describing, procuring,
operating and testing as these relate to paint and coatings,
air handling, surface cleaning and preparation, paint-
related consumables, personnel garment systems and related
laundering, facility cleaning, paint-delivery systems, and
environmental considerations. "The diversification of
backgrounds and experience in the working group membership
has been a key element," said Charles Berndt, working group
chair. "The cross-pollination of ideas that are brought to
the table...has led to the quick progress on this RP." For
more information, call the Institute of Environmental
Sciences, (708) 255-1561.


   Risky Appointment - S. Zack Mansdorf, Ph.D, president-
elect of the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA)
has been selected as the director of Liberty International
Risk Services for Liberty International, a subsidiary of
Liberty Mutual Group, in Boston. As director, Mansdorf's
responsibilities involve development of technical services,
technology transfer and worldwide client relations. Mansdorf
will begin his tenure as AIHA president in May at the
American Industrial Hygiene Conference and Exposition, which
is co-sponsored by AIHA. Mansdorf also has held industrial
hygiene positions with the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, and the
Midwest Research Institute. For more information, call
Christine Feheley, (703) 849-8888.


   Demolishing Suit - A couple living in Arapahoe County,
Colo., have filed a lawsuit in district court saying
asbestos particles were blown over their home during
demolition of a building located next to them. Kathleen
Collins and Theodore Singer named FTSC Partnership,
developer of the Polo Reserve now being constructed in place
of the building; Randall & Blake Inc., the demolition firm;
and the city of Littleton, Colo., which the suit says
permitted the demolition. Singer and Collins argue in their
suit that a crew demolished the building in June during
windy weather. The incident threatened the couple's health
and caused emotional distress, the suit said.


   Lead Contract Award - Versar Inc., Sprinfield, Va., was
awarded with three contracts with a combined potential value
of $1.5 million. The contracts include a $600,000 two-year
contract with the Federal Highway Administration to assess
containment efficiency in environmental exposure from lead
paint removal and maintenance on bridges. The second
contract, worth $700,000, is to provide a variety of
infrastructure deism services to Leigh City, Utah. The third
contract, for $100,000, was with the state of California's
Division of State Architect Seismic upgrade program.


   Quality Control - The American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) is preparing to release a draft standard
for institutions to use for certifying environmental
professionals. Once the standard is approved, only about 25
percent of the nation's approximately 130 credentialing
institutions are expected to pass muster. The credentialing
guidelines, the result of nearly two years of work, will be
circulated to members of ASTM's subcommittee on
environmental credentialing and ultimately to all ASTM
members. The model for the standards effort is the Council
of Engineering and Scientific Study Boards, said Anthony
Buonicore, chairman of the task force developing the
standards. The draft standard states it "does not propose to
address any specific certification program for environmental
professionals." It does, however, specify criteria for
credentialing organizations. Contact: ASTM, (215) 299-5400.


   Directory - The National Conference of State Legislators
(NCSL) has issued a new listing of who in the states is
leading various lead-poisoning prevention activities. Lead
Poisoning Prevention: Directory of State Contacts costs $20
plus shipping, and can be ordered through NCSL's Marketing
Department: (303) 830-2200.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

CONTRACTS


   92nd Contracting Squadron, Fairchild Air Force Base,
Wash., seeks contractor for demolition of two buildings and
off-base disposal. Requirements for the removal and disposal
of asbestos and lead materials will be included in the
solicitation. SOL F4561396B0007. Contact: Lt. Christopher
McMahon, (509) 247-4871.

   U.S. Coast Guard, Civil Engineering Unit, Miami, seeks
contractor to furnish all labor, tools, equipment and
material for removal and disposal of existing built-up roof
system, which includes removal and disposal of asbestos-
containing roof flashing. SOL DTCG82-96-B-HAX024. Contact:
Shirley Clayton, (205) 536-4133.

   Commanding Officer, Naval Facilities Engineering Command,
North Charleston, S.C., seeks contractor for repairs to
Marine Corps reserve center in Montgomery, Ala. Contract
calls for some removal of asbestos-containing exterior
siding and removal of lead-based paint. SOL N62467-94-B-
1122. For more information, call (803) 820-5853.

   Commanding Officer, NAVFAC Contracts Office, Port
Hueneme, Calif., seeks contractor to demolish asbestos-
containing material and boiler at Building 19. SOL N47408-
96-Q-5533. Contact: Christine Taborelli, (805) 982-5058.

   Officer in Charge of Construction, NAS, Jacksonville,
Fla., seeks contractor to renovate conference space and
Building 11 at the Naval Air Station. The work includes
asbestos abatement and interior demolition. SOL N62467-95-B-
2512. For more information, call (904) 772-5574.

   Federal Correctional Institution, Fort Dix, N.J., seeks
contractor for asbestos abatement of approximately 4,700
square feet of tile. SOL RFQ 441-0001. Contact: Debbie Tuno,
(609) 723-1100.

   ROICC, NAVFAC Contracts, NETC, Newport, R.I., seeks
contractor for interior demolition and removal of lead-
containing paint and asbestos. SOL N62472-96-B-6911. For
information, write to: Ms. East, ROICC, NAVFAC Contracts,
Building 1, Simonpietri Dr., Newport, RI 02841-1712. No
phone number listed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev27.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 12, 1996

CALENDAR


   Feb. 20, Jersey City, N.J., Lead Abatement Budgeting and
Estimating Course, sponsored by the Environmental Management
Training Services. Call: (201) 798-3391.

   March 11-13, Pittsburgh, The Industrial Lead Paint
Abatement and Removal Conference. Conference is sponsored by
the Steel Structures Painting Council. Call: (412) 687-1113.

   May 7-11, Munich, Germany, IFAT'96, the 11th
International Trade Fair for Waste Water and Waste Disposal.
Conference will focus on decontamination of old sites. For
more information, call (089) 51 07-0.

   Oct. 6-8, Baltimore, IAQ '96: Paths to Better Building
Environments, sponsored by the American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers Inc. For more
information, call ASHRAE at (404) 636-8400.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>