
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B16-50</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000321-B004-255</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/budget/budget6.html 205.168.79.27 19970114195434 text/html 15550
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:54:38 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:46:06 GMT
Content-length: 15375
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>


<HEAD>


<title>DOE EREN - Improving America's Built
Environment</title>


</HEAD>


<BODY bgcolor="#FFFFFF" vlink="#843131" text="#000000"
link="#323294">


<center>


<IMG SRC="/picts/eren.gif"></a>


<P>


<H1>"Improving America's Built Environment"</H1>


<P>


<IMG SRC="/picts/topbar.gif">


</center>


<P>


<BR>


<P>


<b>Office of Building Technology, State and Community
Programs</b>


<P>


<I>Outside Chicago, the future of American homebuilding is
taking shape in a 


community called Prairie Crossing.  Designers, builders,
developers, financiers, 


material suppliers and household equipment manufacturers are
working together to 


build 300 homes that are much more energy efficient than
conventional houses in the 


Chicago area.  Built by Shaw Homes, these houses will reduce
energy use by 19% 


over Shaw's current practice in Prairie Crossing, which is
already 36% better than the 


Chicago area's current codes.   Energy savings are only one
of the benefits.  The cost 


of constructing the new houses will be reduced by $1,000.  
They also feature 


improved indoor air quality, enhanced health and comfort for
occupants, greater 


durability and reduced construction wastes.   The Chicago
team is one of four 


sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy under its
Building America Program.  


The goal is to show how America's housing stock can become
more affordable and 


more resource efficient when the diverse professions
involved in homebuilding work 


together in a "systems engineering" approach.  Building
America promises to 


revolutionize the home building industry.</I>


<P>


America's buildings have an extraordinary impact on our
lives.   They affect the health 


of the economy:  Residential and commercial buildings use
more than one third of all 


the energy  consumed in the U.S., at a cost of $200 billion
each year.   They affect the 


environment:  The energy used in U.S. buildings is
responsible for as much 


greenhouse gas emissions as the total carbon emissions of
Japan and the United 


Kingdom combined.   They have an impact on poverty: 
Families earning less than 


150% of the poverty level typically spend as much as 15% of
their income on energy 


compared to less than 4% for other families.


<P>


New technologies and new design and construction practices
can make buildings 


healthier, cleaner and more efficient.  But bringing these
new technologies to the U.S. 


building industry is difficult.  The industry invests
relatively little in research and 


development.  One reason is that it consists of a large
number of small builders, 


architects, suppliers and manufacturers of building
equipment and appliances.  DOE's 


buildings programs are designed to encourage close
collaboration among these 


professions.


<P>


DOE's buildings programs focus on three areas: commercial
buildings, residential 


buildings, and building equipment and appliances.   In each
of these, DOE invests to  


capture near-term energy savings as well as save energy in
the longer term.  


<P>


<B>Fiscal Year 1997 Highlights</B>


<P>


<I>Energy for Today</I>


<P>


The Office works to capture the many opportunities for
near-term energy savings in 


the building sector.


<P>


<B>Residential Buildings</B>


<P>


The<B> Weatherization Assistance Program</B> partners with
states and 


local service organizations to lower the energy costs of
residences occupied by low-


income people, particularly the elderly, the handicapped and
families with children.   


More than 4.4 million homes have been weatherized under this
program.


<P>


The typical family served by the program earns less than
$8,000 a year, and realizes 


an 18%  reduction in heating costs.   Each million dollars
invested in the program 


directly or indirectly supports 74 jobs.   DOE funding has
encouraged state and local 


weatherization agencies to leverage more than $200 million
annually from other 


sources. 


<P>


The <B>Affordable Homes for Low-Income Housing Program
</B>helps develop 


energy efficient design guidelines for new low-income
housing and rehabilitated 


public housing.   The program offers technical assistance to
publicly owned and 


assisted housing agencies and non-profit housing providers,
including Habitat for 


Humanity.   Its goal is to achieve energy efficiency gains
of 30%.


<P>


The <B>Home Energy Rating Systems (HERS) Program </B>
supports pilot efforts 


by states to implement home rating systems linked to energy
efficient financing.   


Home Energy Rating Systems demonstrate the value of energy
efficiency to lenders, 


and help homeowners recover that value in the housing
market.


<P>


<B>Commercial Buildings</B>


<P>


The Office's flagship program for retrofitting existing
commercial buildings is 


<B>Rebuild America</B>.   Initiated in 1995, it has created
partnerships among 


community and regional organizations, private businesses,
utilities and technical 


experts to renovate commercial and multi-family residential
buildings.


<P>


In partnership with the U.S. Conference of Mayors,  with
non-profit organizations in 


Boston, Kansas City, and San Francisco, and with the states
of Colorado, Wisconsin 


and Tennessee, the program will reduce operating costs for
building owners and 


tenants by $650 million annually within the next five years,
while increasing the 


comfort of the tenants and reducing air pollution.  The
program has attracted a 


private-to-DOE funding ratio of 70:1.


<P>


<B>Appliances and Building Equipment</B>


<P>


The <B>Technology Introduction Partnership Program</B> works
with appliance 


retailers, manufacturers, and other organizations to
accelerate the commercialization 


of efficient appliances and equipment.   Examples include
working with major hotel 


and motel chains to improve the efficiency of the best
available packaged terminal air 


conditioners.     The program also includes a collaborative
effort involving 40 utilities 


to produce coordinated rebate and information programs that
help customers 


purchase  high-efficiency heating, ventilating and air
conditioning equipment.


<P>


The <B>Lighting and Appliance Standards Program </B>uses an
analysis-based 


process to develop energy efficiency standards.   In Fiscal
Year 1997, the program will 


continue improving this process for increased and earlier
participation by 


stakeholders, and for more thorough economic analysis.   The
program will also 


develop new analytical methods and improved data collection
for all lighting and 


appliance rulemaking.   It will review efficiency test
procedures and revise them to 


ensure that innovative designs can be tested fairly.


<P>


The <B>Solar Buildings Appliances Research and Development
Program</B>, 


through support to the Utility Solar Hot Water Consortium,
has achieved 20-30% 


increases in market penetration for solar domestic hot water
systems with 15-20% 


reductions in installed costs.   The next generation
prototype of equipment will have 


25-40% increases in cost-effectiveness.


<P>


<B>State and Municipal Programs</B>


<P>


The <B>State Energy Program</B> consolidates two previous
grant programs--the 


Institutional Conservation Program and State Energy
Conservation Program--giving 


states greater flexibility to address their own energy
problems.   The program helps 


states, territories and the District of Columbia maintain
their capacity to plan and 


implement their own programs, respond to energy emergencies,
leverage other 


resources and enter into technology deployment and related
partnerships with DOE 


and private partners.   The program will support
approximately 6,300 jobs in Fiscal 


Year 1997.


<P>


The <B>Municipal Energy Management Program </B>supports
local government 


projects that help communities become more energy efficient
and more economically 


and environmentally sustainable.   Reduced energy costs
allow cities to cut taxes or 


devote tax resources to other needs.


<P>


<I>Energy for Tomorrow</I>


<P>


The Office also operates programs designed to develop
advanced technologies and 


construction practices that will produce greater benefits in
the future.


<P>


<B>Residential Buildings</B>


<P>


The <B>Building America Program</B> creates industry
consortia to 


develop a systems engineering approach to work together to
produce more efficient 


and affordable housing and faster, less wasteful
construction practices.   The first 


prototype of the Integrated Building and Construction
Solutions consortium has 


achieved a 40% reduction in annual energy use.


<P>


The <B>Exemplary Residential Buildings Program</B> advances
the contribution 


of passive solar design in combination with energy
efficiency, to provide up to 75% of 


the heating, cooling and lighting requirements in new
buildings with little or no 


increase in construction cost.


<P>


The <B>Building Standards and Guidelines Program</B>
provides technical and 


financial help to states to upgrade and implement their
residential and commercial 


building energy codes to eliminate inefficient design and
construction practices.   The 


program also helps upgrade voluntary model codes and
develops energy efficiency 


codes for Federal buildings.   About 20 grants to states
will be provided in 1997.


<P>


<B>Commercial Buildings</B>


<P>


The <B>Design for Best Practices Program </B>develops design
tools that 


provide information  on energy efficiency at each phase of
the building life cycle to 


help architects, builders, owners and operators optimize
efficiency investments.


<P>


Research on <B>Building Materials and Structures</B>
develops environmentally  


benign materials, including advanced insulation and building
envelopes, to 


significantly lower  heating and cooling demands.


<P>


<B>Windows and Glazing</B> research focuses on
electrochromic and 


"superwindow" technologies, including government-industry
partnerships to 


commercialize electrochromic windows by 1999, reducing
energy loss through 


windows by 20%.


<P>


<B>Appliances and Building Equipment</B>


<P>


The <B>Lighting Research Program </B> works with industry to
develop improved 


lighting  systems and applications that will reduce energy
use by 50%.


<P>


<B>Space Conditioning Research and Development</B>, in
partnership with 


industry, is  developing advanced technology to enable the
highly efficient use of 


natural gas in heating and cooling.   The generator-absorber
heat exchange (GAX) 


cycle heat pump developed by this program will be introduced
to the market in 


1999.


<P>


The <B>Advanced Refrigeration Systems Program</B> conducts
applied research 


to develop highly energy-efficient heat pump and
refrigeration technology using 


refrigerants that don't deplete the earth's ozone layer.


<P>


<B>Benefits</B>


<P>


<B>Energy Savings:</B> 0.6 quadrillion BTUs per year by
2000, 2.9 quadrillion 


BTUs by 2010.


<P>


<B>Cost Savings</B>:  $5 billion per year by 2000 and $23
billion by 2010.


<P>


<B>Pollution Prevention</B>:  13 million metric tons of
carbon equivalent by 2000, 58 million by 2010.


<P>


<B>Market Profile</B>


<P>


<MENU><LI>Buildings use 36% of America's energy and 66% of
its electricity.  <br>


<LI>The trend for energy use is upward.   Between 1995 and
2015, America will add an 


estimated 24 million households and 17 billion square feet
of commercial floor 


space.   This could  increase energy use by 5.7 quadrillion
BTUs--equivalent to the 


<I>total</I> energy use of Virginia and Ohio.<br>


<LI>The potential for savings is great.   A 30% improvement
in U.S. building efficiency 


would reduce consumer costs by approximately $100
billion.<br>


<LI>Many buildings were built long ago and contain obsolete
energy systems.   About 


80% of our commercial buildings were constructed prior to
1979.<br>


<LI>In new construction, the consequences of energy-related
decisions last a long time.   


The <I>median</I> lifetime for commercial buildings is
between 60 and 90 


years.<br>


<LI>Nearly 28 million households are eligible for DOE's
Weatherization Assistance 


Program.  These households typically have incomes below
$8,000 and spend a 


disproportionate share of that income on energy.


</MENU>


<P>


<table border=1 width=100% cellpadding=0>


<caption><b>Office of Buildings, State and Local Programs
($000)</b></caption>


<tr><TH width=40%>Program<TH width=15%>FY
1995<br>Appropriation<TH width=15%>FY
1996<br>Appropriation<TH width=15%>FY 1997<br>Request<TH
width=15%>Change<br>1996-1997</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Residential Buildings<TD width=15%
align=right>$7,194<TD width=15% align=right>$6,674<TD
width=15% align=right>$11,662<TD width=15%
align=right>$4,988</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Commercial Buildings<TD width=15%
align=right>8,950<TD width=15% align=right>10,719<TD
width=15% align=right>16,350<TD width=15%
align=right>5,631</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Design for Best Practices<TD width=15%
align=right>4,827<TD width=15% align=right>4,444<TD
width=15% align=right>8,739<TD width=15%
align=right>4,295</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Space Conditioning R&D<TD width=15%
align=right>13,107<TD width=15% align=right>9,895<TD
width=15% align=right>12,313<TD width=15%
align=right>2,418</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Lighting and Appliance R&D<TD width=15%
align=right>15,949<TD width=15% align=right>9,173<TD
width=15% align=right>20,800<TD width=15%
align=right>11,627</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Materials and Structures R&D<TD width=15%
align=right>3,687<TD width=15% align=right>3,168<TD
width=15% align=right>3,900<TD width=15%
align=right>732</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Windows and Glazing R&D<TD width=15%
align=right>4,967<TD width=15% align=right>5,936<TD
width=15% align=right>9,170<TD width=15%
align=right>3,234</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Codes and Standards<TD width=15%
align=right>21,259<TD width=15% align=right>14,231<TD
width=15% align=right>23,850<TD width=15%
align=right>9,619</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Weatherization Assistance<TD width=15%
align=right>214,871<TD width=15% align=right>111,764<TD
width=15% align=right>155,500<TD width=15%
align=right>43,736</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>State Energy Program<TD width=15%
align=right>52,997<TD width=15% align=right>25,936<TD
width=15% align=right>38,400<TD width=15%
align=right>12,464</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Municipal Energy Mgmt.<TD width=15%
align=right>1,824<TD width=15% align=right>1,804<TD
width=15% align=right>1,600<TD width=15%
align=right>(204)</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%>Management<TD width=15%
align=right>17,869<TD width=15% align=right>13,724<TD
width=15% align=right>21,787<TD width=15%
align=right>8,063</tr>


<tr><TD width=40%><B>TOTAL</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$367,502</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$217,468</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$324,071</b><TD width=15%
align=right><b>$106,603</b></tr>


</table>


<p>


<IMG SRC="/picts/erenbar.gif">
<center>
<pre>
</pre>
<p>
<H4>Return to <A HREF="/">EREN Home Page <IMG ALIGN=bot
SRC="/picts/return1.gif" ></A></H4>
<p>
<IMG SRC="/picts/erenbar.gif">
</center>
<P>

Please send comments to:<br>


<A
HREF="mailto:webmaster.eren@nrel.gov">webmaster.eren@nrel.gov</A>


<P>


</BODY>


</HTML>


</DOC>