
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B02-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B001-348</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/appc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024349 text/html 22824
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:40 GMT
Content-length: 22606
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Perspectives On Defining Substance Abuse</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_tech_for_understand_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="otatoc.htm">Technologies for Understanding</a> and
Preventing Substance Abuse and Addiction</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="54150" -->

<p><b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b></p>

<p><b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p><b>APPENDIX C: </b></p>

<p><b>PERSPECTIVES ON DEFINING SUBSTANCE ABUSE </b></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuse-related
issues include, mass communications, criminal justice, medicine,
and public health. These entities often operate independently of
one another and use substantially different terms when describing
the use of illicit substances or the illegal use of licit
substances. </p>

<p>MASS COMMUNICATIONS </p>

<p>The traditional realm of mass communications includes
television, radio, and popular journals and newspapers. Within
these media, the term substance abuse has become a catch-all
phrase, with no clear boundaries. Much of the general public has
become familiar with the term substance abuse within this
ambiguous context. </p>

<p>CRIMINAL JUSTICE </p>

<p>While it is well-known that many crimes are committed by
persons with substance use disorders and that these disorders can
be major contributors to their crimes, there is no systematic
policy within the criminal justice system for the evaluation of
these disorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state,
or local, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicit
substance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner,
is considered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitative
analyses including blood, urine, and breath tests can be
performed to detect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presence
of illicit substances. The Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is
0.10 grams/deciliter for all States excluding Oregon, California,
Utah, Vermont, and Maine, where the level is 0.08
grams/deciliter. As of December 1992, 15 states had lower BAC
levels for youthful offenders charged with driving while
intoxicated. These levels range from 0.00-0.02 grams/deciliter,
which is considered &quot;zero tolerance,&quot; up to 0.04
grams/deciliter (6). The alcohol breath test, while a different
procedure from the BAC, converts the results into BAC units.
Thus, the levels of intoxication for BAC and breath test are
identical. </p>

<p>However, there are limitations to these analyses. In some
jurisdictions, these tests can be performed only with the written
consent of the person. In others, the urine test measures the
presence of only one or two drugs rather than looking for the
entire range of abusable substances. </p>

<p>Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation, there is
little use of psychological screening examinations or structured
interviews to determine the level and severity of use, abuse, or
dependence. </p>

<p>PUBLIC HEALTH </p>

<p>The traditional public health model incorporates the host-
agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has an
individual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential use
and/or harmful use of a substance. </p>

<p>Host factors may include possible genetic, psychological, and
biological susceptibility. Agent factors incorporate the
substance's abuse liability capacity, as well as how the
substance is marketed. Lastly, environmental factors encompass
not only the availability of the substance, but the social,
cultural, political, and economic climate as well (3,4). </p>

<p>Over the past 20 years, professionals within the field of
public health have attempted to deemphasize the strict medical
concept of substance abuse. Attention had previously focused
almost exclusively on individual drug use patterns, rather than
featuring the diverse problems of drug, alcohol, and tobacco use
as being intimately tied into communities and society as a whole.
</p>

<p>Even the term &quot;substance abuse&quot; has come under
scrutiny. While the word &quot;substance&quot; may at first
appear quite generic, in many fields, this term has come to
incorrectly infer illicit drug use--reinforcing the misperception
of many individuals that alcohol and tobacco are not drugs.
&quot;Abuse&quot; generally denotes the more severe forms of
addiction. In reality, there is a continuum that begins with
initial drug use and may progress to harmful use and addiction,
with various problems present along the spectrum. In lieu of the
term &quot;abuse,&quot; public health professionals prefer terms
such as &quot;alcohol and drug problems&quot; or the
&quot;harmful/hazardous use&quot; of a drug. </p>

<p>The focus of the public health perspective is to understand
the importance social norms, environment, and availability play
in the shaping of alcohol- and drug-related problems both on an
individual and societal level. </p>

<p>MEDICAL </p>

<p>Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently cited
texts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence are
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)
issued by the American Psychiatric Association and the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) published by the
World Health Organization (WHO). Each successive version of the
DSM and ICD has been given a number signifying its order in the
overall sequence of manuals; DSM uses Roman numerals and ICD uses
ordinary numbers. The newest version of ICD, ICD-10, was
published in 1992. The current version of DSM is the Third
Edition- Revised (DSM-III-R), which will shortly be superseded by
DSM-IV. </p>

<p>ICD </p>

<p>While the current ICD and DSM definitions of substance
dependence are nearly identical, the two manuals differ sharply
on the concepts of abuse, which ICD classifies as harmful use. </p>

<p>The ICD manual is intended to be used on an international
basis, and the socially defined &quot;American&quot; criteria
present in the DSM manual for substance abuse cannot be
adequately transferred to a wide range of cultures. The current
ICD-10 category of harmful use, while applicable
cross-culturally, is limited to: &quot;A pattern of psychoactive
substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration
of injected drugs) or mental ( e.g.,episodes of depressive
disorder secondary to heavy consumption of alcohol).&quot; </p>

<p>DSM </p>

<p>In the early 1950s the first DSM manual grouped alcohol and
drug use disorders under the broad category of &quot;Sociopathic
Personality Disturbances.&quot; At that time, a substance use
disorder was considered a moral weakness or the manifestation of
a &quot;deeper&quot; psychological problem, rather than a
disorder in-and-of itself with social, psychological, and perhaps
even genetic determinants. </p>

<p>Throughout the 1970s and 1980s clinical research identified
the need for separate categories for substance use disorders. The
DSM-III manual, in 1980, was the first manual in this series to
clearly identify substance abuse and dependence as pathological
conditions different from substance use alone. DSM-III also
alluded to the fact that social and cultural factors are
contributors to the onset and continuation of abuse and
dependence. The DSM-III definition of dependence emphasized
tolerance (needing to take much higher doses of the substance to
obtain the same effect) and withdrawal (having a distinct pattern
of physiological arousal upon abrupt discontinuation or reduction
in dosage), and required the presence of one or both of these
phenomena to make a dependence diagnosis. Substance abuse was
defined as problematic use with social or occupational
impairment, but with the absence of significant tolerance and/or
withdrawal. In both disorders, impairment in social and
occupational function was a prominent aspect of the definitions,
creating a significant overlap between the criteria for substance
abuse and dependence. In 1987, DSM-III was revised (DSM-III-R) to
give the behavioral aspects of substance use disorders equal
weight to the physiological components. </p>

<p>This shift away from the physiological to the behavioral
elements of dependence was strongly influenced by the work of
researchers Edwards and Gross, who had extensively studied
persons with alcohol problems. These researchers conceptualized
alcohol dependence as a syndrome of graded severity that involved
an interconnected complex of behavioral, psychological, and
physiological elements associated with loss of control over
alcohol consumption. </p>

<p>Contributing to the emphasis on behavioral aspects of
dependence was work by Brady, Thompson, and others who had shown
that animals can be taught to self-administer substances of
abuse. Once taught, it was observed that most animals will expend
tremendous amounts of energy to obtain additional doses and that
this &quot;drug-seeking behavior&quot; is very difficult to
extinguish. Efforts to repeat drug self- administration were
especially prominent if the experimental drug was one with a high
abuse liability such as morphine, methamphetamine, or
(especially) cocaine and was difficult to extinguish. </p>

<p>This body of work was among the first in a line of
investigation studying the behavioral aspects of drugs. This
field of research became known as &quot;behavioral
pharmacology&quot; and was strengthened by additional studies by
Olds and others. </p>

<p>Thus, both the work of Edwards and Gross, that of behavioral
pharmacologists, and of basic scientists pointed toward the
presence of a definable and independent syndrome that can result
after an organism has learned to self-administer abusable
substances. This syndrome was not dependent on the ability of the
drug to produce tolerance and withdrawal, but rather on its
positive reinforcing effects. These effects were evident by
observing the behavior of the organism, and could be measured by
quantifying the work that the organism would produce to obtain
the substance. </p>

<p>The development of the substance use disorders section for
DSM-IV began in 1988 and involved the most extensive process yet
undertaken for such a task. The major change in DSM-IV is in the
definition of substance abuse. Unlike DSM-III and DSM-III-R, DSM
-IV clearly separates the criteria for dependence from those of
abuse. Dependence in DSM-IV is a syndrome involving compulsive
use, with or without tolerance and withdrawal; abuse is
problematic use without compulsive use, significant tolerance, or
withdrawal. Preliminary data from the DSM-IV field trials
indicate that this change will probably increase the number of
persons diagnosed as having substance abuse, especially for those
using hallucinogens, inhalants, sedatives, and amphetamines. </p>

<p>Substance Use and the Transition to Abuse/Harmful Use or
Dependence </p>

<p>One problem in developing criteria for this second,
nondependent category, whether called abuse or harmful use, is
that though dependence has been well-studied, the progression
from use to abuse has not been adequately researched (except in
the case of alcohol); and depending on the perspective, may not
always be linear. For example, using the DSM-IV classifications,
it is possible that substances such as opiates may follow a path
that begins with use and progresses to dependence before
abuse-related problems are identified. Within the field of
alcohol research, the consensus of studies is that consuming
three to four standard-sized drinks/day by males (equal to 40 or
more grams of alcohol at 12 grams/drink) is associated with an
increased probability for the development of problems. As females
tend to absorb alcohol more quickly, studies have shown that
problems typically begin at about two to three drinks/day
(1,2,5). </p>

<p>Little work has been done on other substances. All persons who
end up with abuse, harmful use, or dependence begin with use. Use
of a substance, whether licit or illicit, does not constitute a
substance use disorder even though it may be unwise and strongly
disapproved of by family, friends, employers, religious groups,
or society at large. Use by itself is not considered a medical
disorder. For a disorder to be present, use must become something
else such as: occur more frequently; occur at higher doses; or
result in a magnitude of problems. Though there have been some
conceptual models developed for how one might approach a better
understanding of this transition, there are few data available to
clearly point out where the border lies. </p>

<p>DSM-IV AND ICD-10 DEFINITIONS </p>

<p>DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria: </p>

<p>Abuse </p>

<p>A. A maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by
one or more of the following occurring over the same 12- month
period: </p>

<p>1. Recurrent substance use resulting in a failure to fulfill
major role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated
absences or poor work performance related to substance use;
substance-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions from
school; neglect of children or household). </p>

<p>2. Recurrent substance use in situations in which it is
physically hazardous (e.g.,driving an automobile or operating a
machine when impaired by substance use). </p>

<p>3. Recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g.,arrests
for substance-related disorderly conduct). </p>

<p>4. Continued substance use despite having persistent or
recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated
by the effects of the substance (e.g.,arguments with spouse about
consequences of intoxication, physical fights). </p>

<p>B. Has never met the criteria for Substance Dependence for
this substance. </p>

<p>Dependence: </p>

<p>A maladaptive pattern of substance use, leading to clinically
significant impairment or distress, as manifested by three or
more of the following occurring in the same 12- month period: </p>

<p>1. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: </p>

<p>a. need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to
achieve intoxication or desired effect </p>

<p>b. markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same
amount of the substance </p>

<p>2. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: </p>

<p>a. the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance </p>

<p>b. the same (or closely related) substance is taken to relieve
or avoid withdrawal symptoms </p>

<p>3. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a
longer period than was intended </p>

<p>4. Any unsuccessful effort or a persistent desire to cut down
or control substance use </p>

<p>5. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to
obtain the substance (e.g., visiting multiple doctors or driving
long distances), use of the substance (e.g., chain- smoking), or
recover from its effects </p>

<p>6. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities
given up or reduced because of substance use </p>

<p>7. Continued substance use despite knowledge of having had a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is
likely to be caused or exacerbated by the substance (e.g.,
current cocaine use despite recognition of cocaine- induced
depression, or continued drinking despite recognition that an
ulcer was made worse by alcohol consumption) </p>

<p>Specify if: </p>

<p>o with physiological dependence: Evidence of tolerance or
withdrawal (i.e., either items (1) or (2) are present). </p>

<p>o without physiological dependence: No evidence of tolerance
or withdrawal i.e., neither items (1) nor (2) are present). </p>

<p>ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Clinical Use: </p>

<p>Harmful Use: </p>

<p>A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage
to health. The damage may be physical (as in cases of hepatitis
from the self-administration of injected drugs) or mental
(e.g.,episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy
consumption of alcohol). </p>

<p>The diagnosis requires that actual damage should have been
caused to the mental or physical health of the user. Harmful
patterns of use are often criticized by others and frequently
associated with adverse social consequences of various kinds. The
fact that a pattern of use or particular substance is disapproved
of by another person or by the culture, or may have led to
socially negative consequences such as arrest or marital
arguments is not in itself evidence of harmful use. </p>

<p>Acute intoxication or &quot;hangover&quot; is not in itself
sufficient evidence of the damage to health required for coding
harmful use. Harmful use should not be diagnosed if dependence
syndrome, a psychotic disorder, or another specific form of drug-
or alcohol-related disorder is present. </p>

<p>Dependence Syndrome </p>

<p>A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually be made only
if three or more of the following have been experienced or
exhibited at some time during the previous year: </p>

<p>1. A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take the
substance. </p>

<p>2. Difficulties in controlling substance-taking behavior in
terms of its onset, termination, or levels of use </p>

<p>3. A physiological withdrawal state when substance use has
ceased or been reduced, as evidenced by: the characteristic
withdrawal syndrome for the substance; or use of the same (or
closely related) substance with the intention of relieving or
avoiding withdrawal symptoms. </p>

<p>4. Evidence of tolerance such that increased doses of the
psychoactive substance are required in order to achieve effects
originally produced by lower doses (clear examples of this are
found in alcohol- and opiate-dependent individuals who may take
daily doses sufficient to incapacitate or kill nontolerant
users). </p>

<p>5. Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or interests
because of psychoactive substance use, increased amounts of time
necessary to obtain or take the substance or recover from its
effects. </p>

<p>6. Persisting with substance use despite clear evidence of
overtly harmful consequences, such as harm to the liver through
excessive drinking, depressive mood states consequent to periods
of heavy substance use, or drug- related impairment of cognitive
functioning; efforts should be made to determine that the user
was actually, or could be expected to be, aware of the nature and
extent of harm. </p>

<p>Narrowing of the personal repertoire of patterns of
psychoactive substance use has also been described as a
characteristic feature (e.g., a tendency to drink alcoholicdrinks
in the same way on weekdays and weekends, regardless of social
constraints that determine appropriate drinking behavior). </p>

<p>It is an essential characteristic of the dependence syndrome
that either psychoactive substance taking or a desire to take a
particular substance should be present; the subjective awareness
of compulsion to use drugs is most commonly seen during attempts
to stop or control substance use. This diagnostic requirement
would exclude, for instance, surgical patients given opioid drugs
for the relief of pain, who may show signs of an opioid
withdrawal state when drugs are not given but who have no desire
to continue taking drugs. </p>

<p>The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific
substance (e.g., tobacco or diazepam), for a class of substances
(e.g., opioid drugs), or for a wider ranger of different
substances (as for those individuals who feel a sense of
compulsion regularly to use whatever drugs are available and who
show distress, agitation, and/or physical signs of a withdrawal
state upon abstinence). </p>

<p>The diagnosis of the dependence syndrome may be further
specified by the following (the following roughly correspond to
the course modifiers and relapse section of DSM-IV): </p>

<p>o Currently abstinent. </p>

<p>o Currently abstinent, but in a protected environment (e.g.,
in hospital, in a therapeutic community, in prison, etc.). </p>

<p>o Currently on a clinically supervised maintenance or
replacement regime (controlled dependence, e.g., with methadone;
nicotine gum or nicotine patch). </p>

<p>o Currently abstinent, but receiving treatment with aversive
or blocking drugs (e.g., naltrexone or disulfiram). </p>

<p>o Currently using the substance (active dependence). </p>

<p>o Continuous use. </p>

<ul>
    <li>Episodic use. _ </li>
</ul>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_tech_for_understand_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="otatoc.htm">Technologies for Understanding</a> and
Preventing Substance Abuse and Addiction</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="54150" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>