
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B39-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA074-000493-B040-330</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi116.html 205.156.212.5 19970122010421 text/html 56587
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:02:23 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:26 GMT
Content-length: 56400
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi116.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
February 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>MAXWELL STIRS UP TROUBLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(391 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FRAUD CASES UP 16% - VALUE BY 25%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(260 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>'CONCERTED ATTACK ON FRAUD IS REQUIRED,' CLAIMS AUDIT FACULTY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(952 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONFERENCE REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>FFIN WORKING FINE ON FRAUD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(409 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>FRAUD RISES ALONG WITH STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(302 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CASE STUDY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>THE CASE FOR THE DEFENCE?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(977 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>LOSING OUT IN THE NUMBERS GAME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1485 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>HOW FORENSIC ACCOUNTANTS FACE GREATER LIABILITY EXPOSURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1080 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ADVANCE FEE AND PBI FRAUD - ALWAYS TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1236 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>CURRENCY SCAM INVESTIGATORS WITH A YEN FOR KNOWLEDGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(793 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>THE FRAUD REPORT STATISTICS PAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(548 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>BY DEFINITION, A BIG PROBLEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(261 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

MAXWELL STIRS UP TROUBLE

The decision by the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) (UK) to go ahead with
further Maxwell trials provoked as much reaction as the verdicts in the
first trial. The gasps that were heard in court as the defendants in
the Maxwell trial were acquitted on all charges were soon followed by
cries outside the court. Whether the shouts in court were of joy,
shock, or surprise, the comments outside were of a predictable nature:
critics slammed the use of juries in fraud trials and the record of the
Serious Fraud Office in prosecuting complex fraud.

Whenever a fraud case goes wrong - in other words, when defendants are
acquitted or those convicted receive light sentences - the reaction is
always the same. We were not disappointed in the case of the Maxwell
trial.

In contrast to the cries of 'abolish the jury' or 'scrap the SFO', one
of the most pertinent and sane comments came from George Staples,
director of the SFO. Although presumably bitterly disappointed by the
verdict of the jury, he said: 'It is our job to conduct a thorough
investigation and ensure that defendants are prosecuted fairly, and
that has happened. The jury has considered the verdict for many days
and has reached its verdict. The criminal justice system has functioned
in the way that it was designed to do.'

The truth - reinforced by the announcement of further trials - is that
at the moment the SFO is being forced to conduct political show trials
rather than trying to solve the serious problems of corporate fraud and
illegal acts in the City and elsewhere.

If there is trouble in prosecuting serious frauds, then creating
another agency or removing the people in charge will not solve the
problem. The law is a mess. In its report of July 1993, the Royal
Commission on Criminal Justice said: 'Those giving evidence to us have
suggested that fraud trials would be simpler to determine if the
substantive law of fraud were reformed. Apart from the common law
offence of conspiracy to defraud, there is no specific offence of fraud
in England and Wales, and fraudulent conduct has therefore to be bought
under the ambit of various offences.'

Pension law has been reformed as a result of the Maxwell trial - so
now, should the law on fraud.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FRAUD CASES UP 16% - VALUE BY 25%

Fraud in central government has increased by 16% in the last year,
according to the Treasury's own figures. The 1994-95 Fraud Report - an
analysis of reported fraud in government departments - the Treasury
revealed that government departments reported a total of 408 cases of
department staff fraud, an increase of 16% over 1993-94 and 35% over
1992-93. The total sum involved was #2.12m compared with #1.69m in 1993-
94 and #2.11m in 1992-93, although the report says that in a number of
cases the amount involved had not been identified or could not be
assessed.

The report was published in January 1996 just two months after the 1993-
94 report (see The Fraud Report, November 1995) which was released only
after a complaint to the Parliamentary Commissioner under the Code of
Practice on open government. The Treasury refused to speculate on the
growth of fraud in central government. It said: 'Whether the increase
in the number of fraud cases reported reflects a real trend is
impossible to say. It may be that greater fraud awareness and better
fraud reporting procedures in departments leads to more cases being
reported. What is undeniable is that the risk of fraud is not
diminishing. Staff at all levels need to be alert to these risks.'

Strangely out of the 58 central government bodies, including all
government departments, which submitted annual returns in 1994-95, 30
of them - just over half - submitted a 'nil return' saying there had
been no cases of fraud.

For further details turn to page 10.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

'CONCERTED ATTACK ON FRAUD IS REQUIRED,' CLAIMS AUDIT FACULTY

More concerted action by management, regulators, auditors and the
Government is needed to fight fraud effectively, according to a booklet
published by the Audit Faculty of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in England & Wales (ICAEW). Peter Williams reports on a
recent initiative by accountants.

In a new booklet, Taking Fraud Seriously, authors Tony Bingham of
Coopers & Lybrand, Ian Huntingdon of KPMG and Martyn Jones of Touche
Ross, wrote: 'Crime and crime prevention evolve together and there is
no shortage of effective measures with which to counter the fraudster.
The real challenge is not a technical but an attitudinal one, the will
to make fraud prevention a priority.'

The role of directors and management

A company can minimise the risk of fraud if directors and senior
managers take a positive lead and set the tone from the top,
communicating clearly that fraud, corruption and dishonesty is not
tolerated. According to the booklet, directors and managers should seek
to establish a clear anti-fraud culture by:

- Leading from the top. Senior management must demonstrate commitment
to an anti-fraud culture and be seen to be subject to the same
procedural guidelines and investigation as the rest of the work-force.

- Implementing and communicating an anti-fraud policy, covering such
matters as giving and receiving inducements, reporting channels,
investigation of suspected fraud and dealing with perpetrators. There
should be a public pledge that allegations of fraud or other wrong
doing by employees or by a third party will be properly investigated;

- Developing a fraud contingency plan, setting out what is done and by
whom in the event of the discovery of fraud.

The booklet also calls for quoted companies to comment in their annual
report on their efforts to prevent fraud and, in particular, to discuss
their policies on the areas outlined above. This suggestion has been
opposed by some finance directors.

Taking Fraud Seriously also discusses the role of non-executive
directors suggesting that they should:

- be alert to the risk of fraud in a business, particularly top level
management fraud;

- be satisfied that internal control measures are given the right
emphasis within the organisation;

- be satisfied with the integrity of the organisation's public company
reporting;

- establish open lines of communication with internal and external
auditors and be prepared to spend time discussing the auditor's
concerns.

The authors also call on directors to consider their wider public
duties when deciding whether to report alleged fraudsters to the
public. At present, many directors feel it is in the best interests of
their organisation not to report fraud to the police but to quietly
deal with the matter themselves, often leaving the fraudster to strike
again.

Reform of the law

As well as calling for a change in attitude towards fraud, the authors -
 all of whom are auditors - suggest that legal changes are required.
Alongside wider legal questions - such as an examination of the pros
and cons of creating a legal responsibility for officers and employees
of public companies to report prima facie fraud to the police - the
booklet calls for enforcing and extending section 389A of the Companies
Act 1985. This section gives auditors rights of access to the company's
records and requires its officers to provide such explanations or
information as the auditors need to perform their duties. It also
contains the offence of misleading an auditor, which the report says is
useful but that it does not carry a stiff enough penalty to encourage
prosecutors to use it.

The report wants the maximum custodial sentence increased from two
years to five, and for the offence to be extended to any employee and
any organisation.

The role of the regulators

Regulators play a key part in the fight against corporate fraud.
According to the report, they need to guard against two main dangers.
First, increasing the length and complexity of their rule book imposes
a burden on the majority of members with well-run business and, second,
more complex legislation can damage the effectiveness of inspection
teams.

Regulators could increase their effectiveness by:

- reviewing their rule books to ensure emphasis on the prevention and
detection of management fraud rather than on minor offences

- making greater effort to cooperate with overseas and international
regulators

- passing on important information promptly to auditors. The authors
want the law changed to impose a duty on regulators to tell auditors
when a client is suspected of fraud. They say that auditors can often
be left in the dark about such suspicions. At the moment, auditors are
under a legal obligation to report their suspicions. Regulators have
opposed the opening up of a two-way street saying that, where possible,
information is often already passed on.

The Government's role

Taking Fraud Seriously calls on the Government to establish an
independent standing body - The Fraud Advisory Panel - with
responsibility for:

- providing a forum for discussion and improved cooperation between
Government, law enforcement, the private sector and other interested
parties;

- increasing the overall awareness of the problem of fraud.

The Panel's membership would be drawn from the legal and accounting
professions, law enforcement, regulatory agencies, business and
academia.

Secondly, the Government should designate a lead department for the
coordination of the its anti-fraud strategy. At the moment
responsibility for anti-fraud policy is scattered around various
Whitehall departments.

Copies of Taking Fraud Seriously are available from Tracy Gray, The
Audit Faculty, The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England &
Wales, Chartered Accountants' Hall, PO Box 433, Moorgate Place, London
EC2P 2BJ.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

FFIN WORKING FINE ON FRAUD

Mike Feltham, head of the London Stock Exchange surveillance
department, told the Taking Fraud Seriously conference (see opposite)
that great efforts have been made to ensure that information is
exchanged relating to any fraud or market abuse.

He said that one of the ways the Stock Exchange passed on and received
information was through membership of the Financial Fraud Information
Network (FFIN). Feltham said: 'FFIN was formed as a result of a
recommendation in a study commissioned by HM Treasury, as part of a
Government response to such cases as BCCI and Maxwell.'

Supervisors, regulators, investigators, law enforcers and Government
meet on a regular basis to exchange information and pool knowledge
about actual or suspected serious financial fraud.

Feltham said: 'FFIN has around 20 members but its feeder contacts go a
lot wider. The primary objective is to provide a framework for pooling
and disseminating information about financial fraud and other serious
criminal activity which pass through, and make use of, the UK financial
system.'

FFIN has no operational responsibilities as these remain with the
individual members. He added: 'There are three stages in the fight
against financial fraud: detection, investigation and enforcement.
FFIN's role is to assist principally with detection but it also helps
the transition of cases from the detection to the investigation stage.
FFIN tries to put together the different pieces of a jigsaw spread
around several players where the picture that emerges can be far more
significant than the individual pieces taken in isolation.'

Although each member has its own constitution and rules on
confidentiality there is normally a legitimate way in which to transmit
information within the membership when the need arises. Feltham said:
'To my mind, FFIN has already assisted the exchange by enabling it to
pass cases to the appropriate investigatory and prosecution agencies,
which has resulted in action being taken which would not have
otherwise.'

The London Stock Exchange and a number of other London regulators also
belong to an international inter-market surveillance group, ISG, which
provides a framework for the sharing of information and the
coordination of regulatory matters among market centres. Formed in
1983, ISG now has 22 North American, European and Australasian
organisations with a common interest in fraud prevention. Feltham said:
'Membership of ISG has assisted us in being able to track movements of
security trading and has allowed us to produce a much more broader
picture than was previously possible.'



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

FRAUD RISES ALONG WITH STANDARDS

Reported fraud has increased because expected standards of commercial
behaviour have risen, according to Ian Hay Davison, who was deputy
chairman and chief executive of Lloyd's from 1983-86. Davison said that
times change: acts once condoned are now regarded as fraudulent.

He said: 'That was the problem of the underwriters at Lloyd's: they
really had no idea that the ways of their fathers are today regarded as
not only unacceptable but as criminal. When I started in the City, the
provision of undisclosed benefits in kind to directors, the use of
insider information to deal before company news was made public, the
development of schemes solely designed to avoid personal taxation
rates, and what we would today regard as false or misleading accounting
practices, were rife. Year-by-year, case-by-case, statute-by-statute,
standards have been raised and offences created.'

But he added: 'Fraud is a serious problem. It has always been and there
is no point in raising standards if the new higher standards are not
enforced. There can be no doubt that the enforcement of law in the area
of fraud has been and continues to be lamentable.'

Davison also pointed to other reasons, such as more complex markets,
greater opportunities through the abolition of exchange controls, a
greater spread of wealth providing more smaller savers to be gulled,
and especially the greater power of computers.

He added: 'British white-collar crime has the quality that too often
its perpetrators persistently refuse to concede that what they have
done is wrong. One attractive quality of the Chinese, as I found in my
term as chairman of the Hong Kong Securities Review Committee, was that
while culprits at Lloyd's if caught red-handed consistently failed to
concede the enormity of what they had done, the Chinese accepted the
justice of the prosecutor's actions.'



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

THE CASE FOR THE DEFENCE?

The Government watchdog, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) (UK), has
expressed concern over the need for the Ministry of Defence (MoD) (UK)
to keep under review more effective arrangements to prevent and detect
fraud. In this article Rachael Church looks at the lessons to be
learned by the MoD and others.

The MoD spends #23bn a year on the nation's behalf, including #9bn on
procurement, yet it reckons that it is relatively free from fraud and
corruption. It has identified only #22m possible fraud in 1993-94 - a
mere 0.1% of its total expenditure, and a much smaller figure than many
private-sector organisations.

Three recent cases involving the corruption of former MoD officials
raises a number of issues of wider relevance, according to the PAC.
Since November 1993, three individuals previously employed by the
Department - Gordon Foxley, James Taylor and Bernard Trevelyan - have
been convicted of receiving corrupt sums. The Foxley case is the most
significant of the three and concerns the receipt of corrupt payments
from overseas contractors. The Department says that not all the corrupt
funds in the Foxley case have yet been identified - although he was
convicted of 12 offences totalling #1.36m. Much of the money is locked
away in Swiss bank accounts. Despite civil action the PAC said: 'The
Department could not give us any grounds for hope that they would
succeed in gaining access to these accounts, but told us they would
pursue every possible avenue.'

Three overseas companies involved in the Foxley case have been
blacklisted, and the MoD is taking steps to recover the corrupt
payments. It has demanded a public apology and a clear assurance that
they will not involve themselves in corruption again, as well as more
onerous oversight arrangements if contracts are placed with them in
future.

Rotating duties

The PAC says that the Foxley case illustrates the risks of fraud and
corruption where staff are in post for a long time and have influence
over contracts. The National Audit Office (NAO) identified cases where
staff had been in post at the same location for over 12 years. The MoD
says that the Foxley case was exceptional in its longevity. It now has
a firm policy of moving staff every five years, but could not say that
everyone who had served in a post for five years would be moved. In
these cases there was a balance between the benefit of long experience
and deep knowledge and the risk of someone knowing all the tricks of
the trade and therefore increasing the risk of fraud.

The MoD's vetting arrangements failed to identify Foxley's lavish
lifestyle which included nine properties in England. The Department
said Foxley had a good cover story that his wife was a medical
practitioner 'who was known to have money in her background'. It is now
considering adopting vetting arrangements similar to those used for
national security purposes to identify individuals who present a fraud
risk.

Gifts and hospitality

As a result of the Foxley case, the Department's rules concerning the
acceptance of gifts and hospitality have been strengthened, by
providing more specific guidance on their interpretation. It says that
large-scale, expensive and exclusive hospitality has now been largely
eliminated, and that hospitality books are now properly maintained and
scrutinised. Rules have also been tightened where officials leave to
work for defence contractors and the Department looks carefully at
precisely what individuals have been doing and who they have been
dealing with - although it still considers this an area of potential
risk. In the US there is a five-year blanket ban on such a switch, but
the MoD says that the UK would not be able to afford the loss of brains
that might be transferred in to income-earning, export-earning
activities.

The MoD has also set up a fraud unit, promulgated fraud indicators,
runs fraud-awareness courses, and has a 'hotline', so that people can
report frauds anonymously.

OTHER PROCUREMENT AREAS AT RISK..

The scope for fraud is higher where control systems are less
comprehensive or where changes in management arrangements have altered
the circumstances in which the controls operate. In the MoD's case
areas identified by the NAO include:

- computer systems

- non-competitive contracts

- local purchase units and

- the control of assets held by contractors.

As a result of NAO work, the MoD has drawn up an action plan to reduce
the risk of fraud.

Computer systems. The MoD increasingly relies on computer systems. A
review by the NAO of the payment systems at Liverpool had identified a
number of concerns which the MoD is addressing through risk assessment.

Local purchase units. Around 400 local purchase units account for about
#270m a year but the MoD acknowledges that it is harder to exercise
control over small local contracts than it is for large procurement
contracts. In some cases there was no separation of duties and the
MoD's internal audit team visited fewer than 1% of them each year. It
plans to extend auditing in this area.

Non-competitive contracting. In 'cost-plus' non-competitive contracts
the risk that costs may be overstated is obvious. The MoD says it has
reduced the level of non-competitive contracting and started
initiatives such as 'No acceptable price, no contract' and the Equality
of Information Statement, which aims to reduce the risk of poor value
for money, including fraud.

Control of assets held by contractors. Government equipment and spares
are held by contractors to enable them to carry out repairs and
maintenance contracts. Controls in this area are often poor with often
an absence of separation of duty, supervisory checks, stocktaking and
exit-gate checks. The MoD's response is that less and less equipment is
held in this way so the risk should diminish over time.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

LOSING OUT IN THE NUMBERS GAME

'Calling cards' allow calls to be made on the move. They are a
necessary and valuable product for many businesses and individuals. But
the increased flexibility they offer comes at the price of increased
risk. Dean Smith of Fraud Management Limited outlines the problem.

Everyone knows of the most common mobile product - the cellular
telephone - but fewer people are aware of the increasingly popular
'calling card' - a product now supplied by most major
telecommunications companies across the globe. In the UK, major
operators such as BT, Mercury and Energis all offer card-based services
operating alongside other international players such as AT&T, MCI and
Sprint. The card's basic function is to allow a call to be placed, from
virtually any telephone, and charged to the account holder for that
card - ie a no-cash call. Billing may be to the user or, in a corporate
environment, to a cost-centre manager responsible for the telecoms
spending of a team of people. There are a number of flexible billing
options available which vary by supplier.

Calling cards offer a good means of cost control over telecoms spending
when users are away from home or office. Increasingly, such products
are being combined with payment cards as value-add features, American
Express being a good example. This evolution is sure to continue,
reducing the amount of plastic in the pocket and enhancing existing
card services. But increased usage means increased risk.

No flights of fancy

Picture this: you are on business in New York and about to catch a
flight to Los Angeles from JFK International Airport, when a delay of
two hours is announced because of bad weather. You decide to call the
person you are meeting to advise of your delay and find a suite of
payphones nearby from which to call. From your pocket, you pull out
your calling card and lift the telephone handset. As you do so, you are
aware of someone just behind and to the side of you, apparently waiting
to use the phone. You dial the free access number which connects you to
the automated operator of the service you use. Following a prompt, you
enter the card number, reading from the card in your hand. Following
another prompt, you enter your secret PIN followed by the telephone
number you are calling. As you enter these last digits, you notice that
the person behind you moves off to use a telephone just a little down
the line. 'Hello Jim, it's Phil here - just calling to say I'll be a
little late ...' As you end your call and move back towards the coffee
shop, you see the person who was behind you with a group of others, all
busily scribbling away in a huddle.

Three weeks later, back in London, your telecoms manager calls you and
asks why your calling card bill is so large. 'Nonsense, I only used it
a dozen or so times to call home and for business'. But on inspection,
you find the normal #200 bill has risen to #10,000. Calls to Mexico,
Columbia, Europe, the Far East and other destinations you know nothing
of. Even more surprisingly, calls were made from other countries while
you (and your card) were in the United States.

Another victim of 'shoulder-surfing'

The person behind you when you made that call at JFK was noting your
card and PIN details. When he went to another payphone, he called his
colleague in Amsterdam to test the card and pass on the numbers. Your
card details were then put onto the Internet as part of a well-
organised distribution network. What do they get out of it? A few
dollars per card number, free calls, and a few more dollars when they
sell the numbers to others waiting around the payphones to make calls
or obtain card numbers themselves.

This is one of the less sophisticated methods of obtaining card
details. High-powered binoculars, video equipment and sound-recording
devices (useful when speaking your numbers to a human operator) have
all been used in similar environments.

Similarly, there are risks when using calling cards from hotels or
other businesses that use call-logging equipment. Card numbers may be
captured in soft or hard copy for reference by prying eyes. Calling
cards might also be used for data transmission from portable PC
equipment, in which case card details may be stored within. And what of
that 'last number redial' button on the telephone you have just used?

It is fortunate, however, that the UK has to date suffered relatively
little from this type of fraud. The US remains the telecoms fraud
capital of the world, but trends in other countries are definitely on
the up. It makes sense, therefore, to take care when using a calling
card anywhere in the world, not just the US.

Shopping around for security

Most telecoms providers are aware of the risks involved with calling-
card products. As such, most have developed a degree of fraud
prevention and detection within the product configuration, operation
and call monitoring. Security features vary widely from operator to
operator and so it is worth exploring these with their agent during the
sales process. It is also worth establishing who would be responsible
for the bill should you be hit by fraud. On the whole, service
suppliers in the UK are reasonably good at fraud detection and should
be able to contact you if fraud is suspected.

The following checklist will help reduce the fraud risk. Take the time
to deliver these messages to appropriate personnel within your
organisation; users, telecoms managers and those responsible for paying
the bills. It could help reduce the trauma, wasted time and possible
expense of a fraud incident.

PIN security

- Once you have memorised the PIN, destroy the original PIN
notification.

- Avoid writing your PIN down. If you have to, note it so that it could
not be identified as a PIN.

- Never write the PIN on the calling card or anywhere that might be
associated with the card eg on any related literature.

- Do not disclose your card number or PIN to anyone except the calling
card operator when you need to make a call. You will never be contacted
and asked for your PIN (or password if one is used) by the service
supplier.

- If you think that someone might have noted your card and PIN numbers,
contact the service supplier to change them immediately.

- Avoid PINs (or passwords) that would be easy to guess - those running
sequentially (1234, 9876 etc) or with repeated digits (1111 etc). Also
avoid obvious keypad sequences like 1397 (clockwise) or 2580 (down the
middle), and your year of birth.

Card security

- Never leave your calling card lying around. Treat it as you would a
credit card.

- If your card is lost or stolen, report it immediately to the service
supplier - and always carry the supplier's emergency phone number.

- To prevent others noting your card number, never use your card as a
proof of identity.

Usage precautions

- Take appropriate precautions when using your card to avoid anyone
seeing the digits you dial (if using direct-dial via tone telephones)
or overhearing the numbers you speak (if calling via the operator).
Shielding the keypad from prying eyes will help significantly. When
passing your card details to the operator, make sure nobody is
eavesdropping. It is perhaps worth cupping your hand over the telephone
mouthpiece.

- If using telephones that display the digits you enter, ensure that
the numbers are not visible to others and that they are cleared after
use. Numbers can be cleared by lifting the telephone handset after your
calls are complete and entering a random digit. This will also help
avoid problems with the last number redial function available on many
telephones.

- Some hotels or organisations use call-logging equipment to help
manage or account for their telephone usage. These could record your
calling card details which may then be visible to others. This only
happens if you direct-dial calls using a tone telephone connected to
the logger. This risk can be avoided by making calls via the calling
card operator or using a telephone not connected to the logger.

- If using your card to make calls from a computer (eg data
transmissions), ensure that your computer is protected against
unauthorised access - your card details may be visible within the
system. If possible, do not enter your PIN as a default setting - enter
it manually for each call made.

- Never loan your card unless you are prepared to pay for the calls
made (which may be a lot more than the ones you know of).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

HOW FORENSIC ACCOUNTANTS FACE GREATER LIABILITY EXPOSURE

Roger Parker, partner in the Commercial Litigation department of City
solicitors Richards Butler, considers accountants' increasing liability
exposure - and offers some remedies.

The Fraud Report has referred in recent editions to surveys suggesting
that fraud is on the increase - or at least that detection rates are.
The number of situations where forensic accountants are called in to
assist companies results in greater liability exposure for the
accountant - albeit with greater fee income as well.

This article summarises the basis of such liability exposure and
highlights certain practices which have led to a degree of concern
about risk-management techniques deployed by accountants. On the basis
that any litigation is symptomatic of a breakdown in communication this
should interest companies as well as accountants.

Common threads

A number of claims, across the professions, have common features:

- Complexity. The more complex the case the more for the development of
problems, be they caused by lack of appropriate communication,
expertise, diligence or resource.

- Late instruction. The forensic accountant will often be instructed
after a fraud has been committed. What is less understandable is if
there is an instruction given unnecessarily late, as happens from time
to time. If there is belated instruction in pressurised circumstances a
proper investigation is less likely to result.

- Fiscal control. Proper financial control of any consultant is
essential, but the thin line between budgetary control and imprudent
management should not be crossed.

- Access to the client. For a company this tends to be less of a
problem because of the proximity of the in-house lawyer to client. It
can be more of a problem where the client is further removed - for
example when the accountant is instructed by a solicitor. It is for the
accountant to ensure that he has all proper and necessary access to lay
clients and to those who may have direct access to material
information.

- Trends. Increasingly, disgruntled clients are 'having a go' at
professionals, sometimes because of their own deep pockets, sometimes
because of their insurers. Also, it is increasingly common for the
dissatisfied to seek to apportion responsibility. Somebody 'must' be to
blame - a human reaction that many (particularly US) courts have over-
indulged.

Sorting out communication

One of the fundamental principles of English and US contract law is the
rule that vague wording in a contract will generally be construed
against the writer (contra proferentem). Not surprisingly therefore,
professional liability cases in both jurisdictions have tended to give
clients the benefit of the doubt when liability is based on
misunderstanding. It is incumbent on the professional proactively to
seek out areas where clients may not have sufficient understanding.
This issue is the biggest single source of claims and is therefore
regularly of concern to professional firms. It is increasingly
important in complex fraud cases because:

- Investigations can be labour intensive involving many hours. Hours
are money. The client will not necessarily be well-placed to assess the
volume of hours or the complexity of the task. That is why he or she
instructs the accountant.

- Explanation of the substance of the problem can be complex and
results may only come toward the end of an investigation. This means
the patience of the client may be sorely tested as hours are spent and
fees incurred with no result until completion. It can be harder in
fraud cases for clients to know whether their decision to invest is
worthwhile. It may be even harder to explain to the client's commercial
management.

Contracts as reference points

Claims will sometimes be based on a retainer letter. The latter is
under-utilised. A perfectly adequate contract between client and
professional on a major instruction can be contained within a couple of
pages. It should be the reference point for identifying responsibility
for the purposes of both contract and negligence. Very few of the major
English legal authorities revolve around the retainer letter because
not enough attention has been given to defining the scope of services
that should be contained in it. More time has been spent in drafting
limitation clauses or costs schedules. There are important matters, but
there need not be an exclusion of the scope. This may seem a bit basic,
but how often have you seen a professional spell out precisely what he
or she is doing? What sources will the accountant be checking for signs
of malpractice? When will the accountant cease to follow a line of
enquiry? What if that line would have produced the answer?

The absence of at least a basic pointer to the scope of work is
inconsistent with the practice adopted by a number of other
professionals. Part of the historical reason for this is linked to the
absence of fixed fee in certain investigatory work. A fixed fee tends
to lead to a fixed definition of what is to be done with the
flexibility of additional services being provided upon request - for an
additional cost. An open-ended and potentially vague assignment is more
likely to lead to a vague brief. It is not suggested that vagueness can
be eliminated, but focus on the 'greyer' areas at least enables a more
accurate assessment of where the parties' risk exposure is.

Resisting negligence

It is clear from recent leading authority in England that if the
professional escapes liability in contract he or she may not
necessarily be so lucky in resisting a claim in negligence. To limit
the danger there should be, possibly to the advantage of both parties
to the arrangement, synonimity between contractual and tortuous
obligations. This can be done simply, by a statement to the effect that
the parties do not agree to there being any tortuous liability over and
above their contractual responsibilities as defined. What many will see
as unacceptable on policy grounds is the possibility of spending time
and money negotiating a retainer letter/contract only to find that some
other, judicially imposed, criteria determines responsibility.

Conclusion

It is easy with hindsight to apportion blame for conduct. It is not so
easy to think positively how to implement procedures to reduce the risk
of dispute. Perhaps predictably, one answer is to do with training, in
the basics - communication skills, drafting and straight thinking of
what each party to the arrangement is expecting to achieve and how they
are going to achieve it.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

ADVANCE FEE AND PBI FRAUD - ALWAYS TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE

Advance fee and PBI fraud continues to be a dramatically successful
form of fraud, despite warnings issued in recent years by bodies such
as the Bank of England, the Law Society and the Federal Reserve. Andrew
Keltie, a partner in Baker & McKenzie, London and a member of Baker &
McKenzie's Civil Fraud Group, reports.

With hindsight, advance fee and prime bank instrument (PBI) frauds seem
so obviously dishonest that it is hard to understand how anyone could
be deceived. But the combination of ostensibly authentic documentation,
and the skillful use of psychology, has led to many sophisticated
business people being defrauded of substantial sums. A recent example
is the loss (and subsequent recovery) of more than #6m by the Salvation
Army in 1992. In May 1992 the Army had been persuaded to pay $10m to a
Belgian bank for investment in 'prime bank instruments' which the
Salvation Army was duped into believing could be bought as a discount
and sold at a profit. In fact, PBIs do not exist and there is no market
in them, other than that conjured up by plausible fraudsters.

Advance fee fraud

This involves tricking the victim into believing that participating in
a transaction (the participation being dependent on payment of an
advance fee or 'commission') will give access to a low-interest or
interest-free loan, or the receipt of some other financial benefit. The
advance fee is usually a small percentage of the finance apparently
being provided. It may be suggested that the source of the finance is
'oil money', or that the funding is by means of a 'self-liquidating
loan'. Fraudsters will go to considerable lengths to compile a dossier
of correspondence and legalistic documents, purportedly authenticating
the availability of the funds and the credentials of the participants.
This will often involve the use of headed notepaper obtained from
banks, accountants and firms of solicitors. The growth (and increasing
acceptability) of fax documents means that genuine letterheads can be
used to create bogus documents which are difficult to detect if sent by
fax.

Once the victim is persuaded of the genuine nature of the transaction,
and the availability of low-cost or free finance, the next stage is
payment of the advance fee, often expressed to be the agent's
commission, the victim having been convinced that payment is the final
stage in obtaining the promised funds. In most cases as soon as it is
paid the fee will disappear along with the fraudster.

Prime bank instrument fraud

Advance fee fraud is still committed but its more sophisticated
exponents have moved on to PBI fraud, which rests on the use of bogus
financial instruments as being the source of the alleged loan or
profit.

PBI fraud is based on the mythical existence of a secret market in
which the world's largest ('prime') banks deal with each other, reaping
huge profits. The victim is enticed with a promise that he can share in
those profits, for a modest investment. PBIs are usually referred to as
'prime bank guarantees', 'prime bank promissory notes (or paper)',
'master collateral commitments' or 'discounted standby letters of
credit'.

The story is that the 'prime' banks lend huge sums to each other all
the time, and that there is a market in PBIs which the victim will be
able to tap into via a smaller bank at which the fraudster has a
contact. Unsurprisingly, the smaller bank will often appear to be
incorporated in Panama or Liechtenstein, and will rarely be found in
any banker's almanac or directory.

Although standby letters of credit do exist and are issued by banks,
they are a form of collateral security or performance bond. They are
not negotiable and there is no market in them. Prime bank guarantees,
prime bank notes and the like do not exist.

A veneer of respectability

Both advance fee and PBI frauds are invariably dressed up with a
variety of complicated legalistic (but incomprehensible) documentation,
all of which the victim is solemnly asked to read carefully and sign.
These usually include a confidentiality agreement and a 'certificate of
origin of funds', confirming that the victim's investment is of 'good,
clean funds of non-criminal origin'.

Another key feature is secrecy. It is frequently claimed that the
source of finance in advance fee fraud is the Middle East, because of
religious restrictions on earning interest on loans; or that disclosure
of the covert market in PBIs would lead to the market breaking down,
because it would no longer be confined to the elite few. The real
purpose of such secrecy is, of course, to prevent or dissuade the
victim from carrying out any form of due diligence and to explain why
the victim cannot meet the lender. It can also make action to attempt
to recover lost funds far more difficult.

Other devices used to reassure a victim include:

- returning a portion of the fee at the end of a week or month,
representing it as a form of profit, the aim being to persuade the
victim that the investment is profitable, and to commit more funds

- spurious references to organisations such as the World Bank, the
United Nations, and the International Chamber of Commerce

- the apparent involvement of professionals, particularly lawyers'
client or trust accounts

- supposed absolute security.

It is often said that transactions are on a 'bank-to-bank' basis and
the investment is as secure as the bank itself. As in the Salvation
Army case, a common device is to persuade the investor to open an
account at a foreign bank into which the profits to be earned from the
transaction will be paid. Before receiving any profit, however, the
investor must pay sufficient funds into the account to show that he is
in a position to participate in the investment - a so-called 'proof of
funds' transaction. Although the account will purportedly be interest-
bearing and under the control of the investor, fraudsters will ensure
that they have signing powers over the account to enable the funds to
be removed and normally routed quickly through several other
jurisdictions to make tracing and recovery more difficult.

Providing powerful remedies

The English courts are able to provide powerful assistance to victims,
such as orders which freeze asset and permit the search of premises,
the seizure of incriminating evidence, and the disclosure of
information (and in many cases a combination of all of these elements).
In addition, such frauds will invariably involve criminal offences and
the police in England and elsewhere now have considerable experience in
investigating these frauds, although the international nature of most
of them can cause difficulties for the police in piecing together
exactly what has happened.

Awareness heightened

Increasing awareness of advance fee and PBI frauds, particularly among
professionals responding to warnings from their professional or
regulatory bodies, has helped to reduce some of the most blatant
examples. Another improvement has been the introduction of anti-money
laundering legislation in many countries. However, it remains the case
that it is possible in some jurisdictions for corporations to be
established and call themselves banks. And the ingenuity and
imagination of sophisticated fraudsters has responded to the increasing
challenges posed to them by growing awareness and more rigorous
legislation. This type of fraud is still a real problem which continues
to claim victims.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

CURRENCY SCAM INVESTIGATORS WITH A YEN FOR KNOWLEDGE

Farleigh Projects International, part of Group 4, specialises in
investigating complex, organised fraud for clients which include large
corporates and Government organisations. Managing director John Davis
and manager of investigations, Tony Ockmore - both former policemen -
talk to Peter Williams about Farleigh's role in investigating the
dollar-yen swap scam.

International fraudsters have netted at least $250m and maybe as much
as $500m over the last four or five years in the dollar-yen scam. The
victims of the fraud are rich individuals some of whom allegedly
obtained their millions in the first place through tax-evasion schemes.

The fraudster persuaded wealthy individuals to give them this 'black
money' on the promise that it would produce fantastic results and would
be 'white money'. Farleigh knows of one individual who invested $25m in
one tranche.

The fraud is simple: investors are told that their dollars will be sold
for Japanese yen and then sold back again. The promised return on this
arbitrage was fantastic - from $4m to $8m over a four-week rolling
period.

The documentation produced by the fraudsters was of a very high
standard and the names of banks and brokers used for the transactions
were reputable and legitimate. But there was no dollar-yen swap
programme - the money was simply stolen.

Dubious provenance protected fraudster

The fraudsters reckoned that many of the investors would not kick up
too much of a fuss because of the dubious nature of the origins of
their cash. Those that did protest were either given a first tranche of
a dividend or interest payment - stolen from other investors - or shown
a false statement of the profits to date. Others were dealt with more
simply - they were threatened.

Farleigh Projects now believes that this scam has been closed down, but
John Davis believes it has some important lessons for prosecuting
authorities, regulators and financial institutions. Farleigh became
involved when it was hired to trace funds and people by an Austrian
bank which was being sued by some of those defrauded. One of its
managers was corrupted by the fraudsters and over a number of years had
provided them with the banking and money transmission facilities they
needed.

This international scam started in the bank guarantee fraud in the late
1980s and moved into the dollar-yen programme as a sort of natural
progression in the early 1990s. The heat was put on the bank guarantee
fraud and they had to find a new outlet. They saw this as the perfect
follow on and in many ways they were right. The fraudsters got away
with so much for so long because different regulators and different
prosecuting authorities simply do not talk to or cooperate with each
other. Farleigh has managed to get authorities across Europe to talk to
each other, acting as a clearing house for information. It even had to
persuade three state prosecutors in different parts of Germany to pool
their knowledge.

Farleigh also believes the fraud has shown up weaknesses in UK
legislation. Money which is invested on the currency market or on other
spot markets is not regulated by the Financial Services Act. The
Securities and Investments Board is studying whether the FSA should be
extended to cover these activities.

Banks could do more

Some observers privately believe that criticism could also be levelled
at banks which still seem to welcome accounts which receive vast sums
of money from peculiar sources without asking too many questions,
although the banks would claim they have now tightened up considerably
following the introduction of money laundering regulations.

The other element that has made the fraud difficult to track down was
the way in which it was organised. Although Farleigh believes it knows
the prime mover in the fraud it was never masterminded in one place.
Instead different pockets of copy-cat frauds sprang up all over the
world - three operated separately out of Germany through Austria into
the UK, and others were based in Australia, Spain, France, Sweden and
Switzerland. Farleigh proved that they were connected because they have
traced at least one money flow between the various different
operations. Davis said: 'It is probably the most organised and biggest
fraud that I have ever come across in my life. The way it split itself
up has caused the police and the prosecutors major problems.'

Although not all of the alleged fraudsters involved are facing trial,
one person has already been sentenced to seven years by a German court,
two people are due to appear in court in the UK later this year, and
several other people have been charged in Germany and Austria - one of
whom committed suicide while in police custody.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

THE FRAUD REPORT STATISTICS PAGE

The analysis of fraud in Government departments places frauds into
various categories - but in reality details are often complicated and
may cross boundaries, as this month's statistics show.

As in the previous two years, the largest category of frauds reported
in 1994-95 is travel and subsistence. These 105 cases represented for
over a quarter in volume but only 6% in value.

The second largest category involves theft of assets such as office
equipment, protective clothing and building materials. The number of
cases represent 15% of the total, while the value of the assets
represent a quarter of the total monetary loss. One case accounted for
#400,000. It involved the alleged theft of equipment due for sale or
disposal, by a staff member who is suspected of exploiting weaknesses
in receipt and stock control procedures. Collusion with outside
accomplices is suspected and investigations are continuing.

Misappropriation of cash came to #832,500, 39% of the total value of
frauds in the year. Two cases accounted for over half the loss in this
category. Enquiries are continuing in one case - value #298,000 - where
a new member of staff noticed irregularities in the accounts. The
suspect was arrested following a suspected arson attack on the office
containing the records in question. Cash books and other records were
allegedly found in the suspect's possession. A prosecution is pending.

In one case the actual loss to the public funds is estimated at
#41,000, whereas the gain to the perpetrators is believed to be between
#600,000 and #700,000. Over a number of years an embassy official
allegedly exploited currency exchange rates by manipulating the
difference between the local official market exchange rate and the
unofficial, parallel market rate, retaining the difference. The fraud
was carried out in collusion with a locally engaged accountant and the
officers are believed to have falsified embassy accounts by recording
only the lower, official exchange rate. The official is also alleged to
have been responsible for rigging local building contracts. He was due
to be charged with theft, deception and corruption but committed
suicide while on police bail.

The Treasury has warned departments to increase controls of access to
personal and sensitive data held on computer. It reports that
unauthorised staff access is on the increase.

Overall, in 38% of the cases, perpetrators were prosecuted, or were
awaiting prosecution or had been dismissed without prosecution. In a
further 22% of cases, the perpetrators were subject to internal
disciplinary action ranging from a reduction in grade through to a
formal reprimand. The lesser penalties were applied in cases such as
misuse of sick leave, official vehicle or telephones for personal
calls.

WHAT HAPPENS TO THE FRAUDSTERS?

The Government says that it takes all cases of fraud very seriously.
Set out below is what actually happened to perpetrators of fraud in
1994-95.

Action                                                 No of cases

Prosecuted, resulting in custodial sentence                 41
Prosecution, resulting in fine or probation                 18
Prosecution pending                                         34
Dismissed (without prosecution)                             63
Downgraded                                                   6
Loss of spine points and/or promotion bar for
  specified period                                          24
Formal reprimand                                            62
Resignation, no further action                              28
Disciplinary action pending                                 26
Insufficient evidence to sustain disciplinary action        16
Culprit not identified                                      42
Cases still under investigation                             48
Total                                                      408



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE FRAUD REPORT via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

BY DEFINITION, A BIG PROBLEM

The rules concerning Government accounting requires departments to make
an annual return to the Treasury of all cases of suspected or proven
fraud - including attempted fraud - affecting their departments
including their agencies, within the following categories:

- Fraud perpetrated within the department by its own staff, including
the theft of assets and cases of collusion outside the department.

- Computer frauds, whether perpetrated by members of staff or members
of the public. A computer fraud is defined as one where IT equipment
has been used to manipulate computer programs or data dishonestly (for
example to alter or substitute records; to destroy or suppress records;
or to duplicate or create spurious records); or where the existence of
an IT system was a material factor in the perpetration of fraud (ie
where the fraud was unlikely to have occurred there had been no IT
system.) Departments are also asked to report any cases involving the
theft or fraudulent use of computer time and resources.

- Frauds by contractors arising in connection with contracts placed by
departments for the supply of goods and services.

- Any other frauds which reveal potentially significant system
weaknesses or exposures to loss of a nature which other departments
might face.

Data is not collected on external frauds perpetrated upon departments
by outside parties, such as tax or benefit frauds or those involving
grants or subsidies. Nor does the report include frauds occurring in
non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs). Frauds in NDPBs are reported to
their sponsoring body rather than to the Treasury.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>