
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B34-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001021-B002-180</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/cn03.html 205.156.212.5 19970121222749 text/html 37727
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:25:54 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:54 GMT
Content-length: 37542
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/cn03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ORIGINS: CATHOLIC DOCUMENTARY SERVICE via NewsNet <BR>
January 4, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>LET US GIVE CHILDREN A FUTURE OF PEACE: 1996 WORLD DAY OF PEACE&nbsp;MESSAGE,&nbsp;by Pope John Paul II</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3195 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>MARGIN NOTES TO LET US GIVE CHILDREN A FUTURE OF PEACE: 1996 WORLD&nbsp;DAY OF PEACE MESSAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(831 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>THOSE WITH MENTAL OR DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES,&nbsp;by Bishop John McCarthy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1021 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>*********&nbsp;ONFILE&nbsp;*********</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(507 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>*********&nbsp;DATEBOOK&nbsp;*********</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ORIGINS: CATHOLIC DOCUMENTARY SERVICE via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

LET US GIVE CHILDREN A FUTURE OF PEACE: 1996 WORLD DAY OF PEACE
MESSAGE,
by Pope John Paul II

   "I feel bound to mention in a particular way children who are
suffering and those who often grow to adulthood without ever having
experienced peace," Pope John Paul II says in his message for the
World Day of Peace Jan. 1, 1996. The theme for the 1996 observance
is "Let Us Give Children a Future of Peace." In it the pope
discusses numerous forms of violence against children. "Many of the
world's children are innocent victims of war. In recent years
millions of them have been wounded or killed: a veritable
slaughter," the pope says. He notes that many children "are forced
to take an active part in" wars, which can compromise these
children's futures in unrelenting ways. Other forms of violence
against children also are discussed, including violence in the home
or the buying and selling of children for purposes of the drug
trade or prostitution. "If children are properly helped and loved,
they themselves can become peacemakers," Pope John Paul says. "It
can hardly be hoped that children will one day be able to build a
better world unless there is a specific commitment to their
education for peace. Children need to 'learn peace': It is their
right and one which cannot be disregarded," he writes. The roles
of the family and of schools are discussed by the pope. "The family
must be for children the first school of peace," he says. In
schools, he adds, children need to learn the history of peace and
not simply the history of victory and defeat in war." The Vatican's
English text of the message follows.

   1. At the end of 1994, the International Year of the Family, I
wrote a letter to the children of the whole world asking them to
pray that humanity would increasingly become God's family, living
in harmony and peace. I have frequently expressed my heartfelt
concern for children who are victims of armed conflicts and other
kinds of violence, and I have not failed to call these serious
situations to the attention of world public opinion.
   At the beginning of this new year, my thoughts turn once again
to children and to their legitimate hope for love and peace. I feel
bound to mention in a particular way children who are suffering and
those who often grow to adulthood without ever having experienced
peace. Children's faces should always be happy and trusting, but
at times they are full of sadness and fear: How much have these
children already seen and suffered in the course of their short
lives!
   Let us give children a future of peace! This is the confident
appeal which I make to men and women of good will, and I invite
everyone to help children to grow up in an environment of authentic
peace. This is their right, and it is our duty.

Children Who Are Victims of War
   2. I begin by thinking of the great crowds of children whom I
have met during the years of my pontificate, especially during my
apostolic visits to every continent: joyful children who are full
of happiness. My thoughts turn to them at the beginning of this new
year. It is my hope that all children of the world will be able to
begin 1996 in happiness and to enjoy a peaceful childhood with the
help of responsible adults.
   I pray that everywhere a harmonious relationship between adults
and children will promote a climate of peace and authentic
well-being. Sadly, many of the world's children are innocent
victims of war. In recent years millions of them have been wounded
or killed: a veritable slaughter.
   The special protection accorded to children by international
law(1) has been widely disregarded, and the dramatic increase of
regional and interethnic conflicts has made it difficult to
implement the protective measures called for by humanitarian
regulations. Children have even become targets of snipers, their
schools deliberately destroyed and the hospitals where they are
cared for bombed. In the face of such horrendous misdeeds, how can
we fail to speak out with one voice in condemnation? The deliberate
killing of a child is one of the most disturbing signs of the
breakdown of all respect for human life.(2)
   In addition to the children who have been killed, my thoughts
also turn to those who have been maimed during or after these
conflicts. I likewise think of young people who are systematically
hunted down, raped or killed during so-called "ethnic cleansings."
   3. Children are not only victims of the violence of wars; many
are forced to take an active part in them. In some countries of the
world it has come to the point where even very young boys and girls
are compelled to serve in the army of the warring parties. Enticed
by the promise of food and schooling, they are confined to remote
camps where they suffer hunger and abuse and are encouraged to kill
even people from their own villages. Often they are sent ahead to
clear minefields. Clearly, the life of children has little value
for those who use them in this way!
   The future of young people who have taken up arms is often
compromised. After years of military service, some are simply
discharged and sent home, where they often fail to fit into
civilian life. Others, ashamed of having survived when their
companions have not, frequently end up as criminals or drug
addicts. Who knows what nightmares must continue to afflict them!
Will their minds ever be free of the memories of violence and
death?
   The humanitarian and religious organizations which attempt to
relieve these inhuman sufferings deserve heartfelt respect. Thanks
are also owed to those generous individuals and families who
welcome orphans with love and do everything they can to heal their
traumas and to help them to fit once more into the communities from
which they came.
   4. The memory of the millions of children who have been killed
and the sad faces of so many others who are suffering compel us to
take every possible measure to safeguard or re-establish peace and
to bring conflicts and wars to an end.
   Before the Fourth World Conference on Women, which took place
in Beijing last September, I asked Catholic charitable and
educational institutions to adopt a coordinated strategy which
gives priority to issues concerning girls and young women,
especially those most in need.(3) Now I wish to renew that appeal
and to extend it in a special way to Catholic institutions and
organizations which deal with children. I ask them to help girls
who have suffered as a result of war and violence, to teach boys
to acknowledge and respect the dignity of women, and to help all
children to rediscover the tenderness of the love of God, who took
flesh, and who, by dying, left the world the gift of his peace (cf.
Jn 14:27).
   I will continue to point out that all, from the most prominent
international organizations to local associations, from heads of
state to ordinary citizens, in everyday actions and at the most
significant moments of life, are called upon to make a contribution
to peace and to give no support to war.

Children Who Are Victims of
Various Forms of Violence
   5. Millions of children suffer from other kinds of violence
present both in poverty-stricken and in developed societies. These
kinds of violence are often less obvious, but they are no less
terrible.
   The International Summit for Social Development which took place
this year in Copenhagen stressed the connection between poverty and
violence,(4) and on that occasion states committed themselves to
a greater battle against poverty through initiatives at the
national level, beginning in 1996.(5) Similar suggestions were made
by the earlier world conference of the United Nations on children,
held in New York in 1990. Poverty is indeed the cause of inhuman
living and working conditions. In some countries children are
forced to work at a tender age and are often badly treated, harshly
punished and paid absurdly low wages. Because they have no way of
asserting their rights, they are the easiest to blackmail and
exploit.
   In other circumstances children are bought and sold(6) so that
they can be used for begging or, even worse, forced into
prostitution, as in the case of so-called "sex tourism." This
utterly despicable trade degrades not only those who take part in
it but also those who in any way promote it. Some do not hesitate
to enlist children in criminal activities, especially the selling
of narcotics, thus exposing them to the risk of personal
involvement in drug use.
   Many children end up with the street as their only home. Having
run away, or having been abandoned by their families, or never
having known a family environment, these young people live by their
wits and in a state of total neglect, and they are considered by
many as refuse to be eliminated.
   6. Sadly, violence toward children is found even in wealthy and
affluent families. Such cases are infrequent, but it is important
not to overlook them. Sometimes children are taken advantage of and
suffer abuse within the home itself at the hands of people whom
they should be able to trust, to the detriment of their
development.
   Many children are also compelled to endure the trauma caused by
fighting between their parents or by the actual breakup of the
family. Concern for the children's welfare does not prevent
solutions which are often dictated by the selfishness and hypocrisy
of adults. Behind an appearance of normality and peacefulness,
masked even further by an abundance of material possessions,
children are at times forced to grow up in dismal loneliness,
without firm and loving guidance and a suitable moral formation.
Left to themselves, such children usually find their main contact
with reality in television programs, which often present unreal and
immoral situations which they are still too young to assess
properly.
   It is no wonder if this kind of widespread and pernicious
violence also has its effect on their young hearts, changing their
natural enthusiasm into disillusionment or cynicism, and their
instinctive goodness into indifference or selfishness. When young
people chase after false ideals, they can experience bitterness and
humiliation, hostility and hatred, absorbing the discontent and
emptiness all around them. Everyone is well aware of how childhood
experiences can have profound and sometimes irreparable
consequences on an individual's whole life.
   It can hardly be hoped that children will one day be able to
build a better world unless there is a specific commitment to their
education for peace. Children need to "learn peace": It is their
right, and one which cannot be disregarded.

Children and Hope for Peace
   7. I have sought to emphasize strongly the often tragic
conditions in which many children are living today. I consider this
my duty: They will be the adults of the third millennium. But I
have no intention of yielding to pessimism or ignoring the signs
of hope. How can I fail to mention, for example, the many families
in every part of the world in which children grow up in an
atmosphere of peace? And how can we not note the efforts being made
by so many individuals and organizations to enable children in
difficulty to grow up in peace and happiness? Public and private
associations, individual families and particular communities have
taken initiatives, the only purpose of which is to help children
who have suffered some traumatic event to return to a normal life.
In particular, educational programs have been developed for
encouraging children and young people to use fully their personal
talents in order to become true peacemakers.
   There is also a growing awareness in the international community
which, in recent years, despite difficulties and hesitation, has
made efforts to deal decisively and systematically with problems
connected with childhood.
   The results achieved thus far encourage us to continue these
praiseworthy endeavors. If children are properly helped and loved,
they themselves can become peacemakers, builders of a world of
fraternity and solidarity. With their enthusiasm and youthful
idealism, young people can become "witnesses" and "teachers" of
hope and peace to adults. Lest these possibilities be lost,
children should be offered, in a way adapted to their individual
needs, every opportunity for a balanced personal growth.
   A peaceful childhood will enable boys and girls to face the
future with confidence. Let no one stifle their joyful enthusiasm
and hope!

Children in the School of Peace
   8. Little children very soon learn about life. They watch and
imitate the behavior of adults. They rapidly learn love and respect
for others, but they also quickly absorb the poison of violence and
hatred. Family experiences strongly condition the attitudes which
children will assume as adults. Consequently, if the family is the
place where children first encounter the world, the family must be
for children the first school of peace.
   Parents have an extraordinary opportunity to help their sons and
daughters to become aware of this great treasure: the witness of
their mutual love. It is by loving each other that they enable the
child, from the very first moment of its existence, to grow up in
peaceful surroundings, imbued with the positive values which make
up the family's true heritage: mutual respect and acceptance,
listening, sharing, generosity, forgiveness. Thanks to the sense
of working together which these values foster, they provide a true
education for peace and make the child, from its earliest years,
an active builder of peace.
   Children share with their parents and brothers and sisters the
experience of life and hope. They see how life's inevitable trials
are met with humility and courage, and they grow up in an
atmosphere of esteem for others and respect for opinions different
from their own.
   It is above all in the home that, before ever a word is spoken,
children should experience God's love in the love which surrounds
them. In the family they learn that God wants peace and mutual
understanding among all human beings, who are called to be one
great family.
   9. Besides the basic education provided by the family, children
have a right to a specific training for peace at school and in
other educational settings. These institutions have a duty to lead
children gradually to understand the nature and demands of peace
within their world and culture. Children need to learn the history
of peace and not simply the history of victory and defeat in war.

   Let us show them examples of peace and not just examples of
violence! Fortunately, many positive examples of this can be found
in every culture and period of history. Suitable new educational
opportunities must be created, especially in those situations where
cultural and moral poverty has been most oppressive. Everything
possible should be done to help children to become messengers of
peace.
   Children are not a burden on society; they are not a means of
profit or people without rights. Children are precious members of
the human family, for they embody its hopes, its expectations and
its potential.

Jesus, the Way of Peace
   10. Peace is a gift of God; but men and women must first accept
this gift in order to build a peaceful world. People can do this
only if they have a childlike simplicity of heart. This is one of
the most profound and paradoxical aspects of the Christian message:
To become childlike is more than just a moral requirement, but a
dimension of the mystery of the incarnation itself.
   The Son of God did not come in power and glory, as he will at
the end of the world, but as a child, needy and poor. Fully sharing
our human condition in all things but sin (cf. Hb. 4:15), he also
took on the frailty and hope for the future which are part of being
a child. After that decisive moment for the history of humanity,
to despise childhood means to despise the one who showed the
greatness of his love by humbling himself and forsaking all glory
in order to redeem mankind.
   Jesus identified with the little ones. When the apostles were
arguing about who was the greatest, he "took a child and put him
by his side, and said to them, 'Whoever receives this child in my
name, receives me; and whoever receives me receives him who sent
me"' (Lk. 9:47-48). The Lord also forcefully warned us against
giving scandal to children: "Whoever causes one of these little
ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have
a great millstone fastened round his neck and to be drowned in the
depth of the sea" (Mt. 18:6).
   Jesus asked the disciples to become "children" again. When they
tried to turn away the little ones who were pressing in upon him
he said indignantly: "Let the children come to me, do not hinder
them; for to such belongs the kingdom of God. Truly, I say to you,
whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not
enter it" (Mk. 10:14-15). Jesus thus turned around our way of
thinking. Adults need to learn from children the ways of God:
Seeing children's capacity for complete trust, adults can learn to
cry out with true confidence, "Abba, Father!"
   11. To become like a little child -- with complete trust in the
Father and with the meekness taught by the Gospel -- is not only
an ethical imperative; it is a reason for hope. Even where the
difficulties are so great as to lead to discouragement and the
power of evil so overwhelming as to dishearten, those who can
rediscover the simplicity of a child can begin to hope anew. This
is possible above all for those who know they can trust in a God
who desires harmony among all people in the peaceful communion of
his kingdom. It is also possible for those who, though not sharing
the gift of faith, believe in the values of forgiveness and
solidarity and see in them -- not without the hidden action of the
Spirit -- the possibility of renewing the face of the earth.
   It is therefore to men and women of good will that I address
this confident appeal. Let us all unite to fight every kind of
violence and to conquer war! Let us create the conditions which
will ensure that children can receive as the legacy of our
generation a more united and fraternal world!
   Let us give children a future of peace!
   From the Vatican, Dec. 8, 1995.
   John Paul II

   Footnotes
   1 Cf. U.N. Convention of Nov. 20, 1989, on the rights of
children, especially Article 38; the Fourth Geneva Convention of
Aug. 12, 1949, for the protection of civilians in wartime, Article
24; Protocols I and II of Dec. 12, 1977, etc.
   2 Cf. John Paul II, "Evangelium Vitae" (March 25, 1995), No. 3.
   3Cf. Message to the Delegation of the Holy See at the Fourth
World Conference on Women (Aug. 29, 1995): L'Osservatore Romano,
Aug. 30, 1995, 1.
   4 Cf. Copenhagen Declaration, 16.
   5 Cf. Program of Action, Chapter II.
   6 Cf. Program of Action, 39 (e).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ORIGINS: CATHOLIC DOCUMENTARY SERVICE via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

MARGIN NOTES TO LET US GIVE CHILDREN A FUTURE OF PEACE: 1996 WORLD
DAY OF PEACE MESSAGE

   The letter to the world's children issued by Pope John Paul II
for Christmas 1994 appeared in Origins, Vol. 24, pp. 481ff (Jan.
5, 1995).
   Also, in his message for the 1994 World Day of Peace (Origins,
Vol. 23, pp. 481ff, in the edition dated Dec. 23, 1993), the pope
discussed violence and the family. That year's World Day of Peace
theme was "The Family Creates the Peace of the Human Family." He
said:
   "In order to count on a peaceful future, every child needs to
experience the warmth of caring and constant affection, not
betrayal and exploitation. And although the state can do much by
providing means and structures of support, the contribution of the
family to ensuring that climate of security and trust cannot be
replaced, so important is it in helping young children to look to
the future with serenity and in preparing them to take a
responsible part in building a society of true progress when they
grow up. Children are the future already present among us; they
need to experience what peace means so that they will be able to
create a future of peace."

   For a recent text in Origins that is of current interest, see
"Walk in the Light," a statement on child sexual abuse, by the U.S.
bishops' Committee on Women in Society and in the Church, and their
Committee on Marriage and Family. It appeared in the current volume
of Origins, pp. 337ff (Nov. 2, 1995). "As a community of Christians
we have the means to shatter the walls of loneliness, shame and
fear that isolate those who are sexually abused and those who have
survived abuse. They need us, and we need to hear their stories of
pain, endurance and courage."

   Gun violence against children was discussed in a text by the
Connecticut Christian Conference that appeared in the current
volume of Origins, pp. 17ff (May 25, 1995). The conference is an
ecumenical group whose members include the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of Hartford and the dioceses of Norwich and Bridgeport.

   See also the text titled "Steps Toward Overcoming Violence," by
Cardinal Anthony Bevilacqua, in Origins, Vol. 24, pp. 793ff (May
4, 1995). It focused on street violence against youths.


   "The family is the key to the development of positive values,
including peacemaking," the U.S. bishops said in their 1994
pastoral message titled "Confronting a Culture of Violence: A
Catholic Framework for Action" (Origins, Vol. 24, pp. 422ff, the
edition dated Dec. 1, 1994).
   It said also that "faith challenges each of us to examine how
we can contribute to an ethic which cherishes life, puts people
before things, and values kindness and compassion over anger and
vengeance."


   "Being a Christian in this society demands that we fight key
elements of our culture of violence," Jesuit Father John Coleman
said in a speech that appeared in the current volume of Origins,
pp. 180ff (Aug. 24, 1995). He said: "We harbor violence in our
hearts and perpetrate it in our deeds." Coleman urged people to
"pay attention to the attraction and embodiment of violence in our
own speech and actions. Ultimately, nonviolence, as Dorothy Day or
Gandhi knew, implies a profound conversion of heart and an aversion
to the roots of violence in culture, in individualism, racism,
vigilantism. They also knew that nonviolence was possible only in
community."

   QUOTE FROM A PAST TEXT OF CURRENT INTEREST:
   "Across the globe ... millions of children are dying -- from
starvation, disease, poverty and military conflict. According to
UNICEF, 40,000 children die every day from malnutrition and related
diseases.
   "Wars have killed nearly 2 million children in the last 15
years; more than twice that number have been physically disabled;
and it is not possible to even estimate the number who have been
traumatized as a result of these conflicts.
   "Seven million children are growing up in refugee camps because
of war and natural disasters; a slightly larger number have been
uprooted from their homes in their own countries....
   "Approximately 80 million children work in often monotonous,
repetitive and dangerous jobs; in some countries these exploited
children earn wages of five to seven cents an hour.
   "Fifteen percent of the world's 2 billion children under 15
years of age live under what UNICEF terms 'especially difficult
circumstances.' Millions, for example, live in the streets of the
exploding Third World cities, resorting to theft, drug trafficking,
prostitution and other desperate measures to survive....
   "Sickness ravages poor families. Diseases long banished or
generally unknown in the industrialized world -- measles, malaria,
sleeping sickness -- kill hundreds of thousands annually. And now
we see the worldwide consequences of AIDS, which will produce an
estimated 10 million orphans in this decade in Africa alone."
   (From "Putting Children and Families First: A Challenge for Our
Church, Nation and World," a November 1991 statement of the U.S.
bishops; Origins, Vol. 21, quoted material on  p. 396 in the
edition dated Nov. 28, 1991.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ORIGINS: CATHOLIC DOCUMENTARY SERVICE via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

THOSE WITH MENTAL OR DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES,
by Bishop John McCarthy

   "Today I call your attention to the special needs of those who
are emotionally disturbed, mentally ill or developmentally
disabled," Bishop John McCarthy of Austin, Texas, said in a letter
to the diocese issued at the start of Advent 1995. "Among our
population there are more than 35 million people who suffer from
some type of mental or emotional disability," he said. "One family
in four has been affected with this burden, and there is no parish
in this diocese or anywhere else that does not have parishioners
who carry the burden of mental disabilities or emotional illness."
But, McCarthy said, "many people with the problems that I am
discussing either stay away or are kept away from parish activities
because they know the meaning of rejection. Parishes and parish
organizations should go out of their way to identify these people
and invite them into our spiritual home." The bishop urged parents
to talk to their children and among themselves "about the complex
causes of mental illness, emotional distress and retardation. Let
our children know that within that person who seems different and
whom they might fear or shun there is an extraordinarily unique
person loved by God." McCarthy's text follows.

   I send you greetings this day as each of our 125 parishes joins
with the rest of the Christian world in beginning the holy season
of Advent, a period of preparation for the celebration of the birth
of the Savior.
   In deepening our awareness of God's love for us, we develop
within ourselves a capacity to love others to a greater extent. It
is the human love that responds to our awareness of divine love
that brings joy and happiness into our lives. It is the lessening
or the absence of love that produces lives that are arid, selfish
and unhappy.
   Let us seriously consider during this holy season expanding our
horizons where human love is concerned. Let us reach beyond a love
that is limited to those closest to us. Let us envelope those
persons who have a desperate need for love but who frequently do
not find it, even among those of us who claim to be followers of
Jesus of Nazareth.
   Regretfully, our society seems to have an inordinate, perhaps
immature, attachment to youthfulness, beauty and health. These are
excellent qualities, but most of us lack one or the other.
Ultimately, all of us will lose all three. The worth of every human
being is to be measured not by appearances or mental acumen, but
rather by the fact that each of us is an extraordinarily unique
being created by God and redeemed by Jesus Christ. Each person is
of infinite worth because each of us was created in the image of
God, "a little less than the angels."
   Today I call your attention to the special needs of those who
are emotionally disturbed, mentally ill or developmentally
disabled. Yes, these too are our brothers and sisters. They need
understanding and love. We, as the followers of Jesus, should be
the first to offer those gifts to them.
   While a large segment of our society may look with disdain and
fear on persons who are different, the followers of Jesus should
do the opposite. Among our population there are more than 35
million people who suffer from some type of mental or emotional
disability. One family in four has been affected with this burden,
and there is no parish in this diocese or anywhere else that does
not have parishioners who carry the burden of mental disabilities
or emotional illness. Needing understanding, support and love, they
all too frequently experience rejection, isolation and disdain.
   While parents are giving thought to preparations for their
children's Christmas, let me earnestly suggest that you consider
giving them the gifts of sensitivity and generosity. Talk to your
children and among yourselves about the complex causes of mental
illness, emotional distress and retardation. Let our children know
that within that person who seems different and whom they might
fear or shun there is an extraordinarily unique person loved by God
from all eternity. While encased for the time being in a human
habitat that does not function exactly the same way as the rest of
us, the sacredness of that individual is crying out to be
recognized. Talk to your children about the importance of going out
of their way to be kind to people that others might avoid.
Encourage them to invite children who face these problems into
their games and other activities. Parents who can do this will give
their children a gift of far greater value than any tricycle,
bicycle or other gift that won't last much longer than the
Christmas tree. You will be giving them the gift of compassion.
   Many people with the problems that I am discussing either stay
away or are kept away from parish activities because they know the
meaning of rejection. Parishes and parish organizations should go
out of their way to identify these people and invite them into our
spiritual home. One of the great messages of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ is that he was so at home with those who are different
-- the despised tax collector, the poor, the prostitute, the lame
and the crippled and the emotionally disturbed. Can we truly claim
to be his followers and not attempt to imitate him in this regard?
   The holy season of Advent is dominated by the image of John the
Baptist. You can say many things about the last of the Old
Testament prophets but one thing is certain: He was different!
Clothed with hides, living in the desert, dining on locusts,
shouting at passersby to straighten out their lives -- I doubt that
John was frequently invited to whatever was the equivalent to the
Rotary Club in that day and time. Yet he was the one that was
chosen by God to use to be the first bearer of the good news, to
draw the attention of the world to Jesus of Nazareth. Are
latter-day John the Baptists still in our midst? Do we see them?v




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ORIGINS: CATHOLIC DOCUMENTARY SERVICE via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

*********
ONFILE
*********

   The final report of a three-year archdiocesan planning project
in the Archdiocese of San Francisco was approved Dec. 15 by
Archbishop John Quinn, with the concurrence of San Francisco's new
coadjutor, Archbishop William Levada. The plan calls for increased
lay leadership and responsibility, and already has led to
establishment of the School of Pastoral Leadership, which now has
1,000 people enrolled. Other priorities in the final report call
for improved liturgies and homilies; strong support for vocations
to priesthood, diaconate and religious life; ongoing religious
education and formation for everyone, including stronger Catholic
schools and religious education programs, and regular adult
education; stronger advocacy and witness for the church's social
teachings by the archdiocese's people and institutions; and
involvement of young adults and youth in service to others.
   In terms of archdiocesan structures, the final planning report
includes recommendations to form an archdiocesan board and
archdiocesan pastoral council to advise the archbishop; establish
the offices of vicar for parishes, vicar for clergy and consecrated
life, and vicar for ethnic and cultural ministries; elevate the
archdiocesan Catholic schools office to the vicar level;
restructure communications under a new Office of Communications and
Public Affairs; establish the office of a director of human
resources.
   Quinn began an archdiocese-wide consultation in early 1993 to
prepare the local church for the next millennium. Among factors
behind the planning was a new San Francisco ordinance requiring
that all public buildings built with unreinforced masonry --
including a number of the city's older Catholic churches -- be
reinforced to meet earthquake safety standards. Decisions made
earlier in the planning process called for the closing of some
churches but also for keeping several open that didn't meet the new
building standards. In August 1995 the archdiocese announced $6
million in grants to help five parishes be retrofitted to meet the
earthquake safety standards.
   Quinn announced last summer that he planned to retire in the
first part of 1996 and that he had a spring-term fellowship at
Oxford University in England and an appointment as centennial
lecturer at Oxford's Campion Hall. He said one reason he asked for
a coadjutor archbishop was to involve his successor in the
archdiocese's final planning stage.

   Auxiliary Bishop John Dunne of Rockville Centre, N.Y., new
chairman of the U.S. bishops' Committee on Women in Society and in
the Church, has named six bishops to serve on the committee. The
U.S. Catholic Conference announced that the committee also expects
to appoint women advisers after its first meeting, in March. Dunne
was elected head of the committee at the U.S. bishops' November
meeting in Washington. The new committee members are Bishops
Richard Hanifen of Colorado Springs, Colo., Howard Hubbard of
Albany, N.Y., and Joseph Gossman of Raleigh, N.C.; and Auxiliary
Bishops Gabino Zavala of Los Angeles, George Murry of Chicago and
William Newman of Baltimore. Among future committee projects are
ongoing studies of feminism and the ways women may exercise
leadership in the church, along with the publication of Pope John
Paul II's 1995 statements to and about women.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ORIGINS: CATHOLIC DOCUMENTARY SERVICE via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

*********
DATEBOOK
*********

   Jan. 17-20: Southwest Liturgical Conference Annual Study Week.
Theme: "What Is This Place? Liturgical Horizons for Word and
Sacrament." Red Lion Hotel. Salt Lake City, Utah.

   Jan 17-21: Annual Convocation: "Small Christian Communities: A
World Vision." Sponsor: Buena Vista, a network of people fostering
small communities. Estes Park, Colo.

   Jan. 19-21: Annual Conference of American Collegians for Life.
Theme: "Changing Minds, Saving Lives, Accepting the Campus
Challenge." Rosslyn Westpark Hotel. Rosslyn, Va.

   Feb. 5: Annual National Day of Prayer for the African-American
Family. Founder: Rev. Jim Goode, OFM. Theme: "A Time to Pray, a
Time to Embrace, a Time to Reclaim Our Children and Youth, a Time
to Affirm and Reaffirm Our Need for God and Each Other."

   Feb. 5-12: Pope John Paul II travels to Guatemala, Nicaragua,
El Salvador and Venezuela.

   Feb. 12-15: Annual Convention of the National Organization for
Continuing Education of Roman Catholic Clergy. Theme: "Priesthood:
Identity and Responsibility." St. Anthony Hotel. San Antonio,
Texas.

   Feb. 15-17: International Congress: "The Origins of Bioethics."
Sponsor: Catholic University of the Sacred Heart Institute of
Bioethics. The Catholic University of the Sacred Heart. Rome,
Italy.

   Feb. 15-17: Annual Mile Hi Congress. Sponsor: Archdiocese of
Denver. Theme: "The Way of the Pilgrim." Holiday Inn Denver
International Airport. Denver, Colo.

   Feb. 25-28: Annual Combined Catholic Social Action Meeting.
Sponsors: U.S. Catholic Conference and 12 Catholic agencies.
Holiday Inn-Capitol Hill. Washington, D.C.

   March 1-3: Annual East Coast Conference for Religious Education.
Sponsor: National Center for Pastoral Leadership. Theme: "Seeking
the Sources of Hope." Omni Shoreham Hotel. Washington, D.C.

   *March 8-10: Great Lakes Pastoral Ministry Gathering. Theme:
"Insights From the Past ... Inspiration for the Future." Holiday
Inn O'Hare International. Rosemont, Ill.

   *March 10-13: Annual Convention for the National Conference for
Pastoral Planning and Council Development. Theme: "The Vision: It
Will Surely Come." Seattle, Wash.

*signifies new listing



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>