
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B02-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B045-222</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021814 text/html 204579
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:17:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:08:42 GMT
Content-length: 204360
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Treatment and Rehabilitation</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<p>STAFF PAPER 3 </p>

<h2>Treatment and Rehabilitation </h2>

<p><b>by James V. DeLong</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Introduction * Abstinence Programs * Methadone Maintenance *
Antagonists * Multimodal Programs * Heroin Maintenance *
Treatment of Users of Nonopiates<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>INTRODUCTION<br>
</i></font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">HISTORY OF TREATMENT <br>
</font></p>

<p>The beginnings of our current narcotics problem go back over a
century. As many authors have noted, the United States had a
large number of opiate addicts in the period between the Civil
War and the passage of the Harrison Act, which limited the
availability of drugs, in 1914. These addicts were primarily
white, female, rural, lower to lower-middle class, and
middle-aged.' They regularly injected morphine or took morphine
or opiated patent medicine orally. Opiates were freely available
from the local pharmacy, so they were not criminals. </p>

<p>Some of them did not even know that they were addicted to
narcotics. Patent medicines were not always labeled, and the user
may have known only that he felt sick when he did not take a
particular medicine, not realizing that the problem was
withdrawal from the medicine itself. Most were knowingly
addicted, of course, and addiction was a matter of great
individual concern. Physicians had developed many different
&quot;cures&quot; between 1856 and 1914, and the effort continued
thereafter. In 1928, Dr. Charles Terry and Mildren Pellens, after
reviewing these efforts extensively, stated: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>. . . for the most part, the treatment of this condition
    has not emerged from the stage of empiricism. The various
    methods described in general indicate that the basis of the
    majority of them is merely the separation of the patient from
    the drug. Very few of those who have described the details of
    treatment have given a rationale for their procedures but
    rather have outlined dogmatically the adoption of certain
    measures whose primary object is the withdrawal of the drug
    and have stated or left the reader to infer that the
    completion of the procedure brings about cure <font size="1">.2
    <br>
    </font></p>
</blockquote>

<p>True to the spirit of the age, there were also numerous patent
medicine &quot;cures&quot; available, some of which were
themselves laden with opiates. </p>

<p>It is difficult to recapture the dominant attitudes toward
addiction during this period. Terry and Pellens cite contemporary
sources contending that addiction was a vice, a physical disease,
a moral perversion, a product of neurotic inheritance, or a
result of morphine poisoning.' Much of the debate is cast in
terms of virtue and vice, and it is hard to tell what these terms
meant to the participants. On the whole, however, the arguments
are remarkably similar to those used in current debate about
addiction. </p>

<p>While there was no consensus on the nature or causes of
addicrecognized as a significant publiclegislative action
developed. The Act in 1914 changed the problem opiates were to be
controlled and than freely available on the open market. </p>

<p>It is not clear what response the lawmakers expected from the
medical establishment. They may have expected doctors to keep on
supplying existing addicts while avoiding the creation of new
ones; they may have expected doctors to force addicts to give up
their habit by refusing to prescribe narcotics; they may not have
thought about it at all. In any event, at passage of the Harrison
Act, the country had at least 200,000 to 300,000 opiate addicts
who were now cut off from their normal sources of supply and
unable to receive drugs except through physicians. </p>

<p>One result was predictable, although not necessarily
predicted: Physicians were deluged with addicts seeking drugs.' A
survey conducted by a Treasury Department committee in 1918 that
reached 31 per cent of the physicians in the United States found
that they had 73,150 addicts under treatment. Treatment, the
committee believed, meant supplying drugs.' In addition to, and
partly in replacement of, private physicians, more than 40
maintenance clinics were opened from about 1918. Most were
sponsored by cities. </p>

<p>Whatever the lawmakers may have thought about the nature of
addiction, the law enforcers considered maintaining existing
addicts on opiates unacceptable. This group believed that, once
the drug was removed and the addict had gone through withdrawal,
he should have no further problems. Rufus King has given some
examples of this view: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>the medical conclusion, propounded as not open to question
    [was] that drug addiction was a correctable and curable
    condition, viz. the following preface to the Prohibition
    Bureau's Regulations: &quot;It is well-established that the
    ordinary case of addiction will yield to proper treatment,
    and that addicts will remain permanently cured when drug
    addiction is stopped and they are otherwise physically
    restored to health and strengthened in will power.&quot; </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Moreover, a small but strident segment of the medical
    community went even further than the authorities ... In 1921
    a member of the American Medical Association's Committee on
    Narcotic Drugs, purportedly speaking officially for the
    Association, was quoted [as saying]: &quot;The shallow
    pretense that drug addiction is a disease which the
    specialist must be allowed to treat, which pretended
    treatment consists in supplying its victims with the drug
    which has caused their physical and moral debauchery .... has
    been asserted and urged in volumes of literature by the
    self-styled specialists.&quot;,,<br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>To people with this mental set, the maintenance clinics served
no useful purpose; they simply prolonged the addictive state
instead of curing it. If one assumes that abstinence is
relatively easy, then drug maintenance does appear to be the
equivalent of drug pushing. The government put severe pressure on
the clinics, and the last one was closed in 1923.' </p>

<p>At the same time, a very tough policy toward physicians was
maintained. The Narcotic Division of the Treasury Department
arrested or threatened 14,701 persons registered to dispense
drugs under the Harrison Act in 1918, 22,595 in 1919 and 47,835
in 1920.' Between 1914 and 1938, 25,000 doctors were arrested for
supplying opiates, and 5,000 of them actually went to jail.'
Those doctors who maintained that addiction was more complicated
than what the official view held, and who advocated maintenance,
were purged from the field. </p>

<p>It is tempting today to condemn this enforcement policy as
both cruel and ineffective. It was certainly cruel, but its real
effect will never be known. To begin with the most elementary
question, no one knows whether the policy of closing off
legitimate sources of supply decreased the total number of
addicts. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics has estimated that the
number of addicts declined from 200,000 at the time of the
Harrison Act in 1914 to 118,000 in 1930, 60,000 in 1936, and
20,000 in 1945. Dr. Alfred Lindesmith has pointed out that these
estimates are improbable, since they depend on the proposition
that new addicts were not being recruited to replace those who
died or quit the habit. if this were true, the average age of
addicts would have risen as the population aged. In fact, the
average age declined steadily throughout the period, and the
other demographic characteristics of the population also changed,
so there must have been substantial recruitment. Lindesmith
reached no firm conclusion on absolute numbers, but pointed out:
&quot;Since the range of estimates of the addicted population at
present is at least as great as it was before 1914, one can make
out a case for any trend one chooses by judiciously selecting the
estimates.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>One can argue that the policy worked fairly well for the
addicts of the early part of the century, who were 60 per cent
female, 90 per cent white, rural rather than urban, and middle or
lower-middle class rather than impoverished. By 1945, the addict
population was about 85 per cent male and only 75 per cent white,
a substantial change in character. Since then, the addict
population has remained about 85 per cent male and become
steadily younger as well as more minority-group-concentrated. In
New York City, for example, the Narcotics Register shows 47 per
cent of the addicts to be black, 27 per cent Puerto Rican,&quot;
and 26 per cent white. During the last two or three years,
addiction has been spreading back into the middle class, but this
is not a marked trend as yet. Clearly, the population of the
1910's and 1920's did not replace itself, and this could be
judged a successful result of sorts. </p>

<p>By any account, a hard core of addicts remained after the
closing of the clinics. During the 1920's, they were largely
ignored, and treatment for opiate addiction disappeared for a
decade. Then, in 1935 and 1938, the Public Health Service clinics
in Fort Worth and Lexington were opened, largely because of
problems created by addicts in the prisons. The basic theory of
treatment remained unchanged since the earlier period-if an
addict could be separated from his drug for a time, he could be
counted as cured. It was generally believed by this time that the
horrors of withdrawal were so great that few real addicts would
undertake it on their own, but that a few months at one of the
clinics would see them through withdrawal and allow them to
recover. Once they went back to the community, it was presumed,
they would never want to go near the drug again because of their
fear of withdrawal. </p>

<p>Subsequent studies have indicated that the PHS clinics did not
work very well.&quot; This was not generally recognized at the
time, however, and there was another hiatus in the development of
new treatment techniques until the explosion of urban addiction
in the 1950's and 1960's. During the latter part of this period,
several new methods came into being in response to the obvious
inadequacies of the old ones. </p>

<p>Synanon, founded in 1959, became the precursor of a line of
therapeutic communities that emphasized the psychological
component of readdiction and tried to restructure the addict's
character. During the next decade, many such communities were
founded across the country. The apogee of the movement was
probably reached in New York City's Addiction Services Agency
between 1965 and 1968. At the same time, civil-commitment
programs more or less on the Lexington model were applied on a
large scale by California starting in 1961 and by New York State
and the federal government starting in 1967. </p>

<p>In 1964, Dr. Vincent Dole pioneered in the use of methadone, a
synthetic opiate substitute for heroin. Methadone maintenance has
grown rapidly in the last few years, and, as of 1971, it is the
technique into which most new money is going. </p>

<p>Contemporaneously with methadone, researchers at Lexington in
1965 began experimenting with the use of antagonists-drugs that
block the effects of opiates without themselves being addictive.
This method, however is still experimental, has a great many
problems, and is not yet an operating modality. </p>

<p>At present, the dominant treatment modalities are therapeutic
communities, civil commitment, outpatient abstinence, and
metbadone maintenance. A large number of hybrid programs,
however, have developed in response to the concern over addiction
during the late 1960's. Some are explicitly multimodal, utilizing
all the major techniques. There are also detoxification programs
that simply take an addict through withdrawal, often using
methadone but sometimes not; there are also crisis intervention
centers, and programs that supply very small doses of methadone
on demand. Many community organizations have become active in the
field, with operations of all types and combinations. </p>

<p>For purposes of clarity, this paper imposes more order on the
field than exists in practice. Methadone receives by far the most
detailed analysis. In part, this is because methadone treatment
is expanding very rapidly, and thorough analysis is therefore
especially important. It is also due to the fact that, since
methadone maintenance has been in the hands of physicians and
scientists who believe in records, evaluation, and research,
information on these programs is more readily available.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">GOALS OF TREATMENT <br>
</font></p>

<p>The apparent goals of treatment are obvious. Society wants the
addict to stop using heroin and committing crimes and, instead,
to find a job, stabilize his personal life, generally improve his
character, and become a useful and productive citizen. Analyzing
programs in terms of these objectives presents a series of
problems, however. The first is mechanical, although important:
It is extremely difficult to get good information on the results
of programs in terms of these or any other measures of success. </p>

<p>The second is more subtle. Even when information on treatment
results can be obtained, it tends to focus on whether the patient
has stopped using heroin. This represents in part a moral
judgment that this is the most important goal of treatment and in
part the belief that abstinence is a valid proxy measure of the
achievement of the other objectives. Historically, there has also
been a tendency to believe that treatment has failed if an addict
subsequently uses narcotics for any length of time whatsoever, on
the assumption, perhaps, that any relapse automatically means
total relapse. </p>

<p>Increasingly, experts have become aware that this
concentration on abstinence is questionable. While abstinence is
to some extent a proxy for the other possible benefits of a
treatment program, it is not completely accurate. The many facets
of the addicted life-style are not totally inseparable, and,
equally important, they need not all be treated at once. After
treatment, an addict might hold a job, support a family, refrain
from criminal activity -and still go on occasional benders of
drug use. Or, he might continue to commit crimes, but fewer than
before. His physical health might be improved even if nothing
else were changed. It is also possible for a program to have a
reverse effect. It might, for example, eliminate opiate addiction
at the price of alcoholism, a dubious bargain. </p>

<p>In short, there is a range of possible benefits and adverse
effects that can be produced by treatment programs. Different
programs attach different importance to each; conflicts of value
are inherent in comparisons of effectiveness. Since such
questions are not easily resolvable, an objective examination of
treatment programs should, ideally, use varying measures rather
than only two categories-success (total abstinence) or failure
(anything else) . Abstinence, stabilization on methadone (or, in
fact, stabilization on heroin), employment, decreased criminal
conduct or non-criminal conduct, support of a family, improved
physical health and psychological functioning-any of these
outcomes represents at least partial success for a treatment
program and should be so regarded. </p>

<p>Despite the strong reservations about using abstinence as a
measure, this paper repeatedly uses freedom from drug use as the
major criterion of the success of treatment programs. While
evaluation of even this factor is fragmentary, it is far more
common than evaluation in terms of other possible measures.
Anyone trying to analyze program results has to use it as a proxy
or refrain from any judgments at all, and it is sufficiently
important to be of use. It should be emphasized, however, that
good multifactor evaluation might drastically change many of the
conclusions contained here. </p>

<p>The third problem is even more fundamental. No one knows
whether the goals of treatment as set forth in the beginning of
this section are realistic or even desirable. Since no one knows
why people become narcotics addicts, no one knows either how to
make them stop or what will happen to them if they do stop. For
example, NIMH officials recently stated that about 25 per cent of
the addict population are people who suffer from depression and
chronic anxiety, another 25 per cent are hedonists who like to
get intoxicated, and the rest are psychopaths who need immediate
gratification and are not particular about how they obtain
it.&quot; Other researchers have also concluded that there is no
one addict type, and that addiction can serve as a functional and
adaptive characteristic for people with different types of
psychic problems. </p>

<p>Yet, there are also a number of researchers who, denying this
stress on psychopathology, contend that people are inducted into
drug use through peer pressure and that large numbers of addicts
may not suffer from severe psychopathology. The argument can be
made that whatever characteristics addicts appear to have in
common are forced upon them by the requirements of sustaining the
addiction once it exists. Still another view is that addicts do
have psychological problems but that these are in many cases no
more severe than those shown by many nonaddicts. If one conducted
a mental-health survey of the population from which most addicts
are drawn, one might discover as many symptoms of mental disorder
among the nonaddicts. Finally, some argue that heroin itself
causes a metabolic change in the body that makes it difficult to
cease being an addict. Thus, one can become addicted casually and
then be unable to rid oneself of the addiction no matter what
therapeutic techniques are brought to bear. 14 </p>

<p>Treatment programs have disparate philosophies on these
questions. Some, though by no means all, methadone programs
assume some physiological basis of addiction. Most therapeutic
communities probably assume a character disorder that can be
helped by group therapy. Some outpatient abstinence programs
assume that addiction may be an almost accidental event for many
addicts, and that they can be helped with minimal intervention.
But these assumptions are not constant within any modality, and
almost all spectrums of opinion exist in each. </p>

<p>In short, there is no uniform theory of addiction and no
adequate description of the addict population. Further, addiction
has spread rapidly in recent years, and we know less about the
new population than we do about the old. And we knew little
enough before. </p>

<p>The difficulties these factors create in judging treatment
programs are obvious. We do not know what expectations are
realistic or desirable. We do not even know for certain that it
is good for addicts to stop taking drugs. Some programs may be
better for certain types of addicts than others, but we are not
sure what types, or whether the programs are attracting the type
with which they do best. </p>

<p>All the figures given in this paper are gross figures-the
programs are judged by effects on the total number of people who
were involved without any breakdown of results for different
hypothetical subgroups of the addict population. The conclusions,
therefore, are tentative, at best. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>ABSTINENCE PROGRAMS <br>
</i></font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">DETOXIFICATION<br>
</font></p>

<p>The most straightforward way to help a heroin addict is to
detoxify him-reduce his daily heroin intake to zero and see him
through withdrawal. The addict can be maintained on an inpatient
basis without any drugs for the five-to-ten-day period necessary
for primary withdrawal symptoms to disappear; or he can be
treated with tranquilizers but not opiates; or methadone can be
used to decrease his opiate dosage gradually until he is
drugfree. </p>

<p>Detoxification services are offered in many places and modes
across the nation-in hospitals, therapeutic communities, free
clinics, and government programs. There is no way of learning how
many addicts receive them each year. </p>

<p>Detoxification has several clear benefits for both the addict
and society. Even if the addict does not intend to stay off
drugs, it reduces his habit and decreases its cost. This spares
him the hassle and society the crime costs of his addiction for
some period, even if only a few days, after the process is
complete. For some addicts, it is also a step toward
rehabilitation. After repeated failures to remain detoxified,
they become ready for other modalities. </p>

<p>On the whole, however, it is not clear that detoxification
itself contributes greatly to the achievement of long-term
abstinence. One program that used methadone in decreasing doses
found that 74 per cent of the patients either did not finish the
withdrawal program or relapsed to drug use within 48 hours after
leaving it. Another, which effects withdrawal without opiates,
found that only 10 per cent successfully completed the
withdrawal, and almost all of these soon relapsed.&quot; The New
York Narcotic Addiction Control Commission has estimated that
only 24 per cent of those who receive detoxification without
other services &quot;remain drug-free for any length of
time.&quot;&quot; </p>

<p>The Haight-Ashbury Clinic in San Francisco has been
experimenting with outpatient withdrawal, utilizing analgesics
but not opiates. It reports the results with 450 patients: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>56 per cent dropped out before they were clean and were
    lost to follow-up for at least two weeks; 5 per cent of these
    resumed their habit, 22 per cent were in treatment, and the
    rest were apparently not known. 12 per cent had decreased
    their habit to &quot;chipping&quot; no more than once a week.
    </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>5.5 per cent had been clean for one month or more. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>38 per cent were lost track of after only one clinic
    visit.&quot; <br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>This population differs from the standard drug-addict
population because it includes individuals who are basically
middle class and who began using heroin after being involved in
the San Francisco speed scene; many have not been addicted for
long. No one knows whether this population is harder, or easier,
to work with than the more familiar ghetto populations. Other
program examples could be cited-some better and some worse-but
the general picture remains: Detoxification does have some
benefits, but it is primarily a service for the drug user who
needs a respite and a short-term way of protecting society
against crime rather than a long-term treatment for addiction. As
such, it is valuable, especially for anyone who believes that
addicts should be treated more humanely than they are at the
present time and that bandaids can be valuable things. But
expectations should not be too high.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><b>CIVIL COMMITMENT <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>In theory, civil commitment is the nonpunitive incarceration
of an addict for purposes of rehabilitation. This method of
treatment was started in the 1930's at the Lexington and Fort
Worth hospitals, where the programs were part voluntary and part
coercive. In the 1960's, civil commitment was applied on a wider
scale, first in California then in New York. Subsequently, the
federal government started using civil commitment as an
alternative to imprisonment through the Narcotic Addict
Rehabilitation Program. Dr. John Kramer has traced the
relationship between the earlier programs and the massive
investment of the 1960's: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>The roots of these commitment laws can be traced to the
    federal narcotics hospital in Lexington. In recounting the
    initial expectations for that institution Isbell writes . . .
    &quot;Drug addicts were to be treated within the institution,
    freed of their physiological dependence on drugs, their basic
    immaturities and personality problems corrected by vocational
    and psychiatric therapy, after which they would be returned
    to their communities to resume their lives. It seems to have
    been tacitly assumed that this program was the answer and
    would solve the problem of opiate addiction. Within a <font
    size="2">year it was apparent this assumption was wrong . . .
    a more adequate treatment program [required]: (1) Some means
    of holding voluntary patients until they had reached maximum
    benefit from hospital treatment. (2) Greater use of probation
    and parole. (3) Provision for intensive supervision and
    aftercare. . . . Isbell goes on to say that the reasons why
    these problems were not solved were complex. &quot;In 1961
    the California Legislature enacted laws establishing a
    commitment program for addicts which was designed to
    accomplish those objectives recommended but never carried out
    at Lexington.&quot;18</font> </p>
</blockquote>

<p>It is generally thought that the programs started in the
1930's were almost total failures. Between 1935 and 1964, there
were 87,000 admissions to the two centers, of which 63,600 were
voluntary and 23,400 were federal prisoners. Of the voluntary
patients, 70 per cent left against medical advice. A series of
studies of addicts released from the abstinence facilities found
that up to 90 per cent of those followed up relapsed into drug
use within a few years.&quot; </p>

<p>As is true of almost every other aspect of the field, this
conclusion is debatable. Recent research has suggested that it
may exaggerate the failures. Dr. John O'Donnell points out that
all the studies had problems with data collection and with
categorization of those addicts who could not be found. He also
questions the assumption that any relapse-any use of drugs-should
be regarded as a failure, an assumption that was made by several
of the studies. As has been pointed out, an addict may become
basically abstinent, even though he does relapse a few times;
and, even if he relapses regularly, he may spend more time off
drugs than he would have without the treatment. This is also a
net social gain. </p>

<p>O'Donnell uses the following example. If one has 2,000
exaddicts in a two-year study (a total of 4,000 man-years) and
defines relapse as a two-week period of heroin use at any time,
then a 90 per cent relapse rate could mean that anywhere between
69 and 3,600 of the 4,000 man-years were spent in a state of
addiction. That is, 90 per cent of the addicts could have
relapsed for exactly two weeks each, or, at the other extreme, 90
per cent could have relapsed for the entire two years, or
anything in between.&quot; The social and individual consequences
of these polar possibilities are very different. </p>

<p>The revisionist approach to the Lexington experience has
caused many observers to soften their adverse judgments somewhat.
Most still believe that it was not effective with very many
addicts but concede that the question probably cannot be answered
definitely. The data that would allow methodologically acceptable
studies are lost. This does not seem to bother anyone too much,
however, because the Lexington population drew heavily from rural
white populations, and the exact results would be of marginal
relevance to our present situation. </p>

<p>The three programs that were started in the 1960's built on
the Lexington model, although they tried to improve it. They
appear to have been started because addiction was either
increasing or becoming more visible, and was thus becoming a
political problem. In 1961, there was simply no treatment
modality available except civil commitment, and even by 1966 it
did not appear that there was any clearly better alternative.
Under pressure to do something, state and federal authorities
picked up the only available model, apparently on the premises
that: (1) The failures of the Lexington program were due in part
to the fact that the duration of treatment was too short (six
months or a year) ; (2) Improved vocational and counseling
services would be helpful; (3) Some careful studies had indicated
that better supervision in the community after release would
improve the success rate; 21 (4) Civil commitment would at least
get addicts off the street. </p>

<p>The California program, instituted in 1961, provides for
commitment on court order in lieu of sentence or prosecution.
Voluntary commitment and commitment by relatives are also
possible, but over 90 per cent of the inmates are there
involuntarily, after conviction. In fact, the program is
structurally and functionally very similar to imprisonment. The
main center, in Corona, California, is a maximum-security
facility under the direction of the Department of Corrections.
There are armed guards and barbedwire fences, and most of the
personnel are corrections workers. The minimum institutional stay
is six months, and the average is about 14 months. After leaving
the institution the addict is required to undergo a three-year
period of &quot;community aftercare,&quot; which is essentially
&quot;parole.&quot; During this time, he follows the same regimen
as ex-felons, with the additional requirement of regular
urinalysis testing and group counseling. Violations of
t1parole&quot; can and, in the case of relapse to drug use,
usually do mean return to the institution. Attempted escape from
the institution and serious parole violations are felonies in
themselves. </p>

<p>The facility does provide inmates with a modified form of
encounter-group therapy, based on the hypothesis that drug use is
a symptom of aberrant personality patterns which must be changed.
However, a study of the program's results concluded that the
program was interpreted by addicts and professional visitors as
more punitive than therapeutic. Whether one were released
depended in large part on how well one played the game at group
sessions. This was not conducive to the honesty that real group
therapy demands. </p>

<p>Evaluation showed that between 1962 and 1964 there were 1,209
persons on release status at some time. At the end of the year,
only 35 per cent were still in good standing and only 16 per cent
maintained this status after three years. The majority who fail
in aftercare do so for drug use, &quot;poor adjustment,&quot;
failure to report in, or new arrest. During the first year, 56
per cent were detected using drugs and 20 per cent convicted of
new crimes. In the three-year period, 81 per cent had been
suspended from release status at least once. The usual pattern
for the inmate consisted of periods spent in the facility
followed by periods of abstinence in the aftercare phase, and
then return to the facility in Corona. As a result of this
pattern, inmates who would have been serving a felony sentence
(70 per cent) actually spent less time &quot;incarcerated,&quot;
while those who were guilty of misdemeanors (16 per cent) were
&quot;incarcerated&quot; longer than if they had served an
ordinary prison sentence. No later results seem to have changed
this pattern. Felon addicts who receive no therapy while in
prison do as well as or better than California Rehabilitation
Center addicts while on parole.&quot; </p>

<p>The New York program, adopted several years later, differs
somewhat in conception.&quot; Like California, New York provides
for commitment in lieu of sentence or prosecution, for voluntary
commitment, and for commitment by relatives or other persons,
such as school officials or prosecuting attorneys. Unlike the
California system, New York's system is under the direction of an
independent Narcotic Addiction Control Commission (NACC) and has
a mental-health orientation involving the use of professional
mental-health personnel. NACC is also more committed to research
and community aftercare programs. </p>

<p>New York's total program, by far the largest in the United
States, has spent $475.3 million in the last four years,
including its investment in methadone and therapeutic communities
as well as in civil commitment. The direct annual investment in
the civilcommitment program appears to be at least $50 million
out of a total budget of $88.5 million. As of the end of 1970,
NACC had 10,764 addicts in its own facilities, and another 10,419
were in facilities accredited or funded by NACC. These population
figures were not broken down by modality.&quot; </p>

<p>Despite the dominance of a mental-health approach and
professionalized therapy, the emphasis on security and remote
institutions has apparently produced a penal atmosphere at many
of the NAOC facilities. Recreational and entertainment facilities
appear to be lacking, and life in a NACC institution has been
described as a dreary round of a few hours in a classroom or
workshop, some time in group meetings led by civil servants, and
the rest of the time watching television or loafing. The peer
pressures, ex-addict, encounter-group leadership, and meaningful
work assignments needed to create an effective therapeutic
environment are absent.&quot; The program has been subject to
some fierce attacks, as in the 1970 New York gubernatorial
campaign, when one candidate claimed that in three years NACC had
spent $345 million and cured 120 addicts.&quot; It is difficult
to know whether all of these accusations are justified. But it is
equally difficult to find disinterested observers who contradict
them. </p>

<p>NACC officials state their results fairly carefully. In June,
1971, the research director testified that &quot;a relatively
small number of people&quot; had been processed through the
entire civil-commitment procedure (the three to five years), and
that, of those who had gone all the way through, 25 per cent
&quot;are currently abstinent, according to a physical
follow-up.&quot; Another 25 per cent had either recertified
themselves to NACC or had entered other treatment programs. The
rest (50 per cent) were in jail as a result of new drug-related
offenses or had returned to drugs.&quot; This statement does not
reveal how many addicts had completed the program, how many were
able to drop out or escape in some way, or what level of
functioning the abstinent addicts were maintaining. The
population is referred to as &quot;small.&quot; </p>

<p>The federal NARA program of civil commitment for addicts
includes three separate programs. Title I provides for addicts
charged with violating federal laws (nonviolent crimes only). In
lieu of prosecution, the addict can be committed to a three-year
treatment period involving both institutional and aftercare
treatment facilities. Admissions under this title have been few.
Between July, 1967, and June, 1970, only 207 persons were
examined and 179 accepted, although a case load of 900 per year
had been anticipated. The main reason seems to be a general
disinterest by U.S. Attorneys.&quot; </p>

<p>Title II offers treatment in lieu of sentencing for addicts
convicted of federal crimes. This program is administered by the
Bureau of Prisons, which provides facilities for treatment within
regular penal institutions. The time of incarceration is not to
exceed ten years, and - the addict can be released to aftercare
services after six months. Only about 375 addicts are currently
being serviced under this title.30 </p>

<p>Title III provides for voluntary commitment by addicts who are
not involved in criminal proceedings. The commitment is for a
period of three years, most of which is spent in aftercare
facilities. The term of the institutionalization itself is to be
determined by the patient's progress but is not to exceed six
months. </p>

<p>Until recently, Title I and Title III patients were sent to
the Lexington or Fort Worth facility, under the Surgeon General.
(Fort Worth has now been transferred to the Bureau of Prisons and
will no longer be used for addiction treatment.) Title III
patients receive their initial evaluation at Lexington, but many
are channeled into community or state programs funded by NARA
grants and contracts. The Lexington facility is the most open of
the institutions and has a more relaxed policy toward escape or
attempted escape. The primary treatment methods employed are
detoxification, counseling, and some work and recreation therapy.
They have begun an experiment with a small therapeutic community
(Matrix House) but require a longer time commitment for patients
in this program. </p>

<p>The initial evaluation determines whether the addict is
suitable for treatment. The rejection rate is about 55-60 per
cent. The grounds for rejection are not clear. Some officials
claim that suitability is based on an assessment of
motivation-whether an addict has sufficient self-control to be
able to function in a relaxed and open environment, and, if not,
the availability of other types of treatment facilities. Another
view is that decisions on suitability are made on the basis of
objective criteria, such as current legal status, criminal
record, age, employment, history, prior drug experience, and
mental state. </p>

<p>In a study of the first 27 months of operation under the new
Act (1966-69), about 2,000 addicts were tested at Lexington. As
of September 30, 1969, there were 802 Title I and Title III
patients on an aftercare status; 26 per cent had been recommitted
to the institution for aftercare violations, and 5 per cent had
been discharged. As of March, 1971, 2,000 patients were in the
civil commitment program, of whom 1,300 were in aftercare. Of the
2,000, 60 per cent were white. Average age was in the late
20's.&quot; In June, 1971, the Director of NIMH stated: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>In the civil commitment program, a study of 1,200 patients
    who were in aftercare in 1970 showed that approximately 85
    percent were employed, 70 percent were not arrested and spent
    no time in jail during that period, 35 percent were in
    self-help therapy, and 33 percent were pursuing their
    education. Patients who had been [in] aftercare for 3 months
    or more were, on the average, drug-free 80 percent of the
    time. A similar statement can be made regarding the heroin
    use of patients who were in the community treatment programs.
    As you know, many patients during the treatment of their
    addiction may abuse drugs other than heroin occasionally,
    such as cocaine, marijuana, amphetamines, or barbiturates. Of
    the patients in the civil commitment program who had been in
    aftercare for 3 months or more, 60 percent were not abusing
    any drugs. The same is true of patients who had been in the
    community treatment program for 3 months or more. Of the
    patients who are in the civil commitment aftercare phase, we
    know that 60 percent do not become readdicted during their
    first year in aftercare. Of the remaining, 25 percent do
    abuse some drugs or become readdicted and require further
    hospital treatment. About 15 percent were dropouts <font
    size="1">.32 <br>
    </font></p>
</blockquote>

<p>It is difficult to know what to make of these results. Even
allowing for selectivity in acceptance into the program, they are
far better than the New York or the California experience would
have led one to expect. Since the detailed studies on which this
statement is based are not available, one can only reserve
judgment. </p>

<p>The Bureau of Prisons has analyzed initial results from its
care of inmates committed under Title II of NARA. As of the end
of 1971, 896 inmates had been examined for program eligibility,
and 70 per cent (630) had been accepted. The program had released
414 inmates to aftercare after an average institutionalization of
15 months, and 297 (72 per cent) of these were still active. The
other 28 per cent had &quot;violated or absconded.&quot; Over
five thousand months of &quot;successful aftercare&quot; had been
accumulated, but the meaning of that term as used in the report
is unclear.&quot; </p>

<p>Many drug experts believe that programs of civil commitment
offer little more than custodial care in a predominantly penal
setting. Counseling and therapy, when employed, are imposed on
the patients by the staff and are of questionable value.
Apparently, most addicts are committed as an alternative to
criminal prosecution or sentencing, and view commitment as such.
Most do not appear to be motivated toward inner change, and those
that do succeed might succeed equally as well in a voluntary
community program. In addition, civil commitment is expensive. It
requires secured facilities, around-the-clock guards, and large
staffs. (Cost estimates for all three of the large programs are
$10,000 to $12,000 per year per addict while the addict is in the
institution. It is not clear whether this represents full costs,
including capital expenditures, or operating costs only.) In
spite of these costs, the chief function of civil commitment
seems to be nothing more than to keep the addict out of
circulation for intermittent short periods. </p>

<p>The NARA information cited above seems to indicate that civil
commitment for a limited term followed by aftercare is more<br>
</p>

<p>promising than this conclusion suggests. The California
program was structured in somewhat the same manner-although with
a more open law-enforcement orientation-and it may be that it
shows worse results than NARA because it was more carefully
evaluated and the patients were more carefully controlled. A
definite answer to this will have to await more detailed
information on NARA. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="1">THE THERAPEUTIC COMMUNITY <br>
</font></p>

<p>&quot;Therapeutic community&quot; (TC) is a generic term used
to describe an institution that attempts to treat the addict by
dealing with the underlying causes of his addiction. The basic
concept of the TC modality, as of the civil-commitment programs,
is that addiction is the result of psychological problems, and
that intensive therapeutic techniques utilized within the
structure of a residential community can restructure the
character and personality of the addict to the point where he no
longer needs to use drugs. Although heroin addicts constitute the
major part of the TC population, most TC's service users of
nonopiates as well. As of mid-1970, there were probably 40-50
therapeutic community programs in the country with approximately
4,000-5,000 residents.&quot; </p>

<p>The growth of therapeutic communities is in some ways as much
a quasi-evangelical movement as a drug-treatment modality, and it
is difficult to describe them without distorting the views of at
least some of the participants.&quot; The flavor of this modality
can be partly conveyed by tracing some analogies and intellectual
roots. First, there is a parallel between the TC and Alcoholics
Anonymous. Synanon, the original addict-oriented TC, was founded
in 1959 by an ex-alcoholic as a treatment program for alcoholics
modeled after AA. It drifted into treatment of opiate addicts
largely by accident. Many of the TC's retain some of the basic AA
characteristics-the concept that there is no such thing as an
ex-addict, only an addict who is not using at the moment; the
emphasis on mutual support and aid; the distrust of mentalhealth
professionals; and the concept of continual confession and
catharsis. However, the TC has extended these notions to include
the concept of a live-in community with a rigid structure of
day-to-day behavior and a complex system of punishment and
rewards. </p>

<p>The rise of the TC also parallels the rising popularity of
group therapy generally. Encounter groups, support groups, and
marathon sessions are as prevalent in the &quot;straight
world&quot; as in the TC's, and the many differences in
group-therapy methods that exist outside exist in the TC's as
well. One reason for the frequent confusion about the different
TC's is that they reflect the many variations in approaches to
group therapy. </p>

<p>The growth of TC's has occurred at the same time as the growth
of interest in communes, and some TC's have an element of the
commune in them-the residents are rejecting a dishonest world in
favor of a better way of life. Synanon, for example, has
residents who have never been addicted to anything but who prefer
the Synanon life-style. Dr. John Kramer has referred to Synanon
as &quot;the third community,&quot; different from the drug-using
community and the &quot;square&quot; community. He points out
that there is a fundamental difference between Synanon and many
of the TC's in that &quot;the Synanon ideal is to retain members
in the group indefinitely and to expand steadily, drawing in more
and more members, squares as well as addicts. Other TC's differ
in that they do expect their members to re-enter the square
community. &quot;3r The past decade has seen a movement toward
community action and a rejection of services furnished
exogenously. Community control is a familiar slogan, and the
beliefs that only the poor know what the poor want and only
blacks can help blacks are also common. To some extent, TC's
reflect this movement. Many of them have adopted the view that
the nonaddict does not really understand the problems and world
of an addict and therefore cannot contribute as an ex-addict can.
Since addicts are often poor and black as well as addicted, this
concept is a powerful force. </p>

<p>Finally, the quasi-evangelical aspect of the TC creates an
interesting, although certainly not documented or provable,
situation. The addict may be replacing his addiction to heroin
with an &quot;addiction&quot; to being an ex-addict and to the
encounter therapy. The philosophy of the TC becomes a religion
for the addict. It is something to believe in and a message to
spread to his fellow addicts in the world. The &quot;religious
fervor&quot; involved exists in varying degrees. In Dr. Kramer's
words: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>It has been undiplornatically stated that religiornania is
    a cure for narcomania. This observation is valid,
    particularly if one defines religiomania broadly as the
    devout acceptance of clearly defined tenets of a faith and
    its principles of behavior, and persistent participation in
    its prescribed rituals. The faith and its practice will
    usually encompass all the life activities of the communicant
    and in its practice he will have the opportunity for both
    penitence and ecstasy. Obedience is part of it as is the
    sense of being an accepted member of the congregation,
    however lowly, and thus possessing an attribute not possessed
    by anyone outside the sect. The requirements can be fulfilled
    not only by formal fundamentalist religious groups such as
    Teen Challenge but by such an organization as Synanon and
    other programs which have been modeled on it.37 <br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>In terms of structure and program, some common features of
TC's can be identified, despite wide individual variations. Most
have three identifiable phases to their program. The first of
these is a testing for admission; the addict must show the
genuineness of his desire to become drug-free. In some places,
the addict must become drug-free on his own and remain so for a
given period of time before he is admitted. In some, he must work
in a storefront center for a time, showing the proper attitude.
Others do not require abstinence in advance and will have a
patient detoxified on methadone or go through withdrawal after
formal admission. In some TC's, an addict is put through an
encounter session with present residents to test his dedication. </p>

<p>The methods vary, but at some point early in the process every
TC tests the candidate's motivation. As might be expected, there
is a high loss rate at this point, although numbers are difficult
to find. The different entrance procedures must be kept in mind
in evaluating TC's, because they can obviously make a substantial
difference in the statistical records of the program. A community
that does not formally admit addicts until they have passed
stringent tests is likely to show a higher success rate than a
community that does its weeding out after formal admission.<br>
</p>

<p>Whatever the form of testing used, relatively few addicts pass
it. In most TC's, somewhere between 50 per cent and 90 per cent
of the applicants are rejected or quit at this initial stage.
Once admitted, the addict enters a treatment ladder. The program
of treatment is usually highly structured and extremely rigid,
with an enforced system of rewards and punishments. The resident
starts at the very bottom of the ladder, with little freedom, no
responsibility, and the lowest types of tasks. As he proves
himself, he begins to acquire more freedom, better jobs, and
increased responsibility. This period of treatment lasts at least
a year and is characterized by clearly marked stages in status.
The emphasis is usually on confronting the addict with the
immaturity of his past behavior and his need to learn responsible
patterns of dealing with the world. Group therapy is emphasized,
and the encounters can be extremely rough. It is part of the
ethos, however, that the motives behind the encounters are
concern and love rather than hostility. </p>

<p>Finally, the resident arrives at the re-entry phase. During
this period, he begins to have a life outside the community
again-he takes educational courses, spends weekends with his
family, works, etc. When he has established a stable pattern
outside the community and is considered responsible by the
professional staff and/or peers, he may be discharged. (At
Synanon, there is no re-entry phase. Family life, education, and
work are all incorporated into the community. To Synanon
community members, the straight world outside the community has
not changed, and the pressures and problems that resulted in
their addiction in the first place are still there. Return to the
outside means return to heroin addiction, alcohol, or whatever
drove them in.) </p>

<p>A major problem in evaluating therapeutic communities is the
difficulty of ascertaining facts. Even a matter so rudimentary as
the costs involved is a matter of dispute because of differences
in calculating capital and operating costs, treatment of welfare
expenditures that go to support the community, allocation of
funds from different government agencies, appraisal of donated
goods and services, and simple lack of records. Costs range
anywhere from $3,000 to $10,000 per year per resident. </p>

<p>Even more difficult to assess is the result of the effort,
since little careful evaluation has been done. One multimodal
program analyzed the &quot;split rate&quot; from the TC component
of its program. They found that, of 122 entrants, 40 per cent
left within three weeks, 50 per cent within seven weeks, and 85
per cent within one year. A TC that appealed mainly to white,
middle-class residents found that, during one year, almost 700
persons entered the program, 535 left voluntarily, and 23 were
expelled. Of those who left, 175 came back. The program graduated
38 residents during the year. Of 113 graduates of the program
over a four-year period, 13 had relapsed to drug abuse. Of the
remaining 100 graduates, 25 were employed in the subject TC, 51
in other addiction programs, and 19 in the community at large;
five were unknown .18 These are only fragments, because there is
very little hard information on the results of TC's. In part this
is because evaluation is expensive and difficult and many
organizations do not have the money to spend on it. Also, some
program operators oppose evaluation on philosophical grounds-they
believe that what they are doing is humane and valuable and that
their work is demeaned by attempts to judge it in quantitative
terms. They may also believe that evaluation has negative effects
on the program. If it shows many failures the residents will come
to believe that they, too, will fail, and the prophecy will be
self-fulfilling. </p>

<p>Finally, there are sound bureaucratic reasons for avoiding
evaluation as much as possible. All the preliminary and anecdotal
indications are that, while a few people are helped greatly by
TC's, an overwhelming majority are not. In the hard competition
for government drug-treatment money, evaluation might well hurt
the TC's more than it would help them. The incentive to permit
evaluation, let alone fund it, is minimal. </p>

<p>Looking at all the available evidence and the impressions of
experts in the field, it is hard to escape the conclusion that
TC's are, at best, good for a very limited number of drug
addicts. As a rough guess, considering the initial rejection
rates, the split rates, and the relapse rate, it would be
surprising if careful evaluation showed that more than 5 per cent
of those who come into contact with the program are enabled to
lead a reasonably drugfree, socially productive life. </p>

<p>There is also a major question about the type of addict for
whom the TC is the proper solution. Some experts believe that the
TC works best for the sociopath who is tough enough to take the
encounters but not for those with less serious psychological
problems or those who are the least alienated. Other experts have
different categorizations. </p>

<p>The TC's may have advantages in dealing with particular
subgroups of addicts, however. Although exact population
breakdowns are seldom available, it is generally recognized that
the mean age of the residents is lower than that of either
addicts in the methadone programs or the total addict population.
This could mean that the TC is especially attractive to young
addicts, but this is not certain; the same result would ensue if
it were less attractive to older addicts. It may also be
effective with multidru'g users or with young experimenters, but
this has also been unproved. </p>

<p>In terms of any national program of treatment of heroin
addicts, it is difficult to see a major role for the TC, simply
because the success rate is too low and the cost too high to make
an important impact on the problem. At the same time, most drug
experts, when they discuss the necessary elements of a
comprehensive drug-treatment program, include a therapeutic
community, but whether this is based on a genuine belief in its
utility, on the hope that utility might be demonstrated, or on
simple politics is unclear. In the long run, it may turn out that
the TC is much more interesting outside the drug context than
within it. By setting itself the task of rehabilitating drug
addicts-a notoriously hard group to rehdbilitate-the TC movement
may have destined itself to look bad. The real contributions that
such methods might make to improvements in the condition and
functioning of more tractable populations are easily lost sight
of by appraisers who are concerned with the drug problem. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="1">OUTPATIENT ABSTINENCE <br>
</font></p>

<p>Many programs have a component that treats outpatients and
attempts to get them to abstain from heroin use. Of 142 programs
covered by an NIMH survey, only 23 were for inpatients only, and
only 43 of the 142 engaged in methadone maintenance; therefore,
at least 76 were operating some form of outpatient abstinence
program. </p>

<p>These programs differ as much as or more than the therapeutic
communities. The major components are community outreach to find
people who need help; group and individual therapy of various
types; vocational and social counseling; intervention with
authorities, employers, or schools on behalf of the patient;
vocational training and education; and family counseling. The
programs emphasize these elements in varying degrees, of course,
and most probably do not offer a complete range of services.
Another variable is the intensity of the patient's involvement
with the treatment center. Some are halfway houses, where the
patient spends the whole day and goes home only at night. At the
other extreme are agencies that have only one or two sessions
with a patient or that are more or less social centers. Most
programs are, of course, between these extremes.&quot; </p>

<p>This method of treatment is not based on any constant
theoretical beliefs. Some people believe that addicts suffer from
underlying character disorders and can be changed only through
heavy involvement in therapy. Others believe that helping with
the immediate problems of the patient will enable him to help
himself. Still others are desperately trying to fend off the
total catastrophe that may overwhelm the patient if he does not
receive aid. </p>

<p>Very little evaluation of these programs has been done, and
there are no reliable data on the results. Most observers believe
that the attrition rates are very high, the number of patients
who remain drug-free is small, and the impact on such areas as
employment and criminal activity is minimal. Dr. Robert DuPont,
Director of the Washington, D.C., Narcotic Treatment Agency, has
found that only 15 per cent of the patients who selected NTA's
abstinence program remained in it for six months, although those
who did remain did well.&quot; A -D.C. Department of Corrections
study of the performance of abstinence patients in NTA facilities
(all of whom had been referred to NTA by the Department of
Corrections) came out with somewhat better results: 50 per cent
of 165 referees were failures after six months. If
&quot;escape&quot; was removed as a category of failure, then the
failure rate was only 25 per cent.&quot; Programs connected with
the criminal-justice system usually have the spur of return to
jail if the patient fails, of course. </p>

<p>The Office of Economic Opportunity enlisted a contractor to do
a thorough evaluation of eight OEO-funded projects; but the
data-collection problems were great, and it was impossible for
the evaluators to reach any meaningful judgments.&quot; OEO is
now trying again, but the results have not yet been published. </p>

<p>In general, the conclusions for these programs are about the
same as for the therapeutic communities and the detoxification
centers: They help a few people a great deal and more people to
some degree, but the failure rates are very high. They have a
considerable cost advantage over the therapeutic communities
because they do not need extensive and expensive residential
facilities. Their over-all, long-term contribution to the drug
problem is in some doubt. The major imponderable is the extent to
which changes in the addict population may invalidate pessimistic
conclusions drawn from past experience. Addiction may have spread
to people who are not so intractable as the groups on which these
conclusions are based. They might become abstinent with the help
that can be given by the outpatient facilities. </p>

<p>Most important is whether these programs have an impact on the
juvenile who is dabbling in the drug scene but has not yet become
a confirmed addict. This is the target population for many such
programs and would seem to be the area in which they have the
most to offer. At present, the answer is an enigma. Some of the
conclusions reached and questions raised in 1969 by Judith Calof
of New York's Community Service Society are still valid: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Voluntary treatment agencies have always emerged in
    response to the neglected needs of segments of the community.
    In the addiction field, there are still grave unmet needs.
    For one, the number of school-aged addicts has been growing,
    while voluntary and public agencies continue to concentrate
    on the older addict. Are special techniques needed for
    reaching and treating this young age group?... </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>A major unmet need is addiction prevention. Do voluntary
    treatment agencies have a major contribution to make in
    prevention? Could their coordinated efforts succeed in
    identifying and reaching those most vulnerable to this
    disease? </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>The limited success of the voluntary treatment agencies
    should not be interpreted as failure, but should be viewed in
    long-range terms. Pioneering means trial and error, with
    inevitable setbacks and frustrations, but it reveals the
    assessment of a situation. Voluntary treatment agencies have
    already demonstrated the enormity of the addiction problem
    and the immense difficulties in rehabilitating heroin
    addicts. The results of their dedicated efforts should serve
    as a learning against unrealistic expectations. Their
    experience can prevent catastrophe in a massive government
    program, and refusal of the public to allocate further funds
    for treatment .43 <br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><i>METHADONE MAINTENANCE <br>
</i></font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">CHARACTERISTICS OF METHADONE<br>
</font></p>

<p>Methadone is a synthetic opiate. For purposes of understanding
its use in the treatment of heroin addiction, its most important
characteristics are as follows: </p>

<ul>
    <li>It is a substitute for heroin, in that it will prevent an
        addict from having or feeling withdrawal symptoms if he
        replaces his usual drug with methadone. </li>
    <li>Unlike the heroin available in this country, it is
        effective when taken orally. </li>
    <li>If the dosage is sufficient (the exact level depending on
        the addict's level of tolerance to heroin), the methadone
        will block the action of heroin, so that the addict
        receives no euphoric effect if he tries heroin. At lower
        doses, methadone will not block this effect of heroin,
        but it will suppress the &quot;narcotic
        hunger&quot;-described by Dr. Jerome Jaffe as a
        &quot;felt sense of physical abnormality&quot;-that an
        addict feels without his drug. </li>
    <li>The effective action of methadone is about 24 hours, as
        opposed to about six hours for heroin. Thus, it needs to
        be taken only once a day. </li>
    <li>When taken orally in constant doses, methadone does not
        produce a euphoric effect. </li>
    <li>To date, no significant deleterious side effects have
        been reported.<br>
    </li>
</ul>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><b>THE PROGRAMS</b></font> </p>

<p>Starting with a 1964 experimental project sponsored by the New
York Health Research Council and conducted by Drs. Vincent Dole
and Marie Nyswander, programs that maintain addicts on methadone
have grown steadily. Despite some differences in theory and
practice, in all maintenance programs an addict receives a dose
of methadone every day, either at a clinic or, if he has proved
himself, at home. He may also receive ancillary services-group or
individual therapy, individual or family counseling, vocational
rehabilitation, employment services, use of social center
facilities, and medical and dental care. The extent and quality
of these varies greatly, but almost all programs provide
something. </p>

<p>There are wide variations in the modes of operation of
methadone programs.&quot; For example, a study of 47 methadone
programs found that 27 programs used ex-addicts on the staff,
while the others did not; 6 had inpatients only, 19 had
outpatients only, and the rest had both. Only 8 of the 47
provided chemotherapy without any group work. </p>

<p>Table 3-1 lists the types of service offered by the 47
programs in terms of the numbers of programs and the per cent of
the total sample offering the service.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">TABLE 3-1</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">TYPES OF SERVICE OFFERED BY
METHADONE-MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS</font> </p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1"><i>Service</i></font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1"><i>Number</i></font> </td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1"><i>Per cent</i></font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Detoxification</font></td>
        <td width="92"></td>
        <td width="66"></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Methadone </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">30</font> </td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">64</font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Tranquilizers and other
        drugs</font> </td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">6</font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">13</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Drug freed </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">4 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">8.5</font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Chemotherapy</font></td>
        <td width="92"></td>
        <td width="66"></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Methadone maintenance </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">47</font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">100</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Cyclazocine maintenance </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">8 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">17</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Naloxone and other </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">3 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">6</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Group work</font></td>
        <td width="92"></td>
        <td width="66"></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Therapeutic community </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">8 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">17</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Group psychotherapy </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">36 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">76</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Group discussions and
        programs </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">9 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">19</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Tndividual psychotherapy </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">35 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">74</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Medical-surgical treatment
        </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">23 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">49</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Educational classes </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">8 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">17</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Religious counseling </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">5 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">1.1</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Work assignments </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">3 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">6</font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Rehabilitation services</font>
        </td>
        <td width="92"></td>
        <td width="66"></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Vocational rehabilitation </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">20 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">42</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Employment counseling </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">24 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">51</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Social and family services
        </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">16 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">34</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Occupational therapy </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">10 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">21</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Recreational programs </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">8 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">17</font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Prevention </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">6 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">13</font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="197"><font size="1">Research </font></td>
        <td width="92"><font size="1">17 </font></td>
        <td width="66"><font size="1">36</font></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>a Drug-free detoxification is not a feature of the methadone
program. <br>
</p>

<p>More detailed statements obtained from 25 of the methadone
maintenance programs showed that 14 favored narcotic-free
rehabilitation as the ultimate goal, and only 11 favored
prolonged maintenance. Also, 18 preferred high-dose
administration (50-180 mg.) and 7 preferred low-dose (20-40 mg.).
Not surprisingly, there was a correlation between preference for
narcotic free rehabilitation and preference for low doses. </p>

<p>The precise number of persons now in methadone-maintenance
programs is not known. At the Third National Methadone Conference
in November, 1970, Dr. Vincent Dole estimated that there were
then about 9,000 people on methadone maintenance in the United
States and Canada .4' This estimate was based on a<br>
variety of inputs, including discussions with the manufacturer of
methadone. It was in rough accord with the numbers of patients
recorded in publications by the major projects and was probably
fairly accurate. </p>

<p>Growth has been quite rapid, however. The NIMH treatment
directory listed 44 methadone-maintenance programs as of 1968-69,
and many of these had small patient populations. As of April,
1970, 64 programs had acquired or applied for Food and Drug
Agency authority to use methadone for maintenance, although not
all of them were in operation. At that time, the best estimates
were that between 50 and 60 programs were actually
operating.&quot; By June 1, 1971, the FDA had given permission to
257 sponsors representing 277 methadone-treatment programs, some
of which included several clinics. Of these, 185 programs were in
institutions and the other 92 were private. The number of
programs now in actual operation is not known.&quot; </p>

<p>The FDA estimated, in June, 1971, that there were 20,000 to
30,000 people on methadone maintenance at that time. Dr. Bertram
Brown Director of NIMH, testified at the same hearings that
20,000 was probably the best estimate.&quot; As of December,
1971, the FDA has doubled its estimate again. It now believes,
according to Dr. Elmer Gardner, that there are between 40,000 and
50,000 patients on methadone maintenance. </p>

<p>Costs. Costs of methadone programs are hard to determine. Many
figures are given, but it is never clear whether all costs (such
as plant and equipment or the value of volunteer help, for
example) are included. As a rough estimate, the cost of the
programs is between $500 and $2,500 per patient per year,
depending on a number of factors. </p>

<p>Methadone itself is not an important cost, since it can be
procured for about $.05 per day per addict. </p>

<p>Controlling and administering the methadone is a significant
cost, since it requires a staff. </p>

<p>Determination and preparation of individual doses are
significant, since determination requires physician time,
preparation requires careful work by a pharmacist, and keeping
track of individual doses takes staff time. Whether individual
doses are more effective therapeutically than standardized ones
is an open question. </p>

<p>All programs use urinalysis to test the patients' use of
heroin and other drugs. This costs $1 to $3 per test, depending
on the frequency, the laboratory, and the number of samples
tested. Obviously, this is a significant cost element: Testing
three times a week at $3 per test would cost $468 per addict per
year. There are some ways of avoiding these costs through random
testing, which is effective for some purposes. There may also be
cost-reduction possibilities for the tests themselves. </p>

<p>The method by which an addict is initially switched from
heroin to methadone makes a large cost difference. If the addict
is switched to methadone as an inpatient in a hospital (as was
done for most of the patients in the Dole-Nyswander project, for
example), each addict admitted may cause $200 to $1,400 for
initial hospital expenses. </p>

<p>Physical plant and facilities obviously make a difference in
costs. </p>

<p>Legal requirements are important. To the extent that
jurisdictional law requires that elaborate information be
obtained and records kept, the costs are increased. </p>

<p>Any research component adds expenses. </p>

<p>The level of ancillary services is important. An effort to
supply group therapy, counseling, vocational or educational
rehabilitation, and other services-all of which require high
staff-to-patient ratios-will increase expenses substantially.
Many of the public statements on costs regard this as the major
variable involved. While most programs pay lip service to the
need for these services, careful evaluation of the extent to
which they influence the success or failure of the program is
only beginning. </p>

<p>The rate of expansion of a program makes a significant
difference in average cost. An addict will probably require more
services and control in his first year than later, when he is
stabilized in a new life-style, so that a new or expanding
program should show higher average costs than a static one. </p>

<p>These variations account for the wide range of the basic cost
estimate. At present, $500 per addict per year seems about the
minimum for a program that uses standardized dosages, outpatient
induction, fairly cheap urinalysis, and no services except those
supplied by the addicts themselves. A reasonable estimate for a
program with individual doses, some inpatient induction, frequent
and expensive urinalysis, and many ancillary services is $2,000,
although, of course, the cost for each patient stabilized in the
program would be much lower.&quot; This figure could be raised
almost without limit by the provision of more extras, of course,
a phenomenon sometimes referred to by program operators as the
danger of &quot;Taj Mahalism&quot;---providing very elaborate
services to a few addicts rather than minimal effective services
to many. </p>

<p><i>Population Characteristics.</i> Because of regional
differences the demographic characteristics of the over-all
methadone population are hard to describe. The patient population
of the Methadone Maintenance Treatment Program (MMTP) in New York
City, for example, is about 40 per cent black, 19 per cent Puerto
Rican, 40 per cent white, and I per cent Oriental. This breakdown
compares with the ethnic breakdown of the New York City Narcotic
Registry, which, as of December, 1969, was 47 per cent black, 27
per cent Puerto Rican, and 26 per cent white.&quot; The Santa
Clara County (California) Methadone Program reports a patient
population of 55 per cent Mexican American, 6 per cent black, and
39 per cent white.&quot; Other programs also exhibit ethnic
breakdowns' indicating that methadone maintenance appeals to
minority-group addicts. The Washington, D.C., program, for
example, is 95 per cent black.&quot; The ethnic composition of
any methadone project is probably not too dissimilar from that of
the local addict population of comparable age, although it may be
skewed slightly toward overrepresentation of white addicts. </p>

<p>Methadone has not had similar success in attracting younger
addicts. Although the minimal age required for admission to most
programs is 18, the mean age of the patient population is usually
between 30 and 35. In addition, the average length of addiction
for the patient population on methadone is 10 to 15 years,
although most programs require only two years, and some now
require only one. There are reports, however, that the mean and
median ages and length of addiction are now falling.&quot;
Unfortunately, no treatment method has been developed that
attracts the majority of young addicts. Most members of this
group do not seem to be sufficiently disenchanted with either the
life-style or the effect of heroin to seek treatment of any type,
or are as yet unconvinced that they are truly hooked. </p>

<p>Results. Most methadone programs have made an effort to
evaluate their effect on the patients. The criteria employed
usually follow those developed to evaluate the MMTP in New York
-remaining in the program, employment, freedom from drug use,
decrease in crime, and willingness to accept help for personal
problems. </p>

<p>The New York program is not only the largest but also the best
evaluated over time. Consistently, the evaluation committee,
headed by Dr. Frances Gearing of Columbia University's School of
Public Health and Administrative Medicine, has found the program
successful with a large percentage of the addicts. The findings
of the evaluation, as of October 31, 1970, are as follows: &quot;
</p>

<p>Population. Most of the patients had been selected under
criteria that required them to be 20 years old, have a five-year
history of addiction, display no serious psychiatric problems,
and have no addiction to drugs other than heroin. Although in
1969 the requirements were reduced to age 18 and two years of
addiction, this had little impact on the age distribution of the
treatment population because of the waiting time. The mean age at
admission remained about 33-higher than the 27.9 mean age of the
addicts on the New York City Register. Whites had a mean age at
admission of 31, blacks of 35, and Puerto Ricans of a year in
between. </p>

<p>Retention. A total of 4,376 patients had been admitted since
the inception of the program in 1964. Of this group, 3,485 (80
per cent) were still in treatment at the time of evaluation. The
others had left voluntarily or had been discharged because of
excessive use of other drugs or alcohol, death, incarceration, or
antisocial or generally uncooperative behavior. Of the 2,424
originally inducted on an inpatient basis, 74 per cent were still
enrolled. Of the 1,952 who had been admitted directly as
outpatients, 88 per cent were still enrolled. (This group had not
been in treatment as long as the others, since outpatient
induction was started only in 1968. They were also a selected
group.) </p>

<p>Special studies of three 500-patient cohorts have been done.
One of those covered the cohort for 21 months, one for 33 months,
and one for 48 months. About 23 per cent of each cohort had been
discharged by 21 months after admission, 34 per cent of two
cohorts by 33 months after admission, and 42 per cent of one
cohort by 48 months after admission. </p>

<p>As is shown by the cohort studies, the commonly cited
80per-cent success rate is misleading. The statistic includes a
large number of addicts who have been in the program for a
relatively short period and does not fully reflect the attrition
over time. For example, the total admissions, as of October 31,
1969, were 2,325. As of October 31, 1970, they were 4,376. Thus,
the data for the latter date included 2,051 patients who had been
in treatment for less than one year, and half or more of these
may have been in for six months or less. (The cohort studies show
that the attrition rate during the first six months is about 10
per cent, and over the first year it is about 16 per cent.)
Maintenance of the over-all average of 20 per cent attrition is
therefore dependent on continuing expansion of the program. </p>

<p>There is another side of this argument, however. MMTP has
fairly strict standards for behavior and drops people for
violation of those standards; a large proportion of those listed
as failures were therefore dropped by the program (they
themselves did not want to leave). A study of 138 terminations
found the following causes: 55 </p>

<p>Involuntary terminations 81.2% </p>

<p>Uncooperative behavior 17.4% </p>

<p>Antisocial behavior 7.2 </p>

<p>Unreachable psychopathology 7.2 </p>

<p>Drug abuse 8.7 </p>

<p>Alcohol abuse 10.9 </p>

<p>Arrested 15.2 </p>

<p>Medical disability 2.2 </p>

<p>Death 12.3 </p>

<p>Voluntary terminations 15.9 </p>

<p>Voluntary discharge 14.5 </p>

<p>Loss of contact 1.4 </p>

<p>Administrative terminations and unknown 2.9 </p>

<p>Administrative .7 </p>

<p>No information 2.2<br>
</p>

<p>One can question whether a methadone program should terminate
patients for all of the causes given. Even if the patient has
serious problems remaining, the program may have substantial
beneficial effects. One can argue that the only patients who
should be counted as failures are those who drop out voluntarily.
If this criterion is applied to the 500-patient cohort that had a
42 per cent attrition rate over 48 months, and if we assume that
only 15.9 per cent of these dropouts were voluntary, then only 34
of 210 dropouts would be counted as failures. By this standard,
the MMTP may claim that it has a ' t least partial success with
93.2 per cent of all addicts who are admitted to the program. </p>

<p>Again, this is not totally satisfactory, for several reasons.
For example, it is difficult to know how to categorize those who
die or are discharged for medical disability. Some of the
voluntary patients moved to programs in other cities. Some
patients who were expelled might have dropped out voluntarily at
a later time. Thus, 93.2 per cent may be unrealistically high.
But it does show that a 42 per cent termination rate over four
years probably understates the value of the program somewhat. </p>

<p>To sum up, if one adopts MMTP's own standards on the retaining
power of methadone, the common figure of 80 per cent success errs
on the high side. If, however, one argues that those standards
are too stringent, excluding too many patients who are receiving
worthwhile benefits from the program, the 80-percent figure may
be too low. (it should be noted that the same problems exist in
assessing the effects of nomnethadone programs. They are just
more obvious in this context.) </p>

<p>Employment. For the group that stayed in the program,
employment rose markedly. About 26 per cent of the men were
employed when they entered. This figure rose sharply to about 57
per cent and 66 per cent for those in the program six and twelve
months, respectively, and then rose more slowly to about 78 per
cent for those in the program for 48 months. Because of
attrition, this percentage rise represents a much smaller
absolute rise in employment. Out of a cohort of 100 entrants, 26
would be employed. After four years, 58 members of the cohort
would still be in the program, of whom 45 (78 per cent of the 58)
would be employed. So, out of any group of 100 entrants, only 45
would be employed after four years. </p>

<p>Criminal Activity. For the group that stayed in the program,
criminal activity apparently decreased. In the three years before
admission to the program, the methadone patients had 120 arrests
and 48 incarcerations for every 100 man-years. In the four years
after admission, they had 4.5 arrests and 1.0 incarcerations. </p>

<p>A group of detoxification patients studied for purposes of
comparison showed 131 arrests and 52 incarcerations per 100
person years in the three years prior to detoxification and 134
arrests and 63 incarcerations for the four years after
detoxification. A separate study of 912 patients admitted over a
four-and-a-half year period showed a 90-per-cent drop in criminal
convictions.&quot; </p>

<p>Drug Use. While most patients test the methadone blockage a
few times while on methadone, none had returned to regular heroin
usage while still in the program. About 8 per cent have problems
with chronic alcohol use and 10 per cent with continuing use of
amphetamines, cocaine, and barbiturates. </p>

<p>Fate of Dischargees. A Gearing Committee study of 281
expatients six months after discharge had the following findings:
</p>

<p><font size="2"><i>Left</i> <i>Discharged</i> <i>Total</i></font>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><i>voluntarily</i> <i>for cause</i> <i>discharge</i></font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Arrested or jailed 10% 26% 23%</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Dead 2 2 2</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Detoxification 13 20 19</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Other R. program 11 4 7</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Medical or psychiatric facility - 3 2</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Private M.D. 2 2 2</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moved 7 1 1</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Readmitted 33 6 11</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">No reports found 22 36 33 <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Total sample 100 (45) 100 (236) 100 (281)</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Total N (90) (472) (562) <br>
</font></p>

<p>Two other studies have produced similar results. </p>

<p>Previous evaluations of MMTP have been criticized on the
ground that the original selection criteria (since eased, as we
have noted) picked only those addicts most amenable to treatment.
Another criticism is that the ambulatory induction program has
required that the applicant have either a job or a family. This
may also select the strongest candidates. Finally, the fact that
there is a waiting period may also operate to select patients who
are most amenable to treatment. The Gearing evaluations through
1970 do not include any analysis of attrition rates from the
waiting list or any comparison of those who enter treatment and
those who drop off the list. </p>

<p>These criticisms seem at first glance to have weight. There
are several compelling arguments that they do not, however. Dr.
Carl Chambers, Research Director of the New York Narcotics
Addiction Control Commission, headed a study that utilized
single-factor analysis to compare patients who stayed in the
program and patients who did not. He found that continuing in the
program was not related in any statistically significant way to
the patient's sex, marital status, multiple abuse of drugs, abuse
of alcohol, ethnicity, education, age at onset of heroin use, or
number of prior treatments. Continuing in treatment was
marginally related to conviction history, in that there was a
significant difference between those with three or more
convictions and those with two or fewer. It was related to the
length of abuse of narcotics, in that 90 per cent of those who
had abused five or fewer years and only 77 per cent of those who
had abused more than five years remained in treatment for two
years. There was a relationship to the employment status of the
patient at time of admission-88 per cent of those who were
employed and 77 per cent of those who were not remained in
treatment for at least two years. The item with the greatest
predictive power was the number of convictions-the fewer the
number, the greater the chance of remaining in treatment.
Combinations of these characteristics do have some predictive
value. For example, the Chambers study concluded that a patient
with seven or more convictions who had no marketable employment
skills was least likely to remain in treatment two years (55.6
per cent of these did remain), and that a patient with few
convictions and no multiple drug or alcohol problems was most
likely to remain in treatment (95.8 per cent).&quot; </p>

<p>In short, the original admission criteria may exercise some
influence on the success rate as measured by retention, but it
seems to be minimal. Some admissions criteria, such as the four
years of addiction, would operate against success. Others, such
as freedom from severe psychiatric problems (which would probably
result in a higher percentage of employed addicts than the number
in the population at large), would operate in favor of success.
But none seems to be very important. </p>

<p>Some special studies indicate that problem groups of patients
do respond to methadone, although not quite so well as the normal
groups. Of 269 patients on probation or parole-a group that would
be especially difficult to work with-72 per cent remained in the
program in good standing.&quot; Even more convincing is the fact
that the Dole-Nyswander results have been replicated by reputable
researchers in other places. At the National Methadone
Conference, sponsored by NIMH and the National Association to
Prevent Addiction to Narcotics, a succession of researchers from
different parts of the country recited results comparable to,
though usually not quite so good as, those achieved by the Dole
Nyswander program. Results have been generally good no matter how
few the restrictions placed on patient characteristics.&quot; </p>

<p>Interpreting these reports is complicated by the fact that,
while the basic criteria remain fairly constant, there are
variations in the exact methodology of evaluation-in the extent
to which information from addicts is verified independently, in
the frequency of urinalysis, in the relations between the police
and the program (in some places, for example, the police may
cooperate with methadone treatment by not prosecuting addicts in
the program except for very serious crimes), in the sampling
techniques used, and in the definition of retention. In addition,
some programs use outside evaluation teams, and some rely on
internal information systems or on special studies done by their
own staff. At present, no two major programs have been thoroughly
evaluated by the same team of outside experts, although the
Columbia group that evaluated the MMTP will probably also
evaluate the Narcotics Treatment Agency in Washington, D.C. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, the basic consistency of results is quite
impressive. Although we may not yet know exactly how good
methadone maintenance is, its essential efficacy is as well
established as anything in this field can be. It is now generally
acknowledged that methadone is medically safe, acceptable to many
heroin addicts, effective, and administratively feasible for
large-scale programs.&quot; Clearly, methadone should not be
regarded as a miracle cure. The majority of program operators
believe that most addicts on methadone try heroin a few times,
partly out of curiosity as to whether the block works, partly
because of the desire for euphoria. Judging a program in terms of
whether an addict ever relapsed might well make it appear to be a
failure. Methadone addiction avoids the large swings and
demanding schedule of heroin addiction, thus making it easier for
an addict to hold a job and support his family, but it is likely
to take months for an addict to revamp his life-style into a new
pattern. Underlying psychological problems remain, except for
those caused by the demands of heroin addiction itself. Addicts
tend to abuse some other drugs, such as amphetamines and alcohol,
to about the same degree that they abused them while on
heroin.&quot; </p>

<p>From society's point of view, the most important of all the
evaluation criteria is remaining in the program. An addict who is
using methadone is not continuing either extensive heroin use or
heroin-seeking behavior, and his criminal behavior will probably
be reduced because he does not need the money to purchase the
drug. He is not spreading hepatitis contracted from infected
needles by selling his blood to hospitals.&quot; He is not trying
to sell heroin because he needs money for a fix. He is not
hanging out in a shooting gallery or on the street serving as a
role model for the neighborhood adolescents. And he is not
helping to provide the mass market for heroin that makes
investment in its importation and distribution economically
attractive despite the risks. It should be emphasized, however,
that the addict will still have the criminal skills he has
learned and may choose to use them to support himself. In such
case, the decrease in crime would be the difference between the
amount needed to support the habit and the addict and that needed
to support the addict alone. Some patients may continue to commit
crimes at the same level as before, using the extra money to
raise their standard of living or to build up a nest egg.
Criminal activity, according to several experts, declines slowly,
over a period of a year or more.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="1">BASIS FOR THE SUCCESS OF METHADONE </font></p>

<p>The expansion of methadone maintenance has been based on
empirical evidence of its utility, not upon any solid
understanding of the pharmacological reasons for its success.
While, obviously, this success is due to its nature as an opiate
and long-acting substitute for heroin, an understanding of the
nature of addiction itself is missing. It is not known whether
methadone is more effective than other modalities because
addiction has physiological components that only another opiate
can offset or because of factors rooted in the psychology of
addiction. </p>

<p>The issues concerning possible physiological components of
addiction can be stated succinctly: </p>

<p>Are some persons physiologically vulnerable to heroin, in the
sense that it causes physical changes in them that it does not
cause in &quot;normal&quot; people? </p>

<p>Are there inherent physiological factors that make some people
seek heroin-is there some pre-existing felt physical need that
does not exist in most people? </p>

<p>Does taking heroin cause a permanent or long-term
physiological change in the addict that makes him crave the drug
after he becomes abstinent? </p>

<p>Does heroin addiction create a physiological change that makes
an ex-addict particularly vulnerable to stress after he becomes
abstinent? </p>

<p>There is no clear answer to any of these questions. Yet, most
scientists would be inclined to think that the answers to at
least the first two are &quot;No.&quot; Dr. Vincent Dole, in the
past, has hypothesized that narcotics addicts may have an
inherent neurological vulnerability to the drug, but recently he
seems to have modified his view.&quot; The second two questions
are the subject of debate among experts. Dr. Dole does seem to
think that opiate addiction causes a metabolic change in the
addict that, in turn, causes drug hunger. Whether he thinks this
change is permanent or only fairly long lasting (i.e., well
beyond the period during which overt withdrawal symptoms are
present) is, however, unclear.&quot; In either event, giving
methadone to an addict, iti Dr. Dole's view, simply corrects the
metabolic imbalance that has already been caused by his heroin
addiction. In this sense, he believes the analogy between
methadone for an addict and insulin for a diabetic is valid.
Others are skeptical.&quot; </p>

<p>Dr. William Martin has hypothesized a more elaborate
physiological model. In his view, an opiate such as heroin or
methadone causes a metabolic change that makes the user more
vulnerable to stress.&quot; An addict may become abstinent, but
stress will trigger a physiological reaction that makes him crave
the drug again. Furthermore, this effect may increase with
continued or increased doses of opiates. Thus, when an addict is
maintained on a methadone dosage higher than his prior heroin
dosage, as is true in many programs, the underlying physical
problem is aggravated. This, in turn, makes it even less likely
that he will ever be able to become totally abstinent. Dr. Martin
is uncertain whether the opiate-induced change is reversible. </p>

<p>Which, if any, of these theories are correct is obviously an
important question. A finding that there is an inherent
neurological vulnerability or that addiction causes an
irreversible or long-term metabolic change that induces drug
hunger, either inherently or as a response to stress, would have
important consequences for law enforcement, treatment, education,
and research. </p>

<p>To reiterate, the metabolic theories are far from proved at
present. They may turn out to be wrong, or it may develop that
there is a physiological change that is reversible over a period
of months or years. Such a finding would pose very difficult
public policy problems, because methadone might be prolonging and
aggravating a physical condition that could be reversed if an
addict could endure abstinence from opiates for some period that,
in practice, most addicts cannot endure. </p>

<p>There are other hypotheses about the reasons for the success
of methadone maintenance that are alternatives or supplements to
the metabolic theory. Some of these are as follows: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>To some extent, abstinence symptoms may be a conditioned
    response to environmental factors. In turn,
    self-administration of heroin is a conditioned response to
    the existence of these symptoms, in that for the addict it
    has been a successful way of eliminating them in the past.
    (There are reports, for example, of men who have been in
    prison and &quot;clean&quot; for years experiencing
    withdrawal symptoms upon return home.) By blocking the effect
    of heroin, methadone extinguishes the reinforcement for its
    self-administration <font size="1">.61 </font></p>
</blockquote>

<p>Heroin has a short duration of action and involves wide
emotional swings, from euphoria after administration to the
threshold of withdrawal six hours later. The rapidity of this
cycle forces a totally drug-oriented existence on the addict. If
he does not concentrate on procurement of the drug to the
exclusion of virtually everything else, he is not going to have
it when he needs it. Methadone, with its twenty-four-hour action
and gentler swings, allows the addict the luxury of thinking
about something besides drugs. </p>

<p>Methadone programs, with or without supporting services, gives
the addict a good deal of psychological support. The staff is
concerned with his well-being and is giving him a medicine in
which they have obvious confidence. Medical practice has long
known that this placebo effect is important. </p>

<p>Heroin addiction imposes a structure and purpose on the
addict's life-getting the drug. Daily visits to the methadone
clinic may provide comparable structure. </p>

<p>The life-style and personal associations of an addict provide
great pressures to relapse after a period of abstinence. An
abstinence program located where the addict will not live in the
future (e.g., Lexington) does nothing about this problem, because
the addict does not build up an alternative life-style and
alternative associations and will probably return to the old ones
after release. Methadone protects him from heroin while he builds
new patterns of behavior and loses touch with the addict culture.
In this view, after new patterns have been developed, it might be
possible to withdraw the addict from methadone because his
altered environment would not put pressure on him to relapse. </p>

<p>There is some evidence that a substantial number of addicts
-perhaps as many as one-third-&quot;mature out&quot; of addiction
when they reach their 30's and 40's. Some of the patients who do
well on methadone may come from this group.&quot; </p>

<p>Studies have indicated that monitoring an ex-addict is an
important factor in keeping him off drugs.&quot; The crucial
ingredient of methadone treatment may be not the methadone per se
but the urinalysis. Addiction to methadone is necessary only to
force the patient to come to the program. </p>

<p>At present, one can do little but note these differences; one
cannot know how these vary in validity for different addicts or
groups, or, in some cases, even how they could be researched. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="1"><b>ISSUES CONCERNING </b>METHADONE <br>
</font></p>

<p><i>Dosage Level. </i>The first question about dosage levels is
how much methadone should be given to an addict. Most people have
a general preference for administering the least amount
consistent with success. This is based partly on moral feelings
that one should give as little of an opiate as possible and
partly on a desire to minimize unknown side effects or metabolic
disruption. The problem is to determine this minimum level. </p>

<p>The general rule of thumb is that a daily dose of 100 mg. will
block any effect of heroin for almost all addicts. Most programs
administer a maximum of 180 mg., although a few may go as high as
300 mg. in selected cases. A program that administers 80 mg. or
more is probably aiming at a blockage dose. A lower dose will not
block the effect of heroin-an addict can achieve euphoria if he
tries. However, the lower dose will block the narcotic hunger and
thus remove some of the pressure for heroin use. For most
addicts, a dosage of 40 or 50 mg. is enough to eliminate this
craving, but an even lower dose may be enough if the addict has a
light habit. </p>

<p>In the early methadone programs, it was apparently assumed
that any addict who found that he could break the block would do
so, and that the higher, blocking doses were necessary. In the
last few years, some experiments have been made comparing the
efficacy of high and low doses. Dr. Avram. Goldstein, at the
Santa Clara County Program, maintained three groups of randomly
chosen addicts on blind doses of 30, 50, and 100 mg.,
respectively. (Blind dosage is not discussed with the patient,
who is not aware of how much he is receiving.) The addicts
receiving the lower doses did tend to use heroin more often
during the first month, but by the third month in treatment there
was no significant difference among the groups in either heroin
use or retention in the program.&quot; Dr. Jerome Jaffe, of the
Illinois Drug Abuse Program, has done similar research with
roughly equivalent results. For the first month or so, the
highdose group has a higher retention rate; thereafter, the two
groups do about the same in terms of retention, employment, and
arrest rates. Dr. William Weiland came to the same con clusions
after similar experiments in Philadelphia with groups of 52
patients on 50 mg. of methadone and 52 on 100 mg. for a period of
60 days.&quot; There are few dose-related side effects. </p>

<p>These results suggest that suppression of the narcotics hunger
may be more important than the blockage effect, at least for
motivated addicts. The results are only suggestive, however,
because the time spans involved in these experiments are limited,
and it is not known what the results of a more extended
experiment might be. The results might also be different if the
populations involved were younger or less motivated. Drs. Dole
and Goldstein, among others, regard these experiments as very
interesting. The low dose does mean that some addicts will drop
out in the initial stages who might have been retained with a
higher dose. In addition, it exposes the patient to the medical
risk of relapse. Given these known costs and risks, and given the
lack of any solid reason to believe that a 100-mg. dose is in
some way more harmful than 50 mg., some doctors are reluctant to
use a low dose. The major reason for doing so is that it
minimizes leakage into the community from patients who take their
methadone home, minimizes side effects, and safeguards somewhat
against unknown side effects or long-term effects. </p>

<p>Some programs use doses even smaller than those described
above, but none has been scientifically evaluated. Colonel Hassan
Jeru Ahmed, of the Blackman's Development Center in Washington,
D.C., claims to give a number of addicts as little as 5 mg. per
day with good success. Without controlled experiments, it is hard
to know whether his opinion is accurate. Theoretically, such a
dose might suppress the hunger in an addict with a very low
habit, or there might be some placebo effect involved. Since
Colonel Hassan's aim is abstinence rather than maintenance, this
might also be a method of slow detoxification. </p>

<p>A second issue about dosage involves expense. Most programs
have assumed that the specific dose should be tailored to the
individual addict and therefore give doses of anywhere from 25
mg. to 180 mg., depending on the individual. From the standpoint
of administrative efficiency, this is costly. To work with a few
standardized doses would allow programs to treat more addicts
with the same expenditure. Dr. Goldstein has done an experiment
to determine whether the individualized dose is really more
effective and has concluded that it is not.&quot; To test this,
he used a blind dosage procedure. (This procedure not only is
necessary for research on dosage but also has substantive
benefits as well. The most important of these may be that the
&quot;dosage game&quot; is part of the addict's life style of
&quot;conning,&quot; and eliminating it contributes to over-all
rehabilitation.) An initial dose of 30 mg., increased by 10 mg. a
day until final stabilization at 100 mg., was equally effective
for all patients. </p>

<p><i>Ancillary Services. </i>Most program operators declare that
ancillary services are a vital part of methadone treatment. Group
and individual therapy, job training, job placement, family
counseling, medical and dental care, and education are all
regarded as crucial to the process of helping addicts make the
adjustment to a new life-style once they have broken the heroin
habit. MMTP, for example, provides extensive services, which is
one reason the total cost is estimated at about $2,000 per year
per patient. (The cost for each patient who has finished the
induction stage is about $1,000 per year.) In its evaluation
reports on MMTP, the Gearing Committee always emphasizes the
importance of services.&quot; Dr. Jaffe, whose Illinois Drug
Abuse Program also offers services, agrees. In particular, he
believes that the techniques and group procedures developed in
therapeutic communities are helpful in stabilizing addicts on
methadone because they create an environment in which patients
not only can be relieved of narcotics hunger but also can begin
to develop attitudes that may be useful to them in achieving
social rehabilitation. </p>

<p>There are some programs that operate with a minimum of extras,
however, and their success rate does not seem markedly lower than
the others'. In New Orleans, most addicts are treated in private
clinics and pay about $10 per week.&quot; The program has limited
ability to finance additional facilities. The Santa Clara County
Program, which also operates at a cost of about $10 per addict
per week, is equally limited in its services.&quot; About 10 per
cent of the patients receive psychiatric help outside the
program, and there is some vocational counseling. There is also
some group work by the patients themselves without professional
involvement. Since the initial retention rate of the Santa Clara
County Program is relatively close to that of the MMTP,
additional ancillary services might contribute little as compared
with their costs. (An important aim of the program has been to
study this question.) The Santa Clara Program did include a
vocational counselor, which many observers feel is the most
important single service that can be offered. It also emphasizes
peer-group therapy as a key to rehabilitation.&quot; Drs. Jaffe
and Dole have experimented with giving methadone without services
to people on waiting lists. Preliminary results from MMTP are
good.&quot; </p>

<p>Although one could easily find widespread agreement that
ancillary services would be clearly desirable if they were free,
one seldom finds any explicit analysis of the cost/benefit
aspects of the issue. The key fact is that, as long as the supply
of addicts holds out, a minimal program can treat many more
patients than an elaborate one at any given level of expenditure.
A program costing $500 per year per addict, with a retention rate
of only 50 per cent, can treat more people than a program costing
$2,000, with an 85-per-cent success rate. With $1 million, for
example, the cheaper program could treat 2,000 addicts for a year
and would retain half of them. The more expensive one could treat
only 500 addicts, even though it would retain 425 of them. The
economic advantages of the cheaper program are even greater when
the comparative outputs are analyzed over time. Still, assuming a
limited budget and an unlimited supply of addicts (and, at
present, almost all methadone programs have waiting lists) , each
type of program will be losing its failures and retaining its
successes. After some period, each would have a success rate of
100 per cent, because only the successes would remain; but the
$500 program would be maintaining four times as many addicts for
the same amount of money. </p>

<p>This analysis holds even for gross differences in success
rates. Since, as New Orleans and Santa Clara show, the actual
differences may be limited, or even nonexistent, the case for the
cheaper program is even stronger. Any city with a large addiction
problem and limited funds should probably choose a methadone
program with minimal services rather than full ones. The
principal argument against this conclusion is that services might
make a crucial difference for the hard-core addicts, and that
this is the population that causes most of the crime. But, while
it is true that addicts with long criminal records are less
successful on methadone than are others, it has not yet been
proved that the services make a crucial difference for this
group. In addition, the proposition that society should condemn
four treatable people to addiction in order to treat one other
addict who is causing more trouble is a hard moral position to
defend. It might be better to put the hard-core addict on heroin
maintenance and treat the others with methadone. </p>

<p>Another argument sometimes used in support of extensive
services is that society should spend the money necessary to give
full treatment to all addicts, thus obviating the whole question
and avoiding the need for moral choices. In the practical world,
however, everyone knows that the cities are in financial trouble
and have tremendous demands on their limited resources. It is
neither possible nor desirable to give narcotics addicts a prior
claim to limited public resources that might otherwise be spent
on education, health, welfare, or countless other pressing areas.
The best model may be one in which the patients are encouraged to
develop their own services, with the expensive ancillary services
targeted on the hard-core. </p>

<p><i>Outpatient Induction. </i>The MMTP originally inducted
patients into the methadone program by putting them in the
hospital for a week or two during the transition from heroin to
methadone. Because this is expensive, and because the limited
number of available hospital beds imposes a constraint on the
number admitted to the program, there has been much interest in
ambulatory induction. Starting in 1968, MMTP has adopted such a
program for some of its patients. As of 1971, about 1,952 of its
4,376 patients had been admitted in this fashion. Preliminary
data indicate that rates of attrition are almost identical
whether patients are inducted as inpatients or outpatients. After
24 months, about 72 per cent of each group remains.&quot; This
figure is not entirely valid because of the special
characteristics of the ambulatory group. Having a job or family
was a requirement for admission to the ambulatory component, and
79 per cent of admittees were employed or in school. Whether a
patient is employed, as we have seen, is a statistically
significant predictor of whether he will remain in treatment. </p>

<p>Other programs have also used ambulatory admission with
consistently good results, and the effectiveness of this method
is no longer in doubt.&quot; </p>

<p><i>Withdrawal. </i>Eventual withdrawal from methadone rather
than perpetual maintenance is regarded as a goal by drug experts
-in part because of a moral feeling that people should not and do
not need to be drug-dependent; in part because of a desire to
free the addict from his ties to the clinic; in part because of
the wish to minimize any unknown long-term effects of opiates on
the human body. </p>

<p>At present, it is uncertain whether withdrawal is possible. In
a study of 350 patients who withdrew from the MMTP, Dr. Dole
found that &quot;narcotics hunger&quot; returned in almost all
individuals immediately after they ceased taking the methadone,
whether their withdrawal was voluntary or involuntary. Since this
is a somewhat special populations high proportion were treatment
failures-the results are not conclusive, although they are
suggestive that withdrawal may be difficult. Dr. Dole has also
found in blind experiments that a patient stabilized on methadone
and free from drug hunger may have a return of drug dreams if his
medication is withdrawn. He believes that, for most addicts,
maintenance has to be a permanent way of life. It is important to
note, however, that the return of &quot;narcotics hunger&quot;
does not automatically mean a return to heroin use; some
individuals are able to live with the hunger without returning to
drugs. But hunger does make successful abstinence substantially
more difficult.&quot;' </p>

<p>Dr. Jaffe believes that withdrawal from methadone can be
successfully accomplished, although his work in this area has not
yet been extensive. In a study of 53 patients in active
treatment, he found that 29 per cent had voluntarily withdrawn
from methadone but remained affiliated with the methadone units,
either participating in group therapy or transferring to
therapeutic communities or aftercare systems. Not all those
observed on withdrawal remained abstinent, although some patients
observed after six months had been able to do so. Dr. Jaffe seems
to feel that continued therapy techniques are helpful in
maintaining abstinence.&quot; </p>

<p>Dr. Avram Goldstein has done experiments showing that the
methadone dosage can be reduced without discomfort to the patient
if it is done slowly at a weekly reduction rate of no more than
10 per cent. Withdrawal from a moderate methadone stabilization
program would then require about six months.&quot; But follow-up
results are not yet in. </p>

<p>Although the results to date are ambiguous, it seems certain
that substantial experimentation with withdrawal from methadone
will be undertaken. Some black activists, in particular, are
strongly opposed to the concept of permanent maintenance and will
accept methadone programs in their communities only if they are
seen as intermediate-term therapies with the ultimate goal of
abstinence. Dr. Beny Primm, of Addiction Research Treatment
Corporation in New York City, for example, told us that his
explicit goal is to get everyone off methadone and into a
drug-free state. Dr. Goldstein has also suggested that methadone
treatment should be thought of as &quot;methadone temporary
support rather than methadone maintenance, with its implication
of life-long medication.&quot; An addict could join the program,
become stabilized on methadone, eventually taper off slowly and
become drug-free, but be able to return to methadone if the urge
to take heroin became overwhelming.&quot; Ultimate determination
of the possibilities of withdrawal must await determination of
the metabolic-change issue. Meanwhile, the only way to find out
if withdrawal is possible is to try it. Since we do not know why
methadone works, there is no way of telling <i>a priori. </i>Some
programs have reported an unexpected phenomenon that might be
called &quot;the 20-mg. barrier.&quot; The patient undergoing
withdrawal does well until the dose is reduced to about 20 mg. At
this level, there is a sudden increase in physical complaints and
heroin usage.&quot; What this means for permanent withdrawal is a
question that needs study. </p>

<p><i>Benefits to the Addict. </i>Methadone maintenance is
sometimes criticized on the ground that it is society's way of
dealing with the addict crime problem without regard to the
addict himself. This view is especially strong among so-called
militant black groups. On the whole, however, the idea that
methadone sacrifices the addict for the sake of society does not
seem valid. Although many communities adopt methadone programs in
an attempt to solve their crime problem, the program results
showing increased productivity and family stability of the
patients suggest that they themselves benefit from the changed
life-style and reduced crime as much as or more than the
community at large. Since most programs operate primarily on a
voluntary basis, the patients themselves must prefer methadone to
the addicted life. Even when an addict is coerced into treatment
by law enforcement, simply staying in treatment is a vote against
the former life-style. </p>

<p>Finally, even if one were to concede the truth of the
criticism, the logical rejoinder would be &quot;So what?&quot;
There is no good reason for society to tolerate crime simply
because the criminal is a heroin addict when it can eliminate the
crime by forcing him to switch to being a methadone addict. It is
not as if one could choose between methadone and an equally
effective but more expensive alternative: The other alternatives
do not appear to work so well. Even if they did, it would be
difficult to argue that addicts deserve priority in allocating
scarce public resources that could be devoted to the general
welfare of the groups in society that furnish most of the
addicts. In general, to the extent that the criticism represents
the truth of the situation, its use as a criticism seems based on
wishful thinking rather than sound analysis. Its proponents wish
there were another, equally effective treatment method or wish
that public resources were unlimited. </p>

<p>If the metabolic theories of addiction should prove accurate,
the issue will become more acute. Dr. William Martin, for
example, poses the issue as the &quot;medical dilemma of
methadone maintenance, namely, the creation or continuance of a
serious medical disorder, physical dependence, in order to
decrease antisocial behavior.&quot;&quot; If this dilemma is a
real one, all the choices would be unpleasant. The nation could
legalize heroin or move to a massive system of heroin
maintenance, but this would pose exactly the same moral problems
as administering methadone. It could continue to keep heroin
illegal and prosecute addicts for crimes committed to obtain it
while refusing them methadone, but this seems both morally wrong
and politically impossible. It could declare that addicts are not
responsible for crimes committed to obtain heroin because of the
physical duress involved. This would necessitate either heroin or
methadone maintenance, however, since no one can be given such a
license to steal without some counteraction by society. Despite
the problems stated by Dr. Martin, methadone seems the best
choice. </p>

<p><i>Methadone and the Law-Enforcement System. </i>Some program
operators are strongly opposed to the development of close
relations between methadone maintenance and the law-enforcement
system. In their view, a coercive system that forces an addict to
accept methadone as a condition for probation or parole is an
intolerable violation of civil liberties. Others, with equally
strong opinions, disagree. They believe that the realistic choice
lies between having the addict on methadone and having him in
jail, and that the authorities will not often impose a methadone
requirement on a man who would otherwise have been released. In
this view, accepting treatment set by courts or parole boards
gives addicts an option that would not have been available
otherwise. All agree that participants in the methadone program
should avoid becoming informers for the law-enforcement system.
Because of the need to maintain the confidential doctor-patient
relationship, patients should not be reported by the treatment
agency for violations of probation or parole. </p>

<p><i>Methadone and Causes of Addiction. </i>Addiction is often
seen as a sociopsychological disorder, stemming from basic
personality defects. In this view, it is useless and wrong to
treat addiction by administering methadone without, at the same
time, treating the underlying disorder. A better way to approach
the problem is to deal with the basic pathology; when this is
done, freedom from drug use will follow naturally. As stated by a
Manhattan probation officer: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>My<b> </b>objection to the methadone program . . . is
    predicated on the observation that while the drug methadone
    removes the physical craving for the other opiates it
    nevertheless fails to combat in any way or deal with the
    various emotional or other difficulties that permitted the
    individual to initially become and remain involved with
    drugs. Since the drug problem has, so to speak, been
    eliminated, that basic problem has not been dealt with; that
    of the inadequate, ineffective person unable to cope with the
    reality of his situation. In essence, an aspect, the symptom,
    has been treated not the entire individual, with the result
    that they then frequently resort to other avenues of escape
    including amphetamines, barbiturates, wines, and liquor, or
    they begin to manifest serious forms of instability.88<br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Most proponents of methadone would readily agree that
methadone <i>per se </i>does not cure any personality disorders
that might cause addiction. (Not all would; it is entirely
possible that the opiates constitute an effective treatment for
certain as yet undefined psychic states.&quot;) Those who do
agree would respond to the basic criticism as follows: </p>

<p>No consistent pathology has been found. No psychiatric
diagnosis can be shown to apply to all heroin addicts or even to
a majority of them. Thus, while addicts tend to be depressive,
they are not so depressive as neurotic nonaddicts. While some
addicts are schizophrenic, 80 per cent to 90 per cent are not.
Some are psychopathic, but the great majority are not. In short,
no satisfactory explanation of the psychological roots of
addiction has been found, much less developed to the point where
it is operationally useful for treatment purposes's </p>

<p>The view that an underlying pathology is responsible is an
assumption rather than a proved fact. One can construct equally
plausible theories that experimentation is caused by exposure and
normal psychological processes, and addiction is caused by
physiological factors. Dr. Dole, for example, believes that the
observed common characteristics of addicts are simply those
forced on them by the nature of the life-style required to
maintain a heroin habit. Other experts also believe that, even
for addicts with marked problems, it is the addiction that causes
the problems rather than vice versa. </p>

<p>Even granting the argument that pathology is at the root of
addiction, it is easier to work on underlying causes with an
addict who is on methadone and free of drug hunger and the heroin
life-style. </p>

<p>Again granting the argument that pathology is at the root of
addiction, the success rates in attempting to cure such
pathologies-especially among the socioeconomic groups that
furnish most of the addicts-are not very high. Thus, one has no
realistic choice except to accept the second best solution of
methadone maintenance, which has very great benefits for society
and for the addict, even though it is not a complete cure. </p>

<p>Perhaps the best summary has been given by Dr. John Kramer,
discussing the psychopathology of addiction generally, not just
methadone: </p>

<p>It is generally conceded that traditional psychiatric
techniques have not been useful in the management of opiate
dependence. In a psychoanalytic frame of reference symptoms are
considered to be the behavioral or somatic representations of an
underlying intrapsychic conflict. Once the conflict is resolved
or reduced to manageable proportions, the symptoms will diminish
or disappear. </p>

<p>This conceptual model fails to account for two different
issues, either or both of which may play a role in people who
abuse drugs. First, though intrapsychic determinants may play a
part in whether a person uses drugs, other circumstances such as
drug availability, subgroup attitudes, peer pressures, and plain
chance are very often more important. In other words, in some
individuals, there may be no serious underlying conflicts, though
there may be considerable conflict with the community. Second,
whatever the original determinants of drug use may be, the
symptom, dependency on drugs, can become so central an issue that
it, so to speak, assumes a life of its own, and even solving the
underlying conflicts may have no influence on the drug dependence
itself. An analogy may be drawn with a depressed person who in an
attempt at suicide breaks his neck and becomes paraplegic.
Psychotherapy may relieve his depression but will not restore
function to his legs. </p>

<p>Because drug use has been invested with such great importance
in our society (an importance it did not always have) it is
assumed that the intrapsychic events which cause, or contribute
to it, are of equal magnitude. Hence the view, that since drug
use potentially subjects the person to such serious consequences,
the psychological problem he has must be equally big. Experience
with drug users does not validate this view. Some do indeed have
clearly definable psychiatric problems, but many do not. Where it
is sought, some subtle psychiatric defect can always be found, as
has been the case with addicts. Further investigation may clarify
this question. In the meantime a functional approach, handling
the symptoms, educating and giving practical assistance as well
as offering psychotherapy in selected instances seem desirable.91
<br>
</p>

<p>Multiple Drug Use. If a heroin addict is involved in the use
of other drugs, methadone will do nothing about that use. There
is evidence, however, that methadone patients do not increase
their use of other drugs-a charge that has been made-although
they do tend to maintain it at about the same level. The Santa
Clara County Program found that, both before and after going on
methadone, about 20 per cent of the patients overused alcohol, 5
to 10 per cent used amphetamines, 45 per cent used marijuana, and
30 per cent used nothing. The only significant difference was
that 20 per cent abused barbiturates before going on methadone,
and only 6 per cent did so afterwards.&quot; Since barbiturates
create a dangerous addiction if used too much, this is an
important shift. </p>

<p>We know of no other before-and-after study of drug use by
patients on methadone. A recent study of multiple drug use by
heroin users, however,&quot; supports Dr. Goldstein's conclusion
that the use of other drugs does not increase. A sample of 422
heroin users were asked whether they had used certain drugs more
than six times. The per cent who had done so were: marijuana-86
per cent; cocaine-47 per cent; barbiturates-34 per cent; and
amphetamines-33 per cent. (They were also questioned about other
drugs, not recounted here.) In general, it had not been thought
that multiple use among heroin addicts was as high as this, and
there may have been some tendency to assume that multiple use
among methadone patients was a new pattern for them rather than
the continuation of an old one. </p>

<p>Leakage of Methadone. As more large methadone projects come
into existence, it is reasonable to anticipate that some of them
will be lax in their control of methadone, permitting leakage
into the community at large. Several possible consequences of
such a development cause concern. First, there is a fear that the
drug will become available in an injectable form that is an
acceptable, if not a totally satisfactory, euphoric substitute
for heroin. Secondly, the availability of even oral methadone
will create a new group of addicts. Thirdly, nonaddicts,
particularly children, may take methadone and die. </p>

<p>These fears have a sound factual basis. Indeed, methadone can
already be bought on the street in any major city, although it is
unclear whether the source is diversion from the programs or
independent manufacture. The major concern is injectable
methadone. Many addicts regard it as a very good drug, and it
could result in a substantial addition to the present addiction
problem. This is probably a controllable problem, however.
Methadone can be mixed with Tang or some other substance before
dispensation (as is true in almost all programs at present), so
that it is suitable for oral administration only. More important,
the drug companies have developed a methadone disk that requires
a large volume of water for it to dissolve. This makes it
difficult, although not impossible, to inject.&quot; </p>

<p>The second concern, the leakage of oral methadone, is more
crucial. The rapid expansion of methadone programs is highly
probable. With this will inevitably come carelessness about staff
and about control of methadone. If there is a market for the
drug, there will also be some corruption. It will be surprising
if there are not some major scandals involving the diversion of
methadone from treatment programs. </p>

<p>In some ways, leakage may not be very important. While there
are some methadone addicts who are not involved in treatment
programs, oral methadone is not so euphoric as heroin, and few
current heroin addicts would prefer it to heroin as a
euphorogenic. </p>

<p>There is no reason to believe that methadone addiction is
physically more harmful than heroin addiction, and, if the
methadone is pure, there is good reason to think it less harmful.
There is substantial evidence to the effect that methadone
addiction is psychologically less harmful than heroin addiction.
In general, while a few addicts might make oral methadone their
drug of choice, it is probable that the major market for illegal
methadone will consist of addicts who are on do-it-yourself
methadone maintenance, who tide themselves over with methadone
when they cannot get heroin, or who want the euphoric effects of
heroin only occasionally. In these cases, both society and the
addict are better off if they can get methadone to substitute for
heroin. </p>

<p>There is some possibility that methadone will make addicts of
persons who would not otherwise have become addicted. Heroin has
two major defects that may exert some deterrent effect on
potential experimenters: It often contains dangerous impurities;
and it is not effective when taken orally. On the whole, however,
it seems unlikely that these factors are very influential. For
those who might not like to inject a drug, heroin can also be
snorted. (This is, in fact, the usual method by which neophytes
take the drug.) The impurities point might be valid, but it is
difficult to believe that anyone willing to get into the general
life-style of addiction is going to be deterred by the marginal
additional disadvantage of impure drugs. It does seem likely,
however, that, as methadone becomes increasingly available, it
will be used as the drug of initiation by persons who would
otherwise have tried heroin. </p>

<p>More difficult to accept are the overdose deaths that are
already starting to occur-most poignantly, among children who
find and drink methadone-laden Tang. Recurrences could be
prevented by insisting that methadone patients keep methadone in
a locked box outside the refrigerator. The drug will keep a week
without refrigeration, so that this is perfectly feasible.&quot;
Noninjectible methadone could also be given in a tablet form that
is too large and bitter for children. </p>

<p>Other deaths occur among people who use methadone to achieve
euphoria. Because methadone is slower-acting and longer lasting
than intravenous heroin, even a veteran heroin addict may take
methadone, decide that the drug is not having an adequate effect,
take more, and overdose when the peak comes two or three hours
later. Self-education within the drug subculture might keep such
incidents to a minimum. But some deaths will occur, and it is
reasonable to expect that the more methadone available, the more
deaths it will cause. </p>

<p>The only effective answer to this argument is to point to the
large number of heroin deaths caused by overdose, disease, and
infection and to the other deaths caused by addict-committed
crime and by such practices as the sale of infected blood by
addicts. Almost certainly there will be an over-all decrease in
opiate-related deaths as methadone replaces heroin in the
community. </p>

<p><i>Side Effects.&quot; </i>A number of possibly undesirable
side effects of methadone have been hypothesized, ranging from
impotence to damage to the bones and teeth. So far, clinical
studies have found no evidence of birth defects and no indication
of physical damage. Drowsiness is a frequent complaint of program
initiates, but this is a natural consequence of an increase in
the opiate dose and disappears as the addict develops tolerance
for the new level. Some addicts continue to complain of the loss
of libido, but the best evidence is that, for most, sexual
performance is better when they are on methadone than when they
are on heroin. In short, although it cannot be stated
categorically that there are no serious side effects, clinical
investigation so far has failed to find any. To date, however,
research has concentrated on possible physical effects; there do
not seem to be detailed studies of the effects of methadone on
intellectual or motor functioning, and we do not know how
methadone affects a wide range of important functions, from
problem-solving ability to the ability to operate a car or often
complex machinery. Since methadone is a powerful tranquilizer, it
may well have effects in these areas. It is also possible that
tolerance to tranquilization develops, as may be indicated by the
disappearance of excessive drowsiness.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="1">THE FUTURE OF METHADONE </font></p>

<p>It is virtually certain that methadone maintenance will
increase rapidly in the next few years. While many observers have
reservations, the cost/benefit and cost/effectiveness advantages
of methadone have become obvious. Since the relationship between
addiction and crime has been widely publicized, political
pressures to do something about crime are great enough so that
the government will probably support methadone, and vigorously. </p>

<p>While the federal subbureaucracies involved-the National
Institute of Mental Health, the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, and the Food and Drug Administration-have never been fond
of methadone maintenance, its social and political advantages
should now be obvious enough to induce large scale federal
funding in the near future. Most informed observers regard the
Administration's proposal to create a Special Action Office on
Drug Abuse Prevention and to increase funding dramatically as
confirmation of this. At this writing, the Food and Drug
Administration is on the verge of liberalizing the rules under
which methadone is approved for use. </p>

<p>As the programs expand, several issues in addition to those
already discussed will become important: </p>

<p><i>Administrative Problems. </i>There are clear differences
between operating small, experimental programs and operating mass
programs. Such issues as the extent to which ancillary services
should be supplied, the extent of monitoring through urinalysis,
high doses versus low doses, standardized doses versus individual
ones, and control of leakage will arise over and over. In
addition, there will be the problems of recruiting and training
staff common to any expanding area. At present, there are not
enough people experienced in methadone programs to double or
triple current programs. One can expect a period of raiding of
existing programs (with a consequent decline in their
effectiveness) and increasing use of less qualified and less
dedicated people. The difficulties of hiring good staff will
compound the leakage problem. It will also create pressures to
use the cheapest methods available. Most of the higher costs of
the more expensive programs are caused by the increased staff
required for added services; if the trained staff to provide
these services is simply not available, they either will not be
provided or will be done poorly. Analysis of the impact of these
services is therefore urgent. </p>

<p><i>Community Problems. </i>As noted, some black militants are
opposed to methadone maintenance because they regard it as a
device to keep the black community &quot;drugged and
enslaved.&quot; Many of the rumors of side effects are also
believed. These fears can be countered as long as there appears
to be a possibility that methadone maintenance leads to
abstinence; but, if experiments indicate that this is not a
reasonable hope, the situation may become more difficult. This is
not the type of problem that is amenable to rational solution, or
even advice. Methadone-program operators, however, can do at
least three things to meet the challenge: </p>

<p>1. Maintain close contact with various elements of the
community, to explain what they are doing and why it is good for
the addict and the community. </p>

<p>2. Provide facilities to ensure that any methadone patient who
wants to try to become totally drug-free will receive the best
possible support for his effort. </p>

<p>3. Involve the community in the staffing and administration of
the project. </p>

<p>Since these are all good policies irrespective of any militant
reaction against methadone, programs should follow them whether
or not they foresee any problem. Some program operators believe
that the fear of adverse community reaction is exaggerated and is
likely to decrease over time. The area in which the addict lives,
after all, bears the crime costs and the risk of a spread in
addiction. As a methadone program becomes operational, the
surrounding community comes to appreciate it, and strong
opposition dissolves. Dr. Robert DuPont, of Washington's Narcotic
Treatment Agency, has told us that methadone patients become the
best missionaries in the community. </p>

<p><i>Long-acting Methadone. </i>The effect of the methadone used
at present lasts only about 24 hours. Drug companies have been
experimenting with a drug (acetylmethadol) that will last up to
three days, and it is expected that this will become generally
available soon.&quot; This will have several significant effects
on methadone maintenance. It will cut costs by reducing the
expense of preparing and administering the drug. It will also
make it more difficult for the patient to skip his dose and try
heroin. Another effect may be to allow the patient greater
mobility and weaken the ties between the patient and the program.
In the view of some, this will be a good thing because it will
enable the patients to lead a more nearly normal life. Others
speculate that it will be counterproductive, in that the routine
daily visit provides an important element of structure in the
patient's life and has positive therapeutic benefits. There is no
way of resolving this dispute <i>a priori.</i> </p>

<p><i>Changing Patterns of Addiction. </i>There is consensus that
the primary reason addicts volunteer for methadone programs, or
stay in them once assigned by the law-enforcement system, is that
they are tired of the life-style of an addict, with the constant
need to make a connection, the strains of criminality, the jail
time, and the risk of infection and death. Participation in a
methadone program and abstinence from heroin become a more
attractive choice. Whether he procures methadone on the street or
through a clinic, as long as it is cheap he can maintain his
opiate habit at low cost and then occasionally obtain the desired
euphoria by skipping the methadone and using large amounts of
heroin. Since the data from existing programs indicate that many
addicts do use heroin occasionally-anywhere from 10 to 50 per
cent, depending on the program and length of time in
treatment-this may already be a common pattern. </p>

<p>This problem presents a difficult choice to program operators.
To eliminate this last increment of drug use might require
expulsion of addicts for occasional heroin use. This would
certainly return some patients to the addicted life, with all the
social and personal costs involved. If an addict is adjusting
well in other ways, this cost is not justifiable. Eliminating the
last vestige of heroin use in such a case is essentially a
meaningless concession to moralism. </p>

<p>There is a more serious question involved, however. There is
no way of knowing the extent to which the negative aspects of the
addicted life have a general deterrent effect that keeps people
from experimenting with heroin. Clearly, almost anyone exposed to
heroin is also exposed to the addict community generally and
knows the risks involved in becoming addicted. It -is possible
that the existence of large methadone programs would indicate to
some portion of the nonaddict population that they could attain
the euphoria of heroin without having to adopt the life-style as
a whole, and they might find this option more attractive than
either abstinence or full-scale heroin addiction. Present
evidence indicates that there may be a curious gap of belief in
people who become addicted to heroin. They know full well that
the drug is addicting and that the life-style is terrible, but
they do not doubt their own ability to handle the drug without
becoming addicted. For all we know, the unattractiveness of the
life-style may be exercising a potent deterrent effect on others
who are curious but more realistic about the danger of becoming
addicted. Opening up the methadone choice might make these people
more willing to run the risk. Since we know little about the
causes of addiction and even less about deterrent effects, we do
not know whether this is a matter for real concern. If it turns
out to be an important phenomenon, it will create some painful
public-policy choices. </p>

<p><i>Total Size of Methadone Programs. </i>A final question
concerns the portion of the addict population that is amenable to
successful methadone treatment. Any figure is only an educated
guess based upon the observer's estimate of the total number of
addicts, observations about the results of existing methadone
programs, and judgments about the criteria of success. </p>

<p>Official U.S. Government calculations seem to agree that 25 to
33 per cent of the addicted population will be helped by
methadone.&quot; This estimate may well be too low; some program
operators have estimated that their methadone programs drew
almost 50 per cent of the addicts in an area within a year or so
after beginning operations.&quot;' Considering that many addicts
believe street rumors adverse to methadone, and that one would
not expect any program to reach its full potential right away, an
estimate of 50 per cent probably represents a more realistic, but
still conservative, figure, if one assumes that
&quot;success&quot; means &quot;derives substantial benefit from
methadone maintenance.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p><i>ANTAGONISTS</i> </p>

<p>Antagonists are drugs that prevent opiates from having any
effect if the antagonists are administered before opiate
injection and that precipitate withdrawal if administered after
injection. The possibility of using these drugs as a major
treatment modality has intrigued researchers for the last six
years, but at present the antagonists remain experimental.&quot;'
</p>

<p>There are two basic antagonists currently in use for the
treatment of heroin addicts, cyclazocine and naloxone, but an
excellent survey by New York's Health Services Administration
noted that there might be several hundred others already in
existence, as yet untested.&quot;' The most important
characteristics of these drugs are as follows: </p>

<p>Cyclazocine produces unpleasant side effects, such as nausea
sweating, a drunken feeling, anxiety, and hallucinations, but
tolerance to these effects does develop. Naloxone does not appear
to have significant side effects. Cyclazocine is effective when
taken orally and has a duration of action of 12 to 24 hours.
Naloxone is effective when taken intravenously but is relatively
ineffective when taken orally. There does not appear to be any
information on subcutaneous administration, though presumably it
would be less effective than intravenous but more effective than
oral administration. Small doses of an antagonist are effective.
Thus, 4 mg. of cyclazocine will block the effects of 15 to 25 mg.
of heroin for one day. Naloxone is even more powerful if used
intravenously: 1 mg. will block the effects of 25 mg. of heroin
for ten hours. (Taken orally, it requires 200 mg. to block the
effects of 25 mg. of heroin for six hours.) Cyclazocine has
addictive qualities, in that an abstinent user will show some
withdrawal symptoms. Users do not crave the drug even when they
are in withdrawal, however. Naloxone does not have addictive
properties. The antagonists do not reduce the &quot;drug
hunger&quot; felt by the opiate addict. </p>

<p>Most experimentation to date has been done with cyclazocine,
largely because the short duration and ineffectiveness of oral
naloxone makes it an unsuitable candidate for mass treatment. </p>

<p>The NIMH Addiction Research Center is now experimenting with a
new antagonist, EN-1639A. It is two to three times more potent
than the other two, is effective orally, and has a longer
duration of action than naloxone <font size="1">.103</font> </p>

<p>Besides the mechanical problems of dosage and delivery, there
are several major problems in using the antagonists as a
treatment modality. Because they do not eliminate the &quot;drug
hunger,&quot; the patient is constantly tempted to miss his dose
and take heroin. As the HSA paper points out, the fact that
addiction to the antagonist itself is minimal means that it is
possible for him to do this. A methadone patient is tied to the
program by his addiction; an antagonist patient is not. Because
of this problem, and also because of the short duration of action
of many possible antagonists, a major search is under way for a
capsule that could be implanted in the patient to release the
drug slowly over an extended period. It is likely to be some time
before success is achieved, however.&quot;' The civil-liberties
questions involved are also substantial. </p>

<p>Two apparent disadvantages may be due to the experimental
nature of the programs. So far, the costs have been high ($3,000
to $5,000 per addict per year), partly because of the need for
inpatient care common to all experimental programs and partly
because of the scarcity and high price of some of the drugs. The
success rate so far is hard to calculate, but, at best, it has
been about 40 per cent over all, judged by the criterion of
remaining in the program.&quot;' However, some of the failures
may reflect the fact that dosages had to be worked out and
supportive services developed. Future experiments may do better.
One can, of course, argue the opposite-that future, larger
projects will be less successful because the Hawthorne effect of
participating in a new experimental program will be gone. In
addition, there is some evidence that the success rate for
outpatients may be considerably lower than for inpatients. </p>

<p>It is as yet unproved that the antagonists will ever be a
useful treatment modality. Nor is there any reason at present to
believe that the side effects of any antagonists would be less
adverse than those of methadone. It could easily turn out to be
the reverse, with the antagonists having more serious adverse
effects. If an addict is going to be dependent upon long-term
chemotherapy, there appears to be no reason at present for
preferring that he be dependent on an antagonist rather than on
methadone. </p>

<p>Under some theories of addiction, the antagonists could be
useful adjuncts to treatment. If one takes the view that it is
important to extinguish reinforcement of the desire to use
opiates, the antagonists may turn out to be successful. One can
also argue that the use of an antagonist, combined with
supportive services, would force the addict from the addicted
life-style and give him an opportunity to forge a new one.
Finally, and probably most important, is the possibility that use
of an antagonist might turn out to be the only practical way an
addict on methadone can become abstinent. If research should
ultimately show that opiate use does create a drug hunger that
persists for a long period after obvious withdrawal is complete,
then antagonists might be developed that would help the addict
survive this period without readdiction. Dr. William Martin has
found that secondary withdrawal symptoms persist in animals for
at least six months after withdrawal from opiates. If the drug
hunger is such a symptom, and if it persists in humans in similar
fashion, there is at present no way for an addict to leave a
methadone program without enduring six months of craving opiates.
As is obvious from the failure rates for abstinence programs, few
manage to do this. If an antagonist could prevent relapses from
leading to readdiction during this period, it would be
valuable.&quot;' </p>

<p>Dr. Martin is cautious about the antagonists. He states only
that, if the research goals are achieved, &quot;I believe that
certain motivated addicts can be benefitted by this approach. . .
. [They] may find a role in the treatment of the juvenile
experiment. <font size="4">Others are more enthusiastic, and
suggestions of mass inoculations are occasionally heard. The
wisdom of such ideas is questionable.<br>
</font></p>

<p><i>MULTIMODAL PROGRAMS<br>
</i></p>

<p>Several programs now contain components of all the different
modalities. The Illinois Drug Abuse Project (IDAP), in Chicago,
the Narcotics Treatment Administration, in Washington, D.C., and
the New Haven Mental Health Center, for example, include
methadone, therapeutic communities, detoxification, abstinence,
and supportive services for all types of patients. The Community
Mental Health Center'in New Haven has an experimental naloxone
group as well, and IDAP at one time tried cyclazocine on some
patients. While the approach is promising, rigorous comparison of
multimodal and unimodal programs has not yet been done, and one
can only set forth the present arguments for and against the
multimodal approach. </p>

<p>The arguments in favor run along the following lines: </p>

<p>Most observers believe that different programs work best for
different addicts, although the typologies are not worked out and
no tool has predictive value at present. If a program has several
modalities, an addict can readily transfer from one to another if
he or the staff feels that his performance could be improved by
the change. In addition, failure in one modality does not mean
total failure, because the addict can try another with minimal
delay. </p>

<p>Different modalities attract different types of addicts.
Therapeutic communities, for example, may have more appeal to
younger addicts; methadone, to older. Differences in age,
education, employment, or criminality may also be significant.
But the modality that attracts an addict may not be the one in
which he will ultimately do best. Combining the modalities makes
one an intake center for each of the others, to the benefit of
all. </p>

<p>In some cases, the modality to which an addict applies is an
accident of geography and personal contacts. Centralized
administration can make this choice more rational and productive.
</p>

<p>Each modality has something to contribute to the others. The
group-therapy techniques and intense environment of the
therapeutic community may help methadone patients by encouraging
them to become abstinent or by improving their understanding of
the factors that led them to addiction. They may also have an
impact on abuse of other drugs by methadone patients. Conversely,
TC residents and other abstinent patients may benefit from
knowing that there is a back-up program if they do not succeed in
remaining abstinent. </p>

<p>A multimodal program will find it easier to develop new
strategies for the treatment of addiction. For example, it may be
possible to have patients who are basically abstinent but receive
low doses of methadone if they feel the craving for drugs is
about to overwhelm them. This could be a particularly important
technique for teenagers. It would be difficult to operate such a
program in connection with any single modality, because both the
administrative structure and the ambience would be against the
experiment. </p>

<p>Politically, it is advantageous to combine the modalities, so
that they will stop fighting each other and unite to get more
support from the government. </p>

<p>The primary arguments against multimodal programs are as
follows: </p>

<p>Most of the benefits to be gained from eliminating accidental
assignment, allowing rapid reassignment, and experimenting with
new programs may be achieved just as well by better
administration and coordination of separate modalities. </p>

<p>Multimodal programs have the basic problem that they transmit
contradictory messages to the patients. The ethos of most such
programs is that abstinence is superior and that methadone
patients, while not so bad as heroin addicts, are definitely
second-class. This lack of psychological support makes it more
likely that the methadone patient will fail. It may also make it
difficult for a patient who is not doing well on an abstinence
program to change to methadone-he may leave treatment entirely
rather than accept what be and his peers view as a demotion. If
such an attitude does not pervade the project, the reverse
problem may occur: The abstinent patient may not see why he
should endure drug hunger while others are receiving methadone. </p>

<p>In this view, faith is a very important part of every
modality. The evangelical nature of the TC has been discussed,
for example, and it may be a necessary part of the therapy. Part
of the success with methadone may be due to the fact that
patients come to believe that they have a metabolic disease and
are going to receive a medicine that will help them. In short,
mixing different modalities may undermine all of them by
confusing the patient about the expectations and possibilities of
the program. </p>

<p>Resolution of this issue must await further research that
explicitly compares the success of the different components of
multimodal programs with that of comparable techniques used
alone. </p>

<p>Since multimodality is a growing trend, such evaluations
should be performed soon.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><i>HEROIN MAINTENANCE <br>
</i></p>

<p>One treatment modality that is not used in the United States
at present is maintenance of addicts on heroin or morphine. While
many, perhaps most, observers react negatively to the idea, there
are good reasons for trying it on an experimental basis. The
major argument in favor is that heroin maintenance might attract
two important groups of addicts: those who do not succeed on
methadone maintenance and those who do not volunteer for it in
the first place. If this were the result, addiction-related crime
would be decreased, because the costs of the heroin habit would
be eliminated and, as a benefit to the addict, the chances of
infection, overdose, and imprisonment would be lessened. In
addition, since remarkably little is known about the etiology of
addiction or the effects of heroin, controlled clinical
experimentation with heroin maintenance would allow some
important questions to be studied. It is also possible that
heroin maintenance would break the market for heroin and remove
the impetus for expansion caused by the high profits of illegal
distribution. (The English experience, described by Edgar May in
Staff Paper 7, is, of course, instructive.) </p>

<p>The most important objections to heroin maintenance are as
follows: </p>

<p>The administrative expenses would be high. If the drug were
administered in clinics, it would have to be made available about
four times a day. Also, because heroin is relatively ineffective
orally, medical personnel might be required to give injections to
ensure a sterilized procedure. Both factors would increase
expenses. If the English system were adopted and the heroin were
dispensed from pharmacies on prescription, it would be difficult
to control the dosages, track the patients, secure the heroin,
and avoid infection and disease. Because of heroin's sharp peaks
and short duration of action, it may be a difficult drug on which
to find and maintain a constant dosage even if the patient
desires stabilization. There is always physical pressure on the
patient to increase his dosage. To make this problem worse, a
maintenance program would draw addicts who were not willing to
give up the effort to attain the euphoria of heroin. Thus, they
might take their maintenance dose, buy more on the street, and
then demand that the clinics maintain the new, higher dosage.
While there may be a pharmacological ceiling beyond which the
drug has no additional euphoric effects, this is not definitely
known. Addicts on heroin maintenance might quickly reach levels
of 100 to 200 mg. of heroin per day, a dose higher than that of
almost all present addicts. The physical effects of this dosage
are not known. Many members of the black community would oppose
heroin maintenance, interpreting it as a scheme to keep the black
community tranquilized and quiet or as an indication that society
is concerned only with the crime caused by addiction, not with
the addicts themselves. Still others, who believe that continuing
use of heroin causes long-term organic damage, might regard
heroin maintenance as a form of mass murder. </p>

<p>The high doses that would tend to prevail in such a program
would tranquilize addicts and make them function ineffectively.
This would make rehabilitation efforts impossible. </p>

<p>Heroin maintenance might draw patients away from methadone,
thus transferring them from a program with proved effectiveness
for rehabilitation to one that is probably counterproductive in
terms of reformation of the addict's life-style. </p>

<p>The existence of heroin maintenance would remove an important
deterrent to experimentation with heroin-the obvious degradation
of the addicted life. </p>

<p>These objections have force. It seems doubtful that society
would wish to move to a large-scale heroin-maintenance program at
the present time, especially if doing so would undercut
methadone. However, there are limitations on the effectiveness of
methadone and on the extent to which it can eliminate the
addiction problem. If, for example, only 50 per cent of the
addicts are helped by methadone, the country may be left with a
sizable addiction problem even after methadone has reached its
full potential. Despite the problems, it is likely that heroin
maintenance will begin to receive serious consideration. It would
be wise to start accumulating solid knowledge on its workings and
effects, and on the validity of the objections to it, before
proposals for large scale programs make the matter urgent. There
will not be time to do so afterwards. Careful experimentation is
desirable.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><i>TREATMENT OF USERS OF NONOPIATES <br>
</i></p>

<p>Treatment of users of the amphetamines, barbiturates,
hallucinogens, and cannabinols has two distinct aspects. The
first is (,crisis intervention&quot;-emergency assistance to
those who are suffering from adverse effects of drugs. The second
consists of longterm programs designed to prevent future drug
use.<br>
</p>

<p>CRISIS INTERVENTION <br>
</p>

<p>Overdoses of opiates and barbiturates constitute a medical
emergency, and death results unless steps are taken
quickly.&quot;' For other drugs, the adverse effects are more
psychological than physical-usually the user is having a severe
mental disturbance as a result of the drug and needs
psychological support until the body clears the drug from the
system.&quot;' </p>

<p>Until recently, users of nonopiates suffering from adverse
effects of drug taking had nowhere to go except hospital
emergency rooms. Most users were reluctant to do this, both
because hospitals often felt compelled to report the illegal drug
user to the authorities, and because emergency-room personnel
treated them demeaningly. In addition, drug users came to believe
that the treatment received in hospitals was not very helpful. In
fact, the reaction of the medical personnel tended to intensify
and prolong the user's own panic. In the words of one observer,
&quot;Modern medical science can keep a panic reaction going for
about five days.&quot; The hospital use of strong tranquilizers
is regarded by experienced drug users and drug-treatment doctors
as unnecessary and possibly damaging. Chlorpromazine, the usual
drug given, has strong side effects... and is unpleasant in its
psychoactive characteristics.&quot;' </p>

<p>Free clinics, manned by interested professionals, experienced
youths, and volunteer doctors, have sprung up in many cities. The
Haight-Ashbury Clinic in San Francisco seems to have been the
prototype. The Langly Porter Youth Drug Unit at the University of
California is another. It is not known how many there now are,
but it is probable that every large city has at least one, some
have several, and the movement is spreading rapidly to suburban
communities. </p>

<p>The treatment provided to drug users on a &quot;bad trip&quot;
consists primarily of &quot;talking down&quot; the patient, which
can be done by peers who have had similar experiences.
&quot;Quiet rooms&quot; for such &quot;talk downs&quot; have been
recommended as a component for all emergency medical centers that
treat youthful drug users. The patient is not left alone and is
constantly reassured about who he is and where he is.
Establishment of verbal contact with the patient is recommended,
and there is little or no use of tranquilizers. When
tranquilizers are used, chlorpromazine is the most common, given
either orally or, preferably, intramuscularly, which avoids
adverse gastrointestinal symptoms. Experimentation is going on
using short-term barbiturates instead. As of 1970, the Berkeley
Free Clinic claimed to have given only three tranquilizing
injections to &quot;freakouts&quot; since the clinic began; the
rest were talked down. </p>

<p>Heavy amphetamine users and barbiturate addicts present
different detoxification problems. The barbiturate addict needs
to be withdrawn from his addiction under a carefully supervised
medical regimen in an inpatient hospital setting, for the
withdrawal process itself is life-threatening.&quot;' Heavy
amphetamine users are apt to suffer from paranoia, sometimes
leading to violence; they need a quiet recovery room away from
strangers whom they may consider enemies. They often shy away
from hospitalization for fear of arrest. </p>

<p>Treating soft-drug users for adverse reactions is an important
health measure to prevent possible deaths, suicides, or bizarre
and self-destructive behavior. Since most facilities that perform
this service do not have a follow-up capacity, there is no way of
telling how many patients return to drug use and how many abandon
it after experiencing adverse reactions. The treatment process
itself is not concerned with abstinence but with the immediate
problem. Many of the patients seen in these clinics are only
occasional experimenters or sporadic-users. </p>

<p>Before the drug legislation of 1970, there was no basis for
federal funding of these crisis clinics. The law now provides
that HEW can make grants for such partial services to drug users.
Some of the clinics are not enthusiastic about federal backing,
fearing that it will lead to greater conformity in approach and a
decreased ability to utilize ex-drug users in new roles. Federal
or state governments might also impose bureaucratic standards on
staff training and facilities without contributing enough money
to meet the costs of these requirements. There is also a fear
that government backing will turn away some clients. <br>
</p>

<p>LONG-TERM THERAPY <br>
</p>

<p>While the crisis centers provide necessary emergency services,
it is unlikely that they have much permanent impact on drug
users. There is therefore a movement to expand the centers to
include programs that will have some effect on the drug-using
behavior of patients. As a result, the crisis centers are
beginning to offer long-term therapeutic help as well as
emergency services. </p>

<p>This expansion is not limited to the treatment of drug users.
Most clinic staff members view drug problems as only one aspect
-and not always the most serious-of human malfunctioning for
which help should be provided. For example, the Center for
Special Social and Health Problems in San Francisco, according to
its descriptive materials, is concerned with drug abuse, sexual
problems, violence and hatred, compulsive gambling, suicide,
management of death and dying, crime and delinquency, inability
to manage finances, obesity, and insomnia. While this list is
more ambitious than most, it illustrates the general trend
toward, broadening the scope of the crisis clinic. In a way,
these organizations are becoming privately run community
mental-health centers. </p>

<p>The techniques and operations of these programs are about the
same as those of the therapeutic communities and outpatient
abstinence programs. Since, at present, there is no chemotherapy
for soft-drug use, no treatment comparable to the methadone
movement is possible. The basic problem with nonaddictive soft
drugs is that continued use reflects the user's desire to keep
taking them or a psychological dependence on them, which can be
even more difficult to deal with than a physical craving. As one
study points out, &quot;Student drug users are, as a group,
knowledgeable about the undesirable effects of drug abuse. In
general, it is not difficult for most student drug abusers to
stop. The issue is to get them to want <font size="1">to
Stop.11113</font> </p>

<p>While some soft-drug users are in TC's, the majority of those
receiving help are in some form of outpatient program, usually
the same programs described in the section on outpatient
abstinence for opiate users. Often, the patients themselves are
the same. A number of heroin addicts use other drugs as well, and
youthful drug users are increasingly experimenting with heroin as
one of several drugs they try. Whether it is possible to sustain
a pattern of sporadic heroin use without becoming addicted is as
yet uncertain. The &quot;speed culture&quot; in the
Haight-Ashbury section of San Francisco has produced some
evidence that speed users, who first use barbiturates to ease the
&quot;crash,&quot; soon learn that heroin is an even smoother way
to achieve this purpose. Eventually they may abandon speed
entirely and become heroin addicts. It is possible that a pattern
of multiple drug use that includes heroin is an intermediate step
toward full addiction.&quot;' It is even more difficult to
determine the success of these programs with soft-drug users than
with narcotics addicts, in part because most experts believe that
youths who become heavily involved with cannabis and
hallucinogens do not usually stay involved for a long period of
time.&quot;' This fact, of course, increases the difficulty of
evaluating the impact of any drug program, because abstinence is
a poor indication of the program's effect. </p>

<p>Some work is going on in the area of chemotherapy. An effort
is now being made to find antagonists to some of the more common
drugs. Researchers tentatively claim to have found a drug that is
an antagonist to amphetamines, although it has not yet been fully
tested, and some work is being done on antagonists to LSD.
However, it is not clear whether these drugs, when and if they
are perfected, will have a significant impact on drug use, since
soft drugs are taken without the spur of physical necessity.
Unless a policy of forced implantation is followed, the drug user
will always have a choice about taking the antagonist, and in
most cases the choice would probably be to continue drug use. </p>

<p>There are, however, two hypotheses under which the antagonists
might be useful. The amphetamines appear to be physically
addictive to a limited extent, and this could exert some pressure
on the amphetamine user to continue his use.&quot;' An antagonist
might prevent the constant renewal of this physical dependence
and give the user's body a chance to become free of it. Secondly,
if one adopts a conditioning theory of drug use, an antagonist
would eliminate the reinforcing effect of gratification from drug
use and might in time extinguish the conditioned response of
taking drugs. </p>

<p>One of the most carefully evaluated methods of decreasing soft
drug use is transcendental meditation. A Harvard Medical School
Study gave questionnaires to 1,950 subjects who had been
practicing transcendental meditation for three months or more. Of
these, 1,862 completed the questionnaire. The decrease in drug
use was quite striking. The study says: </p>

<p>Following the start of the practice of transcendental
meditation, there was a marked decrease in the number of drug
abusers for all drug categories. . . . As the practice of
meditation continued, the subjects progressively decreased their
drug abuse until after practicing 21 months of meditation most
subjects had completely stopped abusing drugs. For example, in
the 6-month period before starting the practice of meditation,
about 80 percent of the subjects used marijuana and of those
about 28 percent were heavy users. Aftel practicing
transcendental meditation 6 months, 37 percent used marijuana and
of those only 6.5 percent were heavy users. After 21 months of
the practice, only 12 percent continued to use marijuana and of
those most were light users; only one individual was a heavy
user. The decrease in abuse of LSD was even more marked. Before
starting the practice of transcendental meditation, 48 percent of
the subjects had used LSD, and of these subjects about 14 percent
were heavy users. In the 3 months following the start of the
practice of meditation, 1 1 percent of the subjects took LSD
while after 21 months of the practice only 3 percent took LSD.
The increase in the number of non-users after starting the
practice of meditation was similar for the other drugs: non-users
of the other hallucinogens after 21 months of the practice rose
from 61 to 96 percent; for the narcotics, from 83 to 99 percent;
for the amphetamines, from 70 to 99 percent; and for the
barbiturates, from 83 to 99 percent.117 </p>

<p>As the researchers point out, these correlations are not proof
of causation. &quot;Involvement in other kinds of
self-improvement activities may also lead to decreased drug
abuse. The motivation to start meditation may have influenced the
subjects to stop drug abuse. The subjects in the present study
may have spontaneously stopped, continued, or increased taking
drugs independently of transcendental meditation.&quot;&quot;' </p>

<p>Despite these necessary caveats, the results are striking,
especially in an area in which, as the study delicately points
out, &quot;Existing programs for the alleviation of
[non-narcotic] drug abuse usually involve education as to the
dangers of the effects of drugs and sometimes provide personal
counseling or psychiatric care. The efficiency of these programs
has yet to be established.&quot;' (Staff Paper 6<b>, </b>by Dr.
Andrew Weil, deals with meditation and other nonchernical means
of achieving altered stages of consciousness.) <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><i>CONCLUSION<br>
</i></p>

<p>Few solid conclusions emerge from this morass of conflicting
information. It is clear that methadone is a helpful treatment
modality, but just how helpful is not yet known. It is equally
clear that its almost inevitable expansion will create new
problems, some of them predictable and some of them totally
unexpected. Not much can be said about the other treatment
modalities and concepts. Those who favor them have not yet proved
their case, but neither have those who are skeptical. On the
whole, it seems probable that they will turn out to have only
marginal effectiveness as drug-treatment methods, although they
may have possibilities as a part of the more general
human-potential movement. The basic problem is that we lack any
solid theory or understanding of the nature and causes of
addiction. As researchers have repeatedly pointed out, for most
drug users the drugs are functional and adaptive mechanisms.
Society cannot make long-term progress toward developing more
effective treatment mechanisms without grasping and accepting
this fact. At present, however, we have little choice but to
proceed empirically.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><i>NOTES<br>
</i></p>

<p><font size="1">1. Alfred Lindesmith, <i>The Addict and the Law
</i>(New York: Vintage ed., 1967), pp. 105-6, 124. (Hereafter
cited as Lindesmith.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">2. Charles Terry and Mildred Pellens, <i>The
Opium Problem </i>(Bureau of Social Hygiene, 1928), p. 627.
(Hereafter cited as Terry and Pellens.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>3. Ibid., </i>pp. 137-65.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">4. Troy Duster, <i>The Legislation of Morality </i>(New
York: Free Press, 1970),</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">p. 15.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">5. Terry and Pellens, pp. 30-32. These authors
are skeptical and believe that physicians would have reported
only addicts under curative treatment. 6. Rufus King, <i>The Drug
Hang-up-America's Fifty Year Folly </i>(in press), MS. pp. 76-77.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">7. Terry and Pellens, p. 866.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">8. King, <i>op. cit., </i>note 6, MS. p. 57.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">9. Norman Zinberg and John Robertson, <i>Drugs
and the Public </i>(in press),</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">MS. p. 40.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">10. Lindesmith, pp. 99-134. For a brief review
of relevant population estimates, see Arthur D. Little, Inc., <i>Drug
Abuse and Law Enforcement (A </i>Report to the President's
Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice:
1967), &quot;Appendix C: History of the U.S. Addict
Population.&quot; This report argues that &quot;what is apparent
is not the constancy of the addict and his habit, but rather that
the addict deserts his habit quite easily&quot; (pp. C-4 and
C-5). It points to sources showing a decline from about 246,000
in 1890 to 100,000 in 1926. These sources are criticized in the
cited portion of Lindesmith.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">11. Frances Gearing, &quot;Methadone
Maintenance Treatment Program:</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Progress Report of Evaluation Through March 31,
1970&quot; (mimeograph, 1970), p. 1 1. (Hereafter cited as
Gearing, 1970.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">12. The studies are summarized in John
O'Donnell, <i>The Relapse Rate in Narcotic Addiction: A Critique
of Follow-up Studies </i>(New York State, Narcotic Addiction
Control Commission Reprints, 1968) (originally published in
1965).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">13. William Martin, Statement in <i>Narcotics
Research, Rehabilitation, and Treatment, </i>Hearings before the
Select Committee on Crime, House of Representatives, 92d Cong.,
Ist sess., April 26-28 and June 24, 23, 1971 (GPO, 1971), Part 2,
pp. 437-38. (A number of statements at these hearings are cited
hereafter. They are footnoted as <i>Hrgs.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">14. These summary statements are drawn from a
large number of published sources and interviews. Some of them
are discussed at greater length later in the paper, particularly
in the methadone section. For development and discussion of
psychological characteristics, see Isador Chein, Donald Gerard,
Robert Lee, and Eva Rosenfeld, <i>The Road to H </i>(New York:
Basic Books, 1964), a book that equals <i>The Opium Problem </i>as
a classic in the field.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">15. David Smith, George Gay, and Barry Ramer,
&quot;Adolescent Heroin Abuse in San Francisco,&quot; <i>Proceedings
Third National Conference on Methadone Treatment, November 14-16,
1970 </i>(GPO, 1971), pp. 89, 90. (These proceedings are
hereafter cited as <i>Third Meth. Conf.)</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">16. Howard Jones, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 588.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">17. George Gay, Alan Matzger, William Bathurst,
and David Smith, &quot;Short-Term Heroin Detoxification on an
Outpatient Basis,&quot; <i>International journal of the
Addictions, </i>VI, No. 2 (June, 1971), 241, 259-60.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">18. Kramer, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 668.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">19. U.S. Comptroller General, <i>Limited Use of
Federal Programs to Commit Narcotic Addicts for Treatment and
Rehabilitation </i>(September 20, 1971), p. 6; Jonathan Cole,
&quot;Report on the Treatment of Drug Addiction,&quot; in
President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of
Justice, <i>Task Force Reports: Narcotics and Drug Abuse </i>(GPO,
1967), pp. 135,140-41. </font></p>

<p><font size="1">20. O'Donnell, <i>op. cit., </i>note 12.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">21. These are reviewed in Cole, <i>op. cit., </i>note
19, pp. 135-36.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">22. Duster, <i>op. cit., </i>note 4, p. 134.
The description and statistics that follow are taken from Duster
and from John Kramer, Richard Bass, and John Berechochea,
&quot;Civil Commitment for Addicts: The California Program,&quot;
<i>American Journal of Psychiatry, </i>CXXV (1968), 816.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">23. Kramer, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 654.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">24. Compare the descriptions of the two
programs in National Institute of Mental Health, National
Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information, <i>Directory of
Narcotic Addiction Treatment Agencies in the United States, </i>1968-69
(GPO, 1970), pp. 5-6. (Hereafter cited as <i>NIMH Directory.) </i>25.
Jones, <i>Hrgs., </i>pp. 565, 584. The budget estimate is
calculated from the budget numbers given. It is not a statement
of the Commissioner.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">26. For a thoughtful critique based on
observation of five centers, see Community Service Society of New
York, Committee on Youth and Correc<i>tion, Observation on Five
Residential Facilities of the Narcotic Addiction Control
Commission </i>(1971), pp. 89-101.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>27. New York Times, </i>October 4, 1970.
See, also, the statement of the Health Policy Advisory Center:</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">The program promises to return the addict to a
useful life &quot;through extended periods of treatment in a
controlled environment followed by supervision in an after-care
program.&quot; The emphasis is on &quot;controlled.&quot; The
addict receives about as much rehabilitation as the criminal
prisoner with about as much result-the recidivist rate for
addicts is much higher than for criminals. Moreover the
rehabilitation centers are run like prisons. There are guards,
most of whom receive training for prison work-one guard for every
two inmates, recalcitrant addicts are beaten and placed in
isolation on reduced diets; inmates are sexually abused; there is
no separation of the young from the old. The few rehabilitation
programs that do exist are staffed by instructors and therapists
who have received little or no training. For the 5,000 or so
inmates in the 14 separate institutions there are only 4
psychiatrists, 16 psychologists, and 78 teachers and vocational
instructors. The prison-like atmosphere has caused a large
percentage of the addicts to try to escape. [Health Policy
Advisory Council, Health/PAC <i>Bulletin, </i>June, 1970, pp.
16-17.]</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">28. Carl Chambers, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 566.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">29. U.S. Comptroller General, <i>op. cit., </i>note
19, pp. 12-17.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">30. Information furnished by the Bureau of
Prisons.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">31. The information on 1969 was furnished by
NIMH. The 1971 information is from Bertram Brown, <i>Hrgs., </i>p.
470.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">32. Brown, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 433.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">33. U.S. Bureau of Prisons, &quot;Narcotic
Addict Rehabilitation Act: Progress Report&quot; (mimeograph),
February 22, 197 1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">34. These are difficult numbers to pin down.
According to the <i>NIMH Directory </i>(p. 144), 40 programs
listed themselves as therapeutic communities as of about 1968. It
is not clear how stringent the standards for inclusion were,
however, and this may include some programs that are essentially
outpatient abstinence with group work. At the other end, it
misses some of the newer therapeutic communities.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">The population figure is also an educated
guess. Most TC's are in New York, and knowledgeable sources
estimate that the Phoenix Houses (the city's TC program) had
about 1,000 residents and private TC's about 1,400 in 1970.
Synanon had about 1,400 residents <i>(NIMH Directory, </i>p. 32).
These places account for the largest number of TC residents, but
there are many others with 10 to 100 residents scattered
throughout the country. The estimate of 5,000 residents is
probably an upper limit.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">35. A description of four of the New York City
projects is given in Community Service Society of New York,
Committee on Youth and Corrections, <i>The Long Road Back from a
Living Death: A Study of Four Voluntary Treatment</i> <i>and
Rehabilitation Programs for New York City's Narcotics Addicts </i>(Part
1) (1967).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">36. Kramer, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 667.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">37. <i>Ibid.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">38. This study was given to us on a
no-attribution basis.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">39. <i>NIMH Directory, passim. </i>For a
detailed description of two projects, see Community Service
Society of New York, Committee on Youth and Corrections, <i>Lifeline
to Tomorrow: A Study of Voluntary Treatment Programs for Narcotic
Addicts (Part </i>11) (1 969).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">40. Robert DuPont, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 144.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">41. D.C. Department of Corrections,
&quot;Performance of Corrections Referrals Under Three
Narcotic-Addiction Treatment Modalities&quot; (Research Report
No. 42: mimeograph, July, 1971).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">42. Friends of Psychiatric Research, Inc., <i>Uniform
Evaluation of Programs to Combat Narcotic Addiction </i>(Baltimore,
1970).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">43. <i>Op. cit., </i>note 39, pp. 93-94.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">44. The data that follow are from S. B. Sells
and Deena Watson, &quot;A Spectrum of Approaches in Methadone
Treatment: Relation to Program Evaluation,&quot; <i>Third Meth.
Conf., </i>p. 17.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">45. Vincent Dole, &quot;Planning for the
Treatment of 25,000 Heroin Addicts,&quot; <i>Third Meth. Conf.,
P. </i>I 1 1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">46. <i>NIMH Directory, </i>p. 144; Second
National Methadone Maintenance Conference, New York, October
26-27, 1969, published in the <i>International journal of the
Addictions, </i>V, No. 3 (September, 1970) (hereafter cited <i>as.Second
Meth. Conf.); Third Meth. Conf.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">47. Charles Edwards, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 395.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">48. Elmer Gardner, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 397; Brown,
<i>Hrgs., </i>p. 440.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">49. Avram Goldstein, &quot;Blind Controlled
Dosage Comparisons with Metha-</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">done in Two Hundred Patients,&quot; <i>Third
Meth. Conf. </i>(hereafter cited as Goldstein, 1970); Ray
Trussell, &quot;Treatment of Narcotics Addicts in New York,&quot;
<i>Second Meth. Conf., </i>pp. 347, 352; Lynwood Holton, <i>Hrgs.,
</i>pp. 600601. Governor Holton's statement is particularly
interesting because it makes budget estimates within the context
of a comprehensive state treatment program.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">50. Gearing Report 1970 and &quot;Successes and
Failures in Methadone Maintenance Treatment of Heroin Addiction
in New York City,&quot; <i>Third Meth. Conf., </i>p. 2.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">51. Goldstein 1970, p. 31.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">52. DuPont, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 173.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">53. See, e.g., Gordon Stewart, &quot;A Survey
of Patients Attending Different Clinics in New Orleans,&quot; <i>Third
Meth. Conf., </i>p. 27.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">54. The information on MMTP is drawn, except
where otherwise indicated, from three sources; the Gearing
Report, 1970; the 1969 edition of the same report; and the paper
presented at the methadone conference, cited in note 50.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">55. Carl Chamber and Dean Babst,
&quot;Characteristics Predicting Long-Term Retention in a
Methodone Maintenance Program,&quot; <i>Third Meth. Conf., </i>p.
140. 56. Herman Joseph and Vincent Dole, &quot;Methadone Patients
on Probation and Parole&quot; (mimeograph) (New York: Rockefeller
University Press, 1970), P. 9.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">57. Chambers and Babst, <i>op. cit., </i>note
67.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">58. Joseph and Dole, <i>op. cit., </i>note 56.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">59. The Second National Methadone Maintenance
Conference had reports from New York, Chicago, Minneapolis, St.
Louis, Baltimore, New Haven, Vancouver, New Orleans, and Miami.
The Third National Methadone Treatment Conference had reports
from New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, New Orleans, Santa Clara,
Philadelphia, Vancouver, Baltimore, Denver, and Washington as
well as from Sweden. </font></p>

<p><font size="1">60. Henry Brill, &quot;Methadone Maintenance: A
Problem in Delivery of Service,&quot; <i>Journal of the American
Medical Association, </i>CCXV, No. 7 (February 15,1971), 1148-50.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">61. Goldstein 1970, p. 37.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">62. The incidence of hepatitis among addicts
has been described as &quot;unbelievable.&quot; Some experts
think the sale of blood by these addicts is creating a major
public-health problem. See Stewart, <i>op. cit., </i>note 53.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">63. For a more detailed discussion, see Staff
Paper 1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">64. Vincent Dole and Marie Nyswander,
&quot;Methadone Maintenance and Its Implication for Theories of
Narcotic Addiction,&quot; in Abraham Wikler, ed., <i>The
Addictive States </i>(Baltimore, Md.: Williams &amp; Wilkins Co.,
1968), p. 359, postulates an inherent neurological vulnerability.
But, at the Second National Methadone Maintenance Conference, Dr.
Dole was asked: &quot;Apart from any psychological factors or
emotional factors, is there a metabolic irregularity which causes
a craving for drugs in the first place or does the metabolic
irregularity come after the use of drugs or both?&quot; His
response was: &quot;This is a very important question for which I
have no adequate answer. I can only guess. My opinion is that a
heavy exposure to heroin induces the metabolic changes. According
to this theory, the abnormal drug craving in man, like the
induced drug seeking behavior in animals, is a result of exposure
to narcotic drugs and not the original cause of the
addiction.&quot; <i>Second Meth. Conf., pp. </i>359, 370.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">65. Dr. Dole seems to lean toward the idea that
the metabolic change is permanent. He has stated: &quot;I believe
one has to reckon with the fact that heroin hunger is probably a
symptom of a pharmacological imprint that may last for a man's
life.&quot; Vincent Dole, &quot;Research on Methadone Maintenance
Treatment,&quot; <i>Second Meth. Conf., </i>pp. 359, 370.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">66. See, e.g., Avram Goldstein, &quot;Blind
Dosage Comparisons and Other Studies in a Large Methadone
Program&quot; (paper presented at the National Heroin Symposium,
June 20, 1971, pp. 12-13; to be published in the <i>Journal of
Psychedelic Drugs)</i>. (Hereafter cited as Goldstein 1971.) </font></p>

<p><font size="1">67. William Martin, &quot;Pathophysiology of
Narcotic Addiction: Possible Roles of Protracted Abstinence in
Relapse&quot; (unpublished paper, 1970), pp. 6-7, and private
communications. </font></p>

<p><font size="1">68. Abraham Wikler, &quot;Interaction of
Physical Dependence and Classical and Operant Conditioning in the
Genesis of Relapse,&quot; in Wikler, ed., <i>The Addictive
States, op. cit., </i>note 76. The views of Wikler and Martin can
be merged into one coherent psycho-physical theory. See Max Fink,
&quot;Narcotic Antagonists in Opiate Dependence,&quot; <i>Science,
</i>CLXIX (September 4, 1970), 1005.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">69. The maturation hypothesis was first
proposed by Charles Winick in &quot;Maturing Out of Narcotic
Addiction,&quot; <i>Bulletin on Narcotics, </i>XIV, No. 1 (1962).
Since then a number of researchers have looked at particular
groups of addicts to determine whether they do, in fact, mature
out. The onethird figure is based on a number of these works as
well as on interviews.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">70. See Cole, <i>op. cit., </i>note 19.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">71. Goldstein 1970, p. 35.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">72. Jerome Jaffe, &quot;Methadone Maintenance:
Variation in Outcome Criteria as a Function of Dose,&quot; <i>Third
Meth. Conf., </i>p. 37.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">73. William Weiland and Arthur Moffett,
&quot;Results of Low Dosage Methadone Treatment,&quot; <i>Third
Meth. Conf., </i>p. 48. See also Hugh Williams, &quot;Low and
High Methadone Maintenance in the Out-patient Treatment of the
Hard Core Heroin Addict,&quot; <i>Second Meth. Conf., </i>p. 439.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">74. Goldstein 1970, p. 24.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">75. See, e.g., Gearing Report 1970, pp. 8-9.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">76. Stewart, <i>op. cit., </i>note 64.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">77. Goldstein 1970, p. 32.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">78. Goldstein 1971, pp. 2-3.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">79. Gearing Report 1971.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">80. Gearing, <i>op. cit., </i>note 50.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">81. For a general review of ambulatory
induction, see the material from the different cities contained
in <i>Second Meth. Conf. and Third Meth. Conf.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">82. Dole, <i>op. cit., </i>note 65, pp. 364,
370, 386.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">83. Jerome Jaffe, &quot;Further Experience with
Methadone in the Treatment of Narcotics Users,&quot; <i>Second
Meth. Conf., </i>pp. 375, 383-84, 386.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">84. Goldstein 197 1, pp. 13-14.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">85. Goldstein 1971, pp. 14-15.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">86. <i>Ibid., </i>P. 14. William Vandervort,
&quot;Treatment of Drug Abuse in Adolescents,&quot; <i>Third
Meth. Conf., </i>P. 87.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">87. William Martin, &quot;Commentary on the
Second National Conference on Methadone Treatment,&quot; <i>Second
Meth. Conf., </i>P. 545.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">88. Quoted in Joseph and Dole, <i>op. cit., </i>note
56, pp. 14-15.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">89. See Gerald Davidson, <i>Hrgs., </i>pp.
326-27.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">90. See material in <i>Second Meth. Conf. and
Third Meth. Conf., </i>which includes several papers on possible
psychopathology. See also John Kramer, &quot;Methadone
Maintenance for Opiate Dependence,&quot; <i>California Medicine, </i>CXIII,
No. 6 (December, 1970), 6, 9.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">9 1. Kramer, <i>Hrgs., </i>pp. 668-69.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">92. Goldstein 1970, p. 35.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">93. John Langrod, &quot;Secondary Drug Use
Among Heroin Users,&quot; <i>International journal of the
Addictions, </i>V, No. 4 (December, 1970), 61 1. 94. Ivan
Bennett, &quot;Development of a Newly Formulated Tablet for
Methadone Maintenance Programs,&quot; <i>Third Meth. Conf., </i>p.
143. 95. This statement was made by Dr. Goldstein at the Third
Methadone Conference. It was not included in the printed version.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">96. See the papers presented at the Second and
Third Methadone Conferences. Many of them are directed
specifically at side effects. This section summarizes what seems
to be the general experience of the programs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">97. Edwards, <i>Hrgs., </i>pp. 393-430; <i>Washington
Post, </i>November 2, 1971. For a discussion of some of the
problems, see &quot;Oral Methadone Maintenance Techniques in the
Management of Morphine-type Dependence&quot;; Combined Statement
of the Council on Mental Health and Its Committee on Alcoholism
and Drug Dependence, American Medical Association; and the
Committee on Problems of Drug Dependence, National Research
Council, March 169 1971.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">98. Jaffe, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 2 1 0.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">99. Brown, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 455.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">100. Stewart, <i>op. cit., </i>note 53;
Goldstein 197 1) p. 5.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">101. The antagonists were introduced as an
experimental addiction treatment modality in 1965. Max Fink,
&quot;Narcotic Antagonists in Opiate Dependence,&quot; <i>Science,
</i>CLXIX (September 4, 1970), 1005. For a review of the
pharmacology, see Jerome Jaffe, &quot;Narcotic Analgesics,&quot;
in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, <i>The Pharmacological Basis
of Therapeutics, </i>4th ed., (New York: Macmillan, 1970), pp.
237,264-71.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">102. City of New York, Health Services
Administration, <i>Narcotics Antagonists Research Program: The
Current State of Knowledge of Drug Antagonists for Heroin
Addiction </i>(mimeographed staff paper: 1971), p. 7. (Hereafter
cited as HSA.) We have found that this is the best source written
in a form comprehensible to laymen.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">103. Martin, <i>Hrgs., </i>pp. 435-36.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">104. HSA, pp. 3, 8-9. HSA said that the
consensus of researchers is that it would take three to five
years for a long-lasting antagonist or long-lasting depot vehicle
to be ready for use, and, in any event, there is no guarantee of
success. Other people we have talked to are skeptical about the
feasibility of the whole idea, and raise both pharmacological and
social objections.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">105. Fink, <i>op. cit., </i>note 101, says
that, since 1968, 40 per cent of more than 450 adult male addicts
have remained in cyclazocine treatment.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">106. Martin, <i>Hrgs., </i>p. 435.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>107. Ibid., </i>p. 436.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">108. Treatment for an opioid overdose consists
of immediate administration of an antagonist to prevent death
from respiratory depression. See Jerome Jaffe, <i>op. cit., </i>note
101, pp. 237, 268. The treatment of barbiturate poisoning is
considerably more complicated and requires more elaborate medical
facilities. See Seth Sharpless, &quot;Hypnotics and Sedatives: 1.
The Barbiturates,&quot; in Goodman and Gilman, pp. 97, 117-18.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">109. There are variations, of course. The user
who has taken an excess of hallucinogen or cannabinol is not
dangerous. He requires support but rarely restraint. The user who
has taken too much metharnphetarnine may have paranoid delusions,
and considerably more caution is indicated.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">1 10. Side effects are not always encountered,
but those that are, are </font>(I <font size="1">many, varied,
and can be quite severe.&quot; They usually occur only with
continued use, however. See Charles Solow, &quot;Drug Therapy of
Mental Illness: Tranquilizers and Other Depressant Drugs,&quot;
in Richard Rech and Kenneth Moore, eds., <i>An Introduction to
Psychopharmacology </i>(New York: RavenPress, 1970), pp. 289,
299-301.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">111. Chlorprornazine, although a powerful
tranquilizer, is not a drug of abuse. See Staff Paper 1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">112. David Smith and Donald Wesson,
&quot;Phenobarbital Technique for Treatment of Barbiturate
Dependence,&quot; <i>Archives of General Psychiatry </i>XXIV
(January, 1971), 56-57.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">113. Herbert Benson and R. K. Wallace,
&quot;Decreased Drug Abuse with Transcendental Meditation: A
Study of 1,862 Subjects,&quot; in <i>Hrgs., </i>pp. 682, 684.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">114. Smith, Gay, and Ramer, <i>op. cit., </i>note
15.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">115. William McGlothlin, &quot;Policies
Concerning Hallucinogenic Drugs,&quot; in Hudson Institute, <i>Policy
Concerning Drug Abuse in New York State, 11 </i>(Hudson
Institute, 1970), 27, 31-32.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">116. See John Kramer, &quot;An Introduction to
Amphetamine Abuse,&quot; <i>journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 11, </i>No.
2 (1969), 1, 13. Dr. Kramer, commenting on treatment, states that
&quot;. . . abstinence is probably the most important therapeutic
device, and that may be difficult to attain. Many users who
attempt abstinence find it difficult because of the fatigue which
results, extreme at first, gradually diminishing, but persistent,
perhaps for months.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">117. Benson and Wallace, <i>op. cit., </i>note
113, pp. 683-84.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>118. Ibid., </i>p. 685.</font> </p>

<ol>
    <li><font size="1"><i>Ibid., </i>p. 682.<br>
        <br>
        </font></li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>