
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B03-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B043-91</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020840 text/html 13599
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:32 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:31 GMT
Content-length: 13381
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Tranquilizers</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h3>MINOR TRANQUILIZERS </h3>

<p> </p>

<p>76. The term 'minor tranquilizers' was introduced into the
scientific literature in the 1950s to distinguish the medicines
prescribed to reduce anxiety and tension from the <i>major </i>tranquillizers,
like reserpine and chlorpromazine, which are employed (as
antipsychotic drugs) in the treatment of severe mental illness
such as schizophrenia. Another phrase, often used interchangeably
with the words 'minor tranquilizers' is <i>anxiolytic sedatives. </i>This
class of drugs may be defined as substances which reduce anxiety,
tension and agitation without other significant effects on
cognition or perceptual processes. </p>

<p>It seems safe to say that the optimal anxiolytic sedative,
which effectively separates anxiety-reducing properties from
those producing undesired psychological side effects does not yet
exist. There are a variety of drugs of several chemical classes
which approximate these criteria, however: bromides, paraldehyde,
chloral hydrate; the newer minor tranquillizers such as
meprobamate (Miltown*), diazepam (Valium*), and chlordiazepoxide
(Librium*) and assorted other compounds (e.g., ethchlorvynol,
glutethimide) which do not fall into a neat chemical
classification. Alcohol and barbiturates are also<b> </b>often
considered with the anxiolytic sedatives, although we will keep
them separate in the following discussions since they have
already been covered in previous sections of this report. </p>

<p>77. Most minor tranquillizers fall between alcohol and
barbiturates in sedative action at a therapeutic dose. The
disparate classes of chemicals have generally similar
physiological action and will be treated as a group, with
individual differences sometimes characterized. The minor
tranquillizers have tended to replace barbiturates as day-time
sedatives in recent years. These drugs and other sedatives are
commonly referred to as 'downers' in the drug argot. </p>

<p>In Canada and the U.S.A., well over $500 million is spent each
year on sedative drugs, to treat a wide variety of symptoms
falling under the category of anixety.131 Although there are no
statistics available to us at this time on the Canadian imports,
exports, manufacture, production or sale of minor tranquillizers,
many observers feel that the supply greatly exceeds medical
needs. The distribution route which the drugs follow after
production is not known, and a considerable percentage may be
diverted for non-medical use. Clandestine manufacture of minor
tranquillizers does not appear to occur and all such drugs
initially start into the market as lawful materials. As described
in the section on barbiturates, patients may be able to procure
large quantities of these drugs through legitimate prescription
channels. </p>

<p>79. In the U.S., production figures for tranquillizers exceed
those for 'sleeping pills', 'pep pills', and opiate narcotics
combined.77 In additional,178 </p>

<p>In 1965 in the U.S.A., some 58 million new prescriptions and
108 million refills were written for psychotropes (sedatives,
tranquillizers and stimulants) and these 166 million
prescriptions accounted for 14% of the total prescriptions of all
kinds written in the United States. </p>

<p>79. Minor tranquillizers are so widely prescribed that the
American Medical Association warned doctors about
overprescription and outlined ways in which the 'misuse of
sedatives' by 'the prolonged and unsupervised<b> </b>administration
of (tranquillizers) for symptomatic relief often without adequate
diagnosis or knowledge of the patient's past experience with
medications, or attitudes towards drugs' is aggravated.8 Evidence
in these recent U.S. surveys indicates that the minor
tranquillizers and other sedatives are more commonly used than
the stimulants among respondents above age 20. </p>

<p>The minor tranquillizers, along with barbiturates, tobacco,
and alcohol, are among the most widely used drugs in North
American society, and are the toxic agents in a large number of
poisoning cases. Since chronic tranquillizer dependence may be
quite frequent, and may involve considerable impairment, the
public's relative indifference to the hazards of tranquillizer
pill-popping is quite alarming. As in the case of alcohol and
barbiturates, much research on medical use has been done, but
little investigation of non-medical use of tranquillizers has
been carried out. </p>

<h3>Medical Use </h3>

<p>80. Minor tranquillizers are widely used in medical practice
today, and are mainly prescribed for patients suffering from
anxiety, tension, behavioural excitement and insomnia. They are
also used in the treatment of lower back pain, convulsive
disorders and withdrawal symptoms of opiate narcotic and alcohol
dependence. </p>

<p>Some clinicians feel that chemotherapy of anxiety is a
secondary approach (although frequently the most expedient) and
that the minor tranquillizers should be used primarily to relieve
immediate distress, and to aid the patient only until other
treatment procedures become effective. </p>

<h3>Administration, Absorption, Distribution and Physiological
Fate </h3>

<p>81. Minor tranquillizers are usually administered orally as
elixirs or<b> </b>tablets, but are also sometimes injected, for
both medical and non-medical purposes. They are generally rapidly
absorbed by the stomach, intestine and rectum, and the absorption
is most rapid with an empty stomach. Once absorbed, the drugs are
distributed quite uniformly throughout the body, with the latency
of response dependent on the particular chemical class. Some are
metabolized, or otherwise chemically altered (usually in the
liver), and excreted into the urine, while others are eliminated
unchanged. The factors of distribution, metabolism, and
excretion, are primarily responsible for differences in potency
and duration of action of the different minor tranquillizers. The
detection of some acute and chronic tranquillizer use is not
easy, and the methods of detection of the metabolites in urine
are highly sophisticated and expensive. </p>

<h3>Psychological Effects </h3>

<p>82. Many of the psychological effects of minor tranquillizers
are similar to those observed with alcohol and barbiturates. As
with these other sedatives, psychological and behavioural
responses to low doses of minor tranquillizers are quite
variable. There may be a sedation in some instances and, in
others, an increase in activity. Studies reveal that complex
interactions between the type of drug and the level of anxiety
occur, even within the same pharmacological group; the drugs may
impair or improve performance, depending on dose and the degree
of anxiety present.131 </p>

<p>Normal doses usually provide relaxation, a feeling of
well-being and perhaps some loss of inhibition. With excessive
use of these drugs the following effects may be observed;
disorientation, confusion, memory impairment, trance-like
episodes, double vision, personality alterations, rage reactions
and other symptoms resembling those of drunkenness. Such
manifestations are difficult to differentiate from the
inebriation caused by barbiturates and alcohol. </p>

<p>83. It appears that driving skills may not be impaired at
clinical doses, so long as the user is not already drowsy or has
not taken other sedatives such as alcohol. At higher doses,
driving skills are more likely to be seriously impaired. One
report states that the accident rate in a group of drivers using
prescribed doses of Librium* was 10 times the general accident
rate for New York State, but it is not clear whether the accident
rate among these drivers who 'needed' a tranquillizer, was so
high because of, or in spite of, the drug they were taking.167 In
Canada it is an offence to drive under the influence of drugs,
and the penalties are similar to those for drunken driving,
although convictions involving tranquillizers are rarely
reported.. </p>

<h3>Physiological Effects </h3>

<p>84. The response to moderate and high doses of minor
tranquillizers is a general depression of nervous and muscular
activity and several other bodily functions. Compared with other
sedatives, the newer minor tranquillizers may have less
inhibitory effect on the parts of the brain which are responsible
for arousal and motor control and may have greater muscle
relaxant effects. The minor tranquillizers affect the levels of
some neurohumors in the brain which may be involved in the
tension-anxiety states. However, the exact mechanism by which
these drugs produce their effects is unknown. </p>

<p>Side effects observed with these drugs include drowsiness,
ataxia, lethargy, skin rashes, nausea, diminished sex interest,
menstrual and ovulatory irregularities, blood abnormalities and
increased sensitivity to alcohol. High doses may depress
respiration, produce unconsciousness and coma and can produce
death. There is no clear evidence of permanent irreversible
damage to neurological or other physiological processes even with
long-term non-medical use. The fact that chronic users of minor
tranquillizers maintain a reasonable diet and are not reported to
suffer from malnutrition, may account for some of the differences
between the chronic effects of tranquillizer use and alcoholism. </p>

<h3>Tolerance and Dependence </h3>

<p>85. Tolerance usually develops to most of the effects of the
minor tranquillizers on repeated use and the dose must often be
increased in order to obtain the desired effects. No tolerance
develops to the lethal toxicity, however, and chronic users must
be especially attentive to the quantities consumed. With one or
two exceptions, these drugs have been reported to produce both
psychological and physiological dependence, resembling that seen
with alcohol and the barbiturates. </p>

<p>The clinical descriptions of the abstinence syndrome, reported
to follow abrupt withdrawal, after excessive dosages of the minor
tranquillizers, indicate a marked similarity to one another and
to alcohol and barbiturates. The syndrome may be characterized by
anxiety, apprehension, tremulousness, muscle twitches, insomnia,
headache, fever, loss of appetite, nausea, vomit, abdominal
cramps, sweating, tachycardia, fainting, hyperactive reflexes,
convulsions, and uncontrolled urination and defecation. In
addition, delirious states can occur with motor agitation,
hallucinations, delusions, disorientation and confusion. The
abstinence syndrome can be very serious, and deaths have been
attributed to withdrawal of meprobamate (Miltown*) and
methyprylon (Noludar*).72 </p>

<h3>Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs </h3>

<ol>
    <li>Cross-tolerance and cross-dependence exist among the
        minor tranquillizers and with other sedative drugs. This
        cross-tolerance does not appear to affect the lethal dose
        and, consequently, alcohol or barbiturates taken
        simultaneously with large quantities of minor
        tranquillizers may act additively and produce toxic or
        fatal reactions. Heavy users of these drugs may switch
        among the sedatives, if necessary or convenient, and
        alcoholics often use barbiturates and tranquillizers to
        sustain inebriation. Individuals dependent on opiate
        narcotics often also use large quantities of minor<b> </b>tranquillizers.
    </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>