
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-42</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B010-265</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp210706.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011233 text/html 13139
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:11:13 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Policy Post No. 21 -- July 6, 1995</title>
<body>
<pre>

------------------------------------------------------------------------
   ******    ********    *************
  ********   *********   *************
  **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST
  **         **      **       ***
  **         **      **       ***               July 6, 1995
  **         **      **       ***               Number 21
  ********   *********        ***
   ******    ********         ***

  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CDT POLICY POST Number 21                       July 6, 1995

CONTENTS: (1) SENATE HEALTH BILL WILL EXPOSE PRIVATE HEALTH RECORDS
          (2) ANALYSIS OF 'HEALTH INFORMATION MODERNIZATION AND 
              SECURITY ACT (S. 872)
          (3) WHAT YOU CAN DO
          (4) ABOUT CDT/CONTACTING US

This document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its
entirety.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) BOND HEALTH BILL (S 872) WILL EXPOSE PRIVATE HEALTH RECORDS TO 
   UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS

The "Health Information Modernization and Security Act" (S. 872), 
introduced in May by Senator Bond (R-MO), poses a serious threat to 
individual privacy by encouraging the development of health information 
systems that will expose sensitive personal information to unauthorized 
use and access. The Bond bill does not adequately address the threats to 
individual privacy presented by the use of such systems. 

CDT urges Congress to pass legislation such as the Fair Health 
Information Practices Act (H.R. 435) introduced in the House by Gary 
Condit (D-CA). We urge Senator Bond to amend his proposal to incorporate 
the comprehensive privacy protections set out in the Condit bill.

Currently there is no comprehensive federal law that protects the 
confidentiality of personal information that individuals divulge during 
encounters with the health care industry. Yet most individuals consider 
information on their health to be the most sensitive information about 
themselves and to be the information most in need of privacy protection. 
The lack of strong uniform privacy protection for personal health 
information has left individuals vulnerable to privacy violations in a 
paper-based world.

However, the threats to privacy posed by the computerization of personal 
health information without appropriate privacy policies and 
technological mechanisms to control the collection, use, access and 
disclosure, will make such information more vulnerable to abuse than 
ever before.

The traditional barriers of location and time disappear in the age of 
computerization. With birth to death dossiers on each American on line 
the potential for multiple simultaneous access from various locations 
exists. The locked file cabinet that traditionally protected medical 
information from prying eyes must be reinvented for the age of 
automation. Legislation to protect the privacy of health information is 
urgently needed.

As health care reform came to a halt at the end of the 103rd Congress, a 
piece of health care reform legislation that received support from 
Democrats, Republicans, health providers, health insurers, and privacy 
advocates was the Fair Health Information Practices Act (introduced by 
Senator Pat Leahy (D-VT) and Representative Condit. The bill was coupled 
with an earlier version of Bond's Health Information Modernization Bill. 
In fact, the privacy protections for health information found in these 
proposals were fleshed out versions of language contained in every major 
piece of health care reform legislation in Congress. Protecting the 
privacy and confidentiality of health information is one of the issues 
on which broad consensus was reached during the health care debate last 
year. 

Without a detailed privacy section, the Health Information Modernization 
and Security Act harkens back to provisions in President Clinton's 
Health Security Act that received widespread ridicule. Like the 
Administration's Health Security Act, Senator Bond's proposal fails to 
fully address the confidentiality of personal health information. 

The Health Information Modernization and Security Act fails to 
incorporate privacy and security standards into the legislation. It 
directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish 
standards for the implementation of privacy and security within eighteen 
months of enactment.

The lack of privacy, confidentiality and security provisions within the 
Act is disturbing, since a goal of the bill is "encouraging the 
development of a health information network through the establishment of 
standards and requirements for the electronic transmission of certain 
health information." The Act would greatly increase the ease with which 
information is accessed, compiled, exchanged and manipulated. The 
failings of this bifurcated approach to policy and technology were 
readily apparent to the Administration, Congress, privacy advocates and 
the private sector in 1994. If Congress advocates a move to automated 
record keeping, it must simultaneously protect the sensitive information 
on individuals that will be stored and transmitted by these systems. 
Before the government accelerates or mandates computerization in the 
health care field, it is crucial comprehensive privacy protections for 
health information be established. 

During last Congress there was consensus that health information systems 
could not be designed and constructed without enforceable privacy rules 
in place. It is neither reasonable nor rational to design a system 
knowing that the sensitive information each American would be asked to 
entrust would be largely unprotected from misuse and abuse, and that the 
failure to address privacy up front would likely lead to a complete 
system redesign or overhaul years later at an increased cost. 

We urge Senator Bond and Congress to ensure that personal health 
information is protected by strong enforceable privacy protections. 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:

Janlori Goldman, Deputy Director 
Deirdre Mulligan, Staff Counsel 

Center for Democracy and Technology +1.202.637.9800 

----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
2) ANALYSIS OF BOND S. 872

General Provisions: Titles I & II

The objective of the proposal is to encourage the development of a 
health information network through the establishment of standards and 
requirements for the electronic transmission of certain health 
information. (Sec. 101) The Secretary of HHS is given responsibility for 
adopting standards for data elements and transactions, but is to be 
guided by current practice and by standards developed or modified by a 
standards setting organization (this is likely to be the American 
National Standard Institute - ANSI). (Sec. 1172) Sec. 1174 requires that 
the Secretary adopt standards relating to the information transactions, 
data elements and security and privacy within 18 months of enactment.

The Secretary is to adopt uniform standards to increase the electronic 
availability of "financial and administrative transactions: claims or 
equivalent encounter information, claims attachments, enrollment and 
disenrollment, eligibility, payment and remittance advice, premium 
payments, first report of injury, claims status, referral certification 
and authorization," and "other transactions determined appropriate by 
the Secretary consistent with the goals of improving the operation of 
the health care systems and reducing administrative costs." (Sec. 
1173(a)(1)). 

In addition, the Secretary is to adopt a unique health identifier for 
each individual. (Sec. 1174(b)(1)). Sec. 1177 sets penalties for use of 
the unique health identifier that are not authorized by the Secretary.

The Secretary is to promulgate regulations specifying procedures for the 
electronic transmission and authentication of signatures that will meet 
current federal and state written signature requirements, "pen & quill" 
laws. (Sec. 1173(d)1)

Privacy and Security Standards:

Section 1172(b)(1) requires each person who "maintains or transmits 
health information or data elements that are subject to this Act" to 
maintain reasonable and appropriate administrative, technical and 
physical safeguards to ensure integrity and confidentiality and to 
protect against reasonably anticipated threats or hazards and 
unauthorized uses and disclosures.

Section 1174(b) gives the Secretary one and one-half years post 
enactment to establish the standards for implementing the privacy 
standards.

Penalties for Wrongful Disclosure of Individually Identifiable Health 
Information

Under Section 1177, individuals who violate the privacy standards, which 
govern obtaining or disclosing individually identifiable health 
information, established by the Secretary, may be fined up to $50,000 
and imprisoned up to 1 year, or both. If the offense is committed under 
false pretenses the fine can be up to $100,000 and the sentence up to 5 
years. If the offense is committed with the intent to sell, transfer, 
use for commercial advantage or personal gain, or use to maliciously 
harm the individual, the fine may be up to $250,000 and the sentence up 
to 10 years.

Preemption

The Act would preempt contrary provisions of State laws, including 
"requirements or standards that are more stringent than the requirements 
or standards under the Act, except: 1) where the requirement is more 
stringent with respect to electronic transmissions of financial or 
administrative transactions from providers to plans and incorporates 
standards adopted under the bill; 2) more stringent with respect to the 
privacy of individually identifiable health information; of 3) is an 
already enacted provisions governing the coordination of benefits; or 4) 
in the Secretary's judgment, is necessary to curtail fraud and abuse. 
(Sec. 1178) The Act does not invalidate or curtail public health 
reporting laws. (Sec. 1178(b)).


Health Information Advisory Committee

Section 1179 establishes a Health Information Advisory Committee (15 
members) to advise and assist the Secretary. The Committee is directed 
to study the issues of uniform standards and electronic exchange and 
report to the Secretary within four years of enactment. The Committee is 
to report annually on compliance with the act. The report will address 
compliance with privacy and security standards among other issues.

Standards for Patient Medical Record Information 

Under Section 1180, within four to six years, the Secretary shall 
recommend a plan for developing and implementing uniform data standards 
for patient medical record information and the electronic exchange of 
such information.

Grants for Demonstration Projects

The Secretary is given the right to make grants for demonstration 
projects aimed at promoting the development and use of electronically 
integrated, community-based clinical information systems and 
computerized patient medical records.

----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
3) WHAT YOU CAN DO

There is currently a companion bill in the House of Representatives, 
H.R. 1766, the Health Information Modernization and Security Act, 
introduced by Representative Thomas Sawyer (D-OH) and Representative 
David Hobson (R-OH). This bill is very similar to Senator Bond's bill. 
All concerns held by the Center for Democracy and Technology for Senator 
Bond's bill are also held for H.R. 1766. 

We urge you to contact Senator Bond (202) 224-5721 to voice your concern 
over S. 872, Health Information Modernization and Security Act, and 
Representatives Hobson (202) 225-4324 and Sawyer (202) 225-5231 over the 
House bill H.R. 1766, Health Information Modernization and Security Act. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
(4) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY/CONTACTING US 

The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest 
organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public 
policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic 
values in new computer and communications technologies. 

Contacting us:

General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to:

<a href = "mailto:info@cdt.org">info@cdt.org</a>

World-Wide-Web:

<a href = "http://www.cdt.org/">http://www.cdt.org/</a>

ftp:

ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/

snail mail:

Center For Democracy and Technology
1001 G Street, NW Suite 700 East
Washington, DC 20001
voice: +1.202.637.9800
fax: +1.202.637.0968

###

</pre>
<hr size =2>
Return to the <a href = "pubs.html">Publications Index Page</a><br>
Return to the <a href = "../index.html">CDT Home Page</a>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>