
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B10-277</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA093-000995-B029-201</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.nyspi.cpmc.columbia.edu:80/users/ethayer/accompli.htm 156.111.80.30 19970121072611 text/html 7359
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
MIME-Version: 1.0
Server: GLACI/2.01
Date: Tue Jan 21 02:30:03 1997
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 7229
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>NYSPI Accomplishments</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<p><font size=5><strong>New York State Psychiatric
Institute</strong></font></p> 

<H3><A HREF="http://www.nyspi.cpmc.columbia.edu/">Back to the 
NYSPI Home Page </A>
<BR></H3>

<p><font size=4><strong>PSYCHIATRIC
INSTITUTE ACCOMPLISHMENTS: A SAMPLING</strong></font><font
size=2><strong><br> </strong></font><strong></strong></p> <blockquote>
<p><strong>CONNECTION MADE BETWEEN PARESIS AND SYPHILIS.</strong><br>
A P.I. pathologist working with a researcher from Rockefeller
Institute discovered the relationship between paresis and the
spirochete responsible for syphilis.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote>
<p><strong>EPIDEMIOLOGY.</strong><br> The first epidemiological
studies of the environmental influences on psychiatric disorders were
begun here.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>STUDY OF
EPILEPSY.</strong><br> The key experimental animal model for the study
of epilepsy originated at P.I.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote>
<p><strong>PSYCHIATRIC SERVICES FOR THE DEAF</strong><br> The first
clinical psychiatric unit for the deaf was established at the
Institute.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>RORSCHACH
SCORING<br> </strong>The first use of the Rorschach scoring system in
the U.S. took place at P.I.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote>
<p><strong>GENETIC STUDIES OF SCHIZOPHRENIA.</strong><br> The first
psychiatric research program in genetics in the U.S. produced data
which gave evidence of a genetic predisposition to schizophrenia.</p>
</blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS FOR MENTAL
DISORDERS.</strong><br> 1. The earliest U.S. demonstration of the
positive effects of phenothiazines<br> ( a group of psychotropic
drugs) in arresting the symptoms of schizophrenia <br> took place at
the Institute.<br> 2. Medical research on the use of electroconvulsive
therapy was first undertaken <br> in this country at P.I.<br> 3.
Lithium carbonate, the most successful treatment of manic-depression,
was <br> introduced in the U.S. at the Institute when the first
lithium clinic in the country <br> opened here. Lithium has saved the
U.S. more than $145 billion since 1970.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote>
<p><strong>P300 BRAIN WAVE IDENTIFIED.</strong><br> A scientist at the
Institute isolated the wave in the electrical activity of the human
brain which is related to cognitive mental activity, thereby
stimulating the search for other components involved in thought
processes such as attending to stimuli and making decisions.</p>
</blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>ADVANTAGES OF BRIEF
HOSPITALIZATION.</strong><br> A pioneer study documented that patients
with chronic mental illnesses could benefit as much from a brief
hospital stay, reinforced by day hospital programs and community
support services, as from the traditionally longer hospital stay.</p>
</blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>CHILDHOOD DEPRESSION
CLINIC.</strong><br> The first such clinic in the world was
established here, providing services for children and adolescents
suffering from depressive and anxiety disorders. It was followed by
the establishment by the federal government of the first Clinical
Research Center for the Study of Child and Adolescent Suicidal
Behaviors, Affective Disorders and Anxiety States. <br> The concept of
&quot;cluster suicides&quot; among adolescents, originated here, has
led to widespread attention to triggers for such behaviors. </p>
</blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>PSYCHIATRIC DIAGNOSTIC MANUAL.
</strong><br> Researchers at the Institute led the development of the
DSM-III, DSM-III-R and were key to its most recent major revision,
DSM-IV, the official diagnostic manuals published by the American
Psychiatric Association and used universally by the profession. </p>
</blockquote> <blockquote> <p><strong>HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE
GENE.</strong><br> A P.I. investigator organized the international
collaboration of researchers, which led to the identification of the
gene for Huntington's disease.</p> </blockquote> <blockquote>
<p>W<strong>ILSON'S DISEASE GENE.</strong><br> A molecular geneticist
at P.I. and an international team of researchers identified the gene
responsible for Wilson's disease, a disorder which mimics symptoms of
schizophrenia and other neurological disorders.</p> </blockquote>
<blockquote> <p><strong>EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DEPRESSION.</strong><br> A
P.I. researcher, using data from a multi-national study, established
that rates of depression are on the rise in ever younger populations,
with the risk of depression two to three times higher among women. The
statistics hold true for almost all countries in the study.<br> <br>
<br> <strong>RESEARCH CENTERS.</strong><br> Because of its excellence,
P.I. was designated a Clinical Mental Health Research Center by the
National Institute of Mental Health in 1978. Since then, seven other
Centers have been established here: <br> * the Cellular Analysis of
Behavior, <br> * Clinical and Behavioral Studies of HIV, <br> * the
Study of Childhood Mental Disorders, <br> * Development of Medication
for Substance Abuse, <br> * the Study of the Genetic Origins and
Treatment of Schizophrenia, <br> * the Study of the Genetic Approach
to Neuroplasticity and Learning <br> * the Study of Suicidal Behavior.
<br> <br> In addition, Psychiatric Institute is one of the sites in
the U.S.named a Diagnostic Center for Collaborative Psychiatric
Linkage Studies in Schizophrenia. </p> </blockquote> <blockquote>
<p><strong>MERIT AWARDS</strong><br> Psychiatric Institute scientists
hold the prestigious MERIT Awards, grants from the National Institute
of Mental Health which provide long-term, stable support to
investigators &quot;whose research competence and productivity are
distinctly superior and who are likely to continue to perform in an
outstanding manner.&quot; The Awards are held for:<br> * Developmental
Effects of Early Maternal Separation<br> * Cocaine Effects in Humans:
Physiology and Behavior<br> * Methylphenidate in Childhood Behavior
Disorders<br> * Prospective Study of Children of Schizophrenic
Parents<br> * Behavioral and Neural Analyses of Learning in
Aplysia<br> * Genetic Studies of Depressive Disorders<br> * Research
in Electroconvulsive Therapy<br> * Linkage Analysis Methods in
Schizophrenia<br> * Temporal Memory and Interval Time Sense <br> <br>
<br> <strong>RESEARCH SCIENTIST AWARDS</strong><br> Senior
investigators hold coveted Research Scientist Awards which offer
long-term federal support for specific projects. The Awards are
for:<br> * Genetics of Affective Disorders<br> * Social Status and
Psychological Disorders<br> * Psychobiology of Anxiety Disorders<br> *
Developmental Effects of Early Maternal Separation<br> *
Epidemiological/Familial Aspects of Drug Use <br> </p> </blockquote>
<p><font size=1>Page created by Gerry Segal: </font><a
href="mailto:segalge@acm.org"><font
size=1>segalge@nypsych.cpmc.columbia.edu</font></a><br> </p> </body>

</html>
</DOC>