
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-39</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B010-203</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp261020.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011149 text/html 17112
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:10:32 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>CDT Policy Post No.26 -- October 20, 1995</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   ******    ********    *************
  ********   *********   *************
  **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST
  **         **      **       ***
  **         **      **       ***               October 20, 1995
  **         **      **       ***               Number 26
  ********   *********        ***
   ******    ********         ***

  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CDT POLICY POST Number 26                      October 20, 1995

CONTENTS: (1) FBI Announces Digital Telephony Surveillance Capacity Request
          (2) Subcribe To The CDT Policy Post Distribution List
          (3) About CDT, Contacting Us

This document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its
entirety.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) FBI NOTICE BEGINS DIGITAL TELEPHONY COMPLIANCE PROCESS -- PUBLIC 
    ACCOUNTABILITY FOR FBI REQUEST ESSENTIAL

On Monday October 16 1995, the FBI published its initial request for 
surveillance capacity as required under Section 104 (a) of the 
Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (PL 104-144, a.k.a. 
Digital Telephony).  As required by law, the FBI will accept public 
comments on the proposed capacity requirements for 30 days (ending November 
15, 1995).  The notice, which includes instructions for submitting 
comments, is attached below.

CDT is in the process of examining the proposed notice, and will issue 
formal comments in the next several weeks.  We are evaluating the notice 
with the following criteria in mind:

* Has the FBI met all the public accountability and oversight criteria
  required by the statute?

* What is the impact of the proposed notice on the privacy of individual 
  telephone subscribers and the security of telecommunications networks?

* Does the requested capacity accurately reflect the needs of law 
  enforcement? 

* The capacity requests are based on an FBI survey of recent surveillance  
  activity. Is the factual justification for the FBI request sufficiently 
  detailed to facilitate a substantial public discussion about the 
  reasonableness of the needs?

* Does the FBI expect telecommunications carriers to comply with the 
  capacity requests if Congress fails to appropriate funds for 
  reimbursement?

CDT plans to meet with the FBI to discuss the proposed notice. CDT will 
also work both on our own and through the Digital Privacy and Security 
Working Group (DPSWG, a coalition of over 50 public interest groups, 
telecommunications carriers, manufacturers, trade associations, coordinated 
by CDT), and with members of Congress to ensure that the reporting 
requirements and public accountability provisions of the law are enforced 
and that law enforcement provides the necessary accounting of its 
capability requests.

CDT stands ready to intervene as necessary before Congress, the Federal 
Communications Commission, the telecommunications industry standards bodies 
charged with setting technical standards for implementing the requirements, 
and at other points necessary to ensure that privacy is protected and the 
public accountability provisions are strictly enforced.  We will continue 
to update you on developments on this issue as they occur. 
________________________________________________________________________

BACKGROUND -- PUBLIC OVERSIGHT REQUIREMENTS IN THE DIGITAL TELEPHONY LAW

The Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) requires 
telecommunications carriers to ensure that their systems contain sufficient 
capability and capacity to permit law enforcement to conduct authorized 
electronic surveillance. However, the requirements of the statute do not 
apply to the Internet, commercial online services (such as America Online, 
Prodigy, or Compuserve), or BBS's.

The statute also contains specific new statutory privacy protections for 
transactional records generated by online electronic communications 
services, greater protection for cordless telephones, and prohibitions on 
pen register authority to gather location information ('pen registers' are 
devices used to gather dialed numbers).  Furthermore, the statute contains 
provisions which require public accountability and oversight over law 
enforcement surveillance capacity requests, telecommunications carrier 
liability, standards setting, and cost reimbursement.

Although law enforcement officials must still obtain a search warrant in 
order to conduct a wiretap, the statute granted law enforcement new 
authority to influence the design of telecommunications networks.  This 
authority must be closely monitored through the law's public accountability 
and oversight provisions to ensure that law enforcement does not over-reach 
or abuse the powers granted under the statute.

The statute separates compliance into two categories: 

* CAPACITY (The subject of the current notice): The ability of a 
  telecommunications network to accommodate a specified number of 
  intercepts, pen register, and trap and trace devices; and

* CAPABILITY: Functional requirements to ensure that a telecommunications 
  network can enable law enforcement to conduct electronic surveillance.

Below is a basic overview of the compliance processes for both the capacity 
and capability requirements of the Digital Telephony law, along with a 
description of the proposed notice.  A more detailed explanation of the 
compliance process, as well as the privacy and public accountability 
provisions can be found on CDT's Digital Telephony Web Page 
(URL:http://www.cdt.org/digtel.html)
_______________________________________________________________________

SURVEILLANCE CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS

Section 104 of CALEA requires telecommunications carriers to ensure that 
their systems posses sufficient capacity to accommodate a specified number 
of simultaneous intercepts, pen register, and trap and trace devices.  As 
required by Section 104 (a)(1), the FBI, after consultation with state and 
local law enforcement officials and the telecommunications industry, has 
published an initial notice or capacity requirements.  Section 104 (a)(1) 
requires that the FBI seek public comment and then publish in the federal 
register and provide to telecommunications carriers:

1. NOTICE OF ACTUAL CAPACITY: The actual number of simultaneousintercepts, 
   pen registers, and trap and trace devices that will be necessary 4 years 
   from the date of enactment (October 25, 1998) (Sec 104 (a)(1)(A); and

2. NOTICE OF MAXIMUM CAPACITY: The maximum capacity required to accommodate 
   all intercepts, pen registers, and trap and trace devices that the 
   Attorney General estimates government agencies will be authorized to 
   conduct simultaneously after the date 4 years after enactment (Sec 104    
   (a)(1)(B)).

Carriers then have 180 days to identify which aspects of their networks are 
not compliant with the published capacity requirements.  Section 104 (e) 
requires the government to reimburse telecommunications carriers for all 
reasonable costs associated with capacity upgrades.  If the government 
fails to reimburse a carrier, that carrier will not have to modify any 
feature or service.  This provision is intended to ensure that the 
government prioritizes capacity requests and does not demand unnecessary 
surveillance capability financed by hidden charges to subscribers.
_______________________________________________________________________

PROPOSED CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS

Throughout the past year, the FBI, through its Telecommunications Industry 
Liaison Unit (TILU) developed a "baseline of electronic surveillance 
activity" by compiling  information from telecommunications carriers, law 
enforcement, U.S. District Courts, State Attorney's General, and State 
District Attorneys. 

From this information, the FBI derived the total simultaneous electronic 
surveillance activity by switch and geographic area.  Future capacity needs 
were determined by considering the impact of demographics, market trends, 
and "other factors" [page 53645, see below] (Section 104 (a)(2) gives the 
FBI broad latitude in determining the basis of capacity needs). 
 
As described above, the capacity requests include both "actual capacity" 
(which must be in place within 4 years), and "maximum capacity" (which must 
be in place after 1998). The FBI has proposed to create three categories of 
capacity requirements based on the projected number of simultaneous 
surveillance orders in geographic areas.  Requirements are based on what 
the FBI refers to as the "engineered capacity" of each switch, feature, or 
service in a specific geographic region [page 53646, see below]. 

Although we contacted several telecommunications carriers, CDT has not yet 
been able to determine precisely what "engineered capacity" corresponds to.  
According to the FBI notice, engineered capacity refers to the maximum 
number of subscribers that can be served by a particular equipment, 
facility, or service.  For the purposes of the descriptions below, we 
assume that the average number of subscribers is equal to 100,000 for each 
facility, equipment, or service deployed on a telecommunications carrier's 
network.  Of course, it could be far more or less depending on the actual 
definition of the term and the number of subscribers per equipment, 
facility, or service.         

CATEGORY III -- Baseline Surveillance Capacity

According to the notice, all telecommunications carriers would be required 
to meet the Category III requirements.  The FBI estimates that roughly 75% 
of the U.S. would be covered by this category [page 53646, see below]. 

ACTUAL CAPACITY: .05% of engineered capacity, or 50 simultaneous 
surveillance orders for each equipment, facility, or service serving 
100,000 subscribers.

MAXIMUM CAPACITY: .25% of engineered capacity, or 250 simultaneous 
surveillance orders for each equipment, facility, or service serving 
100,000 subscribers, by 1998.

CATEGORY II --  Areas With Moderate Surveillance Activity

Carriers in geographic areas which the FBI estimates require higher than 
average surveillance capacity, including large suburban areas and some 
urban areas will be required to meet Category II and Category I 
requirements.  The FBI estimates that roughly 25% of the U.S. will be 
covered by Category II and Category I [page 53646, see below]. 

ACTUAL CAPACITY: .25% of engineered capacity, or 250 simultaneous 
surveillance orders for each equipment, facility, or service serving 
100,000 subscribers.

MAXIMUM CAPACITY: .5% of engineered capacity, or 500 simultaneous 
surveillance orders for each equipment, facility, or service serving 
100,000 subscribers, by 1998.

CATEGORY I -- Areas With Heavy Surveillance Activity

Large urban areas and other areas the FBI estimates require the greatest 
surveillance capacity would fall under Category I [page 53646, see below]. 

ACTUAL CAPACITY: .5% of engineered capacity, or 500 simultaneous 
surveillance orders for each equipment, facility, or service serving 
100,000 subscribers.

MAXIMUM CAPACITY: 1% of engineered capacity, or 1000 simultaneous 
surveillance orders for each equipment, facility, or service serving 
100,000 subscribers, by 1998.
_______________________________________________________________________

SURVEILLANCE CAPABILITY REQUIREMENTS

In addition to specific capability requirements, the Digital Telephony 
statute requires telecommunications carriers to ensure that they possess 
sufficient capability to enable law enforcement, pursuant to proper legal 
authorization, to (Section 103):

1. expeditiously isolate and intercept all wire and electronic 
   communications within a carrier's network;
 
2. expeditiously isolate and enable the government to access call
   identifying information;

3. deliver intercepted communications and call-identifying information to a
   location specified by the government (but only with the affirmative 
   intervention of the telecommunications carrier).  Remote monitoring is 
   explicitly prohibited; 

4. to meet these requirements in a way that protects the privacy and 
   security of communications and call-identifying information not 
   authorized to be intercepted.
_______________________________________________________________________

PROCESS FOR DETERMINING AND MEETING CAPABILITY REQUIREMENTS

The process for determining and meeting capability requirements (outlined 
in Sections 103 and 107 of the statute) is separate and distinct from the 
process for determining capacity requirements.

The CALEA requires law enforcement determine the specific capabilities it 
needs, and consult with appropriate telecommunications trade associations, 
standards setting bodies, representatives of users of telecommunications 
equipment, and State utility commissioners in order to determine what 
specific changes are required to meet the capability requirements (Sec 107 
(a)).  

The telecommunications industry, through standards-setting bodies, is 
charged with developing technical standards to meet the capability 
requirements (the statute explicitly prohibits the government from imposing 
any technical standards on the telecommunications industry). Finally, the 
standards can be challenged before the FCC if any person believes they do 
not adequately protect privacy or fail to meet other requirements (Sec. 107 
(e)).  Carriers are responsible for meeting the capability requirements by 
October 1998.

The FBI is currently in the process of determining its specific capability 
needs 
_______________________________________________________________________

NEXT STEPS

When Congress passed the Digital Telephony bill last year, it 
simultaneously authorized, but did not appropriate, $500 million to 
reimburse telecommunications carriers capacity upgrades and capability 
upgrades where compliance is not 'reasonably achievable (Sec 109 (b)).  If 
Congress fails to appropriate funds to cover reimbursement, 
telecommunications carriers will not be obligated to comply with the 
requirements of the statute.

The Administration has requested to fund the program through a 30-percent 
surcharge on civil monetary penalties and criminal fines at a level of $100 
million dollars for fiscal year 1996.  The request is currently part of the 
stalled anti-terrorism legislation.  However, the FBI expects that funds 
will be appropriated as part of the Commerce, Justice, State appropriations 
bill, which is currently pending before the Congress.

CDT believes that no funds should be appropriated or spent to fund the 
implementation of the Digital Telephony law unless and until law 
enforcement demonstrates it has met the public accountability and oversight 
provisions. CDT is committed to working with the telecommunications 
industry, Congress, and the FBI to ensure that this requirement is met.

For More Information Contact:

    Daniel Weitzner, Deputy Director:  djw@cdt.org
    Jonah Seiger, Policy Analyst:  jseiger@cdt.org
-----------------------------------------------------------------------


(2) THE PROPOSED NOTICE OF CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS FROM THE FEDERAL
    REGISTER, OCTOBER 16 1995.

Note: <a href = "../policy/digtel/FBI_cap_notice.html">Follow this link to view the text of the FBI's notice</a>

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(3) HOW TO SUBSCRIBE TO THE CDT POLICY POST LIST

To subscibe to the policy post distribution list, send mail to 
"Majordomo@cdt.org" with:

    subscribe policy-posts 

in the body of the message (leave the subject line blank)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
(4) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY/CONTACTING US

The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest
organization based in Washington, DC. The Center's mission is to develop 
and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties 
and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies.

Contacting us:

General information:  info@cdt.org
World Wide Web:       URL:http://www.cdt.org
FTP                   URL:ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/

Snail Mail:  The Center for Democracy and Technology
             1001 G Street NW * Suite 500 East * Washington, DC 20001
             (v) +1.202.637.9800 * (f) +1.202.637.0968

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
End Policy Post No. 26

</pre>
<hr size = 2>
Return to the <a href = "pubs.html">CDT Publications Page</a><br>
Return to the <a href = "../index.html">CDT Home Page</a>
</body>
</html>


</DOC>