
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B23-97</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA017-000187-B027-145</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.comptia.org:80/pubs.htm 198.115.138.17 19970106104721 text/html 57451
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Purveyor Encrypt Domestic/v1.2.3 Windows NT
MIME-version: 1.0
Content-type: text/html
Date: Mon, 06 Jan 1997 11:19:26 GMT
Last-modified: Sunday, 27-Aug-95 02:18:41 GMT
Content-length: 57228
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>
Association Awards 
</TITLE>
<META NAME = "GENERATOR" CONTENT = "Live Markup from MediaTech">
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR = "#8080FF" LINK = "#800000" " >
<IMG SRC ="chan.gif">
<RIGHT><H1><EMPHASIS>Computing Channels</EMPHASIS><BR></H1></RIGHT><HR>

<H2><CENTER>Selected Articles</H2></CENTER><HR>
<CENTER><H3>COPYRIGHT 1995 CompTIA All Rights Reserved</CENTER></H3>
<CENTER><STRONG>MOBILE PROFIT OPPORTUNITIES</STRONG><BR>
By Tom Henderson<BR><BR>

<STRONG>Ten Ways to Make More Money in Mobile 
Technologies</STRONG></CENTER>

<PRE> The dollars in mobile technologies are being made by those who 
can think mobile. While many of us can happily listen to Mozart during 
a traffic jam, there are others who need to perform their work 
functions no matter where they are — at any time of the day or night. 
You won’t be able to understand mobility if you have only gone so far 
as to use a hand-held cellular phone; but it’s a start. The mobile 
mentality extends not only to products, but services and supplies as 
well. The mobile mindset is similar to the small office/home office 
(SOHO) marketplace: Each market requires users to have autonomy from 
organizational offices, but excellent connectivity to them. 

THE MOBILE FULL MEAL DEAL (Sorry, McDonalds)

Problem: Connecting mobile/portable PCs to a home office is necessary 
for sales people, professionals (attorneys, surgeons, auditors, etc.). 

Rationale: A PC needs correctly configured communications software 
that matches the organization’s needs, a working PC and cellular 
modem, a working cellular phone, and the office’s computer system for 
connection.

What to Do: Selling cellular products can rarely be done without a 
demonstration, but equipment and air time costs can be very expensive. 
Explore local cellular carriers to understand the commitment needed to 
become a cellular agent. 

Where to Make Money: Mobile equipment installation, service contracts 
and warranty work, cellular activation revenue, PCMCIA and serial port 
cellular modems, portable PCs and connectivity or communications 
software, and regional site communications hardware and software.

Audience: The mobile worker and four-lane surfer. 

CELLULAR DATA PACKET DATA (CDPD)

Problem: The kinds of cellular modems used today are limited in their 
data rates and reliability. CDPD devices use a more reliable method of 
connection.

Rationale: There are three big problems with transmitting data by 
cellular devices: cell switching can cause drop outs; line speed is 
often limited to 9600 baud; and many cellular phones were not designed 
with data ports that connect to PCs. 

What to Do: Develop a program to upgrade cellular modem users to CDPD. 

Where to Make Money: Equipment conversion to CDPD from the cellular 
modems to the cellular phones. Note that CDPD is currently available 
only in major areas, and still being tested in others.

Audience: Frustrated cellular modem users. 

MOBILE PRINTING PROBLEMS 

Problem: It’s nearly impossible to take laser quality printers into 
the field. 

Rationale: A number of portable, battery-driven printers have emerged 
that fit into extremely small spaces, yet print easily onto plain 
paper. 

What to Do: Investigate mobile printers and options.

Where to Make Money: The printer, service policy, ink-jet cartridges, 
paper supplies, mounting/installation, and printer driver installation 
into Windows or System 7.5. 

Audience: Anyone who needs to print portably. 

Mobile Fax Devices 

Problem: Getting a fax on the road is a chore.

Rationale: New portable faxes can now share telephone lines, store 
several faxes, and then either upload them to a PC  or print them on 
self-contained ink-jet printers. 

What to Do: Investigate portable, stand-alone fax machines and their 
options. 

Where to Make Money: The portable fax machine, paper and ink supplies, 
extra phone cords, mounting/installation, Windows or Mac driver 
installation and service policies. 

Audience: Heavy fax users like real estate, civil, legal, and sales 
personnel.

PORTABLE TAPE BACKUP 

Problem: Many portable and mobile computers are not ever connected to 
a LAN where they can be backed up. 

Rationale: Portable tape backups can take care of this important 
maintenance chore in short order. Data can be restored easily in the 
event of a computer loss of any type. 

What to Do: Understand portable tape backup drive options. Most 
connect through a mobile computer’s parallel printer port. 

Where to Make Money: The tape drive, installation of software, tapes, 
service policy, extra cables and training. 

Audience: Anyone without an easy means of backing up their mobile 
computer. 

PORTABLE MULTIMEDIA 

Problem: Few mobile systems come with multimedia components. The 
Macintosh PowerBook has them built-in, but few PCs have the necessary 
parts. 

Rationale: Many of the benefits of multimedia are lost on mobile 
users. New multimedia PCMCIA cards are available, allowing mobile and 
portable users to set up presentations. 

What to Do: If you are not already familiar with multimedia standards, 
such as the MPC-II, learn them, then learn the PCMCIA products and 
their options. 

Where to Make Money: PCMCIA multimedia kits, software installation, 
portable CD-ROM drives, extra cables, self-amplified hi-fi speakers, 
mobile or portable microphone mounts, service policies, and LCD and 
overhead projectors. 

Audience: Mobile users who need multimedia.

REMOTE E-MAIL 

Problem: Few companies have figured out how to deliver company e-mail 
to mobile workers. 

Rationale: Every good e-mail program has a remote access gateway or 
method for mobile users. Many are easy to set up on 286 or 386 PCs 
with older modems. 

What to Do: Find out what e-mail infrastructure an organization uses, 
then explore the remote user access pieces for both the office and the 
mobile side of the e-mail. 

Where to Make Money: The remote e-mail software piece, installation, 
hardware, mobile e-mail software and installation, training, and 
service and support policies. 

Audience: A growing number of mobile users who need frequent e-mail 
connectivity. 

DOCKING STATIONS 

Problem: Busy computer users dislike using file transfer software 
between a mobile computer and a machine used at the office. 

Rationale: Docking stations have improved dramatically from the early 
days of mobile computing. Many have built-in Ethernet cards, SCSI bus, 
a mouse port, a split keyboard and, occasionally, a VGA monitor 
attached. 

What to Do: Know which mobile computers have docking stations, their 
features, and the add-on/in possibilities. 

Where to Make Money: The docking station and all external accessories, 
hardware/software installation, service and support. 

Audience: Anyone who wants to shrink two PCs into one.

INSURANCE AND LOSS RECOVERY 

Problem: Mobile items are frequently lost, usually due to loss, theft, 
drop damage, weather damage, or overuse. 

Rationale: Several insurance and re-insurance companies offer policies 
for mobile computer users that cover every component except data. 

What to Do: Research which agents in your region offer insurance for 
portables and negotiate a deal. Arrange a program to service the 
emergency needs of your mobile clients.

Where to Make Money: Insurance policy commissions, maintenance, 
service, support, fast-replacement contracts and overnight disk 
replacement services. 

Audience: Every mobile user. 

MODEM KITS

Problem: Mobile users often have problems connecting at remote sites.

Rationale: Several vendors now have kits with Y-adapters, converter 
jacks, extra-length cables and other modem connectivity paraphernalia.

What to Do: Investigate the kits and their options. Try a kit so that 
you can give support to your traveling clients. After-hour support can 
have a premium associated with that support. 

Where to Make Money: From the kits and miscellaneous phone 
paraphernalia that is often found at discount stores. Spare external 
RS-232 cables, as well as PCMCIA modem-specific phone cables are hot 
items. 

Audience: Every mobile user owning a modem. 

Mobile users face many more obstacles in finding parts in remote 
regions. Establishing a good working relationship with mobile users 
and organizations can result in lots of solid business. Once 
established, the mobile dollars flow in. The trick, of course, is to 
keep them from flowing out again.

“While many of us can happily listen to Mozart during a traffic jam, 
there are others who need to perform their work functions no matter 
where they are — at any time of the day or night.”


Tom Henderson is the vice president of Engineering at Unitel Inc., a 
communications and database integrator located in Indianapolis. He can 
be reached at (317) 574-1000.</PRE><HR>

<CENTER><STRONG>Profit Builders</STRONG><BR>
By JeffreyMasich
<PRE>
Top 10 Ways for Resellers to Increase Their Bottom Line</CENTER>

During the past 10 years, I have been fortunate to have the 
opportunity to meet a large number of computer resellers and discuss 
their individual recipes for success. With the fierce competition and 
skinny margins in our industry, the smart reseller must seek out and 
exploit all opportunities to increase profits. Here are the top 10 
ways (with no assistance from David Letterman) for a reseller to 
increase the bottom line. OK, away we go.

10.	Seek the agency model

Align yourself with a master reseller or distributor who can help you 
reduce your infrastructure. Carrying inventory and accounts 
receivable are the biggest headache, and often the chief reason, for 
business failure for a reseller. Today, there is an opportunity for 
resellers to have their supplier of computer products carry the 
inventory and, in many cases, the accounts receivable. The reseller 
places the order and receives their split of the profit margin. 
Besides saving on the carrying costs of inventory and accounts 
receivable, there are also savings in brick and mortar, 
administrative personnel, sales tax reporting ... and headaches.

9.	Utilize leasing

The average computer reseller earns an extra three to four profit 
points on a lease as opposed to a sale on net 30 day terms. Most major 
leasing companies allow resellers to broker the lease rate. Every 
computer sold should be quoted on a monthly lease or on a net 30 day 
purchase option. Often a reseller is able to sell more if the buyer is 
able to stay within their capital budget parameters. In addition, 
leasing encourages add-ons and helps protect your customers from the 
competition.

8.	Charge more for constrained products

Remember “supply and demand” back in Economics 101? When supply 
decreases, demand increases. Are you charging all your customers a 
standard mark-up? Customers will expect to pay more for products that 
are in short supply. When pricing out your proposals, make sure that 
the current industry-wide availability of the products are taken into 
consideration.

7.	Establish software solutions

There is more profit to be found in software than in hardware. 
Software solutions should be established for the industries that you 
are selling to. Seek out VARs who have the best software available. 
Determine if you can be authorized to sell that software in your local 
market. Have your staff trained and develop a profit margin split or 
finders’ fee commission with the software providers. Maintain a 
catalog by industry. It is often easier to lead with the software 
solution before selling the hardware. 

6.      Base commissions on collections 

Someone once said, “A sale is not a sale until the invoice is 
collected.” If this is true, why pay a full sales commission when the 
product ships? Consider paying partial commission at the time of 
shipment with the balance payable at the time of collection. Or, 
adjust the commissions monthly based on receivables that age out past 
a pre-determined time frame (i.e., 60 days). This will encourage your 
sales staff to provide better customer service and follow through 
after the sale. This, in turn, wi ll speed up your collections and 
cause customers to be happier with your performance.

5.	Sell peripherals

The profit margin on desktop computers is small. Make sure that your 
sales people add peripherals such as extra memory, multimedia kits, 
modems, docking stations, network interfaces, communication linkages, 
electronic personal organizers, etc. This is your opportunity to 
increase margins.

4.	Maximize soft dollars

Many manufacturers offer a variety of ways for you to redeem soft 
dollars. If you have the option, do not use your soft dollars for 
vacation travel or gifts. Attempt to work with your vendor 
representative to utilize soft dollars on avenues that will increase 
your sales, such as advertising, vendor-focused employees, special 
financing terms, etc.

3.	Utilize financing subsidies

Most of the major CPU manufacturers are still offering 30-day interest 
free financing subsidies through finance companies. Master resellers 
and distributors should be able to provide you with more attractive 
pricing when you purchase through a finance company because the 
manufacturer pays for carrying the receivables rather than your 
supplier. Make sure you negotiate your best deal when purchasing your 
CPUs by leveraging in the manufacturer subsidies and getting your best 
price.

2.	Sell services

There are excellent profits to be earned on the proper selling of 
services. The most popular are installation, training, support, 
technical services, configuration, extended warranties and repairs. 
Attempt to bundle these services whenever making a new hardware sale.

1.	Focus on emerging technology

Attempt to get in front of the emerging technologies. Those who were 
in the front end of networking are now in a much better position to 
serve their customers as networking continues to explode. Future 
technologies can be found in disaster planning, document imaging, 
voice/data technology, EDI, etc. Be prepared to exploit the 
appropriate opportunities. 

By focusing on any of the items on this Top 10 List, a savvy reseller 
should be able to increase his or her bottom line. Trying to 
accomplish them by yourself can be frustrating. Instead, challenge 
different members of your staff with one or two of the items on this 
list. Have them measure their results and present their 
accomplishments to you monthly or quarterly. Set goals and review 
accomplishments against those goals. And finally, do not forget to 
celebrate your successes with those who helped you accom plish them.

Top 10 ListTo Increase Reseller Profits
	10.	Seek the agency model
	9.	Utilize leasing
        8.      Charge more for contrained products
	7.	Establish software solutions
	6.	Base commissions on collections
	5.	Sell peripherals
	4.	Maximize soft dollars
	3.	Utilize financing subsidies
	2.	Sell services
	1.	Focus on emerging technology


Jeffrey Masich is vice president of Channel Finance at MicroAge 
Computer Centers Inc. in Tempe, Ariz. He can be reached at (602) 
968-3168.</PRE><HR>
<CENTER><H2>Global Marketing</H2></CENTER>
By Kurt Luchs<BR>
<PRE>
Whether and How to Successfully be a Reseller in the Global Marketplace


It’s no secret that the worldwide economy is exploding, particularly 
the Pacific Rim nations, led by Japan and the so-called Four Little 
Dragons — Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea. And, Thailand, 
Malaysia and Indonesia are not far behind. What is not so clear, 
however, is whether and how U.S. resellers, VARs and systems 
integrators should try to enter these and other expanding markets. 
After all, most domestic resellers have local or regional business. 
Why should they care what happens a dozen t ime zones away?

One answer is provided by George Colombo, president of Influence 
Technologies, a sales and marketing education company in Winter 
Springs, Fla. that consults with resellers and business owners: “You 
don’t have to target international markets in order to be competing in 
the global marketplace. You don’t have to go out and look for that 
competition because it’s coming to look for you whether you like it or 
not. You have to view your business environment in terms of the global 
marketplace, even if it’s outside of what you perceive to be your 
existing boundaries. The fact is, you’ll be competing against the same 
people here or there. The subject is worth the attention of VARs even 
if their focus is on Main Street."

Colombo’s advice is echoed by Roosevelt Giles, president of 
Information Management Systems Inc., a systems integration company in 
Atlanta that does a good deal of business overseas. “Too many VARs 
refuse to consider the global marketplace,” Giles says. “They prefer 
to believe they can continue to operate within a 50-mile radius, not 
realizing that the radius is slowly shrinking and that part of their 
competition is coming from overseas, either directly or indirectly. 
Part of the globalization of the reselling marketplace is that 
distance matters less and less.” In other words, it is no longer 
possible to ignore or hide from the global marketplace. Many VARs and 
systems integrators will find that they must tackle it head-on if only 
to maintain their current position. Viewed more positively, foreign 
markets are a tremendous opportunity for resellers. The questions then 
become: how have these opportunities arisen, and how can resellers 
take advantage of them?

When Computer Systems Collide

Systems integration problems naturally arise in a booming economy, 
because every time one company buys another, there is a potential 
conflict between computer systems. Usually there is such an installed 
base, such a hefty capital investment at stake, that throwing out the 
existing equipment is not an immediate option. Rather, a way must be 
found to make these diverse systems work together, at least in the 
short-term. This is why every merger and acquisition overseas means 
more potential business for VARs in the United States if they want to 
go after it. 

Another reason for the growing importance of foreign markets is the 
oft-repeated observation that the center of gravity in the world of 
commerce and business continues to shift westward. It started in 
Europe, migrated to the United States and is now moving swiftly to the 
Pacific Rim. That’s a megatrend that shows no sign of slowing. Then 
again, as information technology penetrates foreign markets ever more 
deeply, systems that were largely developed in the West must be 
adapted to local conditions and standards that are often very 
different. 

Even such basic issues as differing standards for electrical voltage 
can greatly increase the need for systems integration expertise. 
Speaking of expertise, it is frequently in short supply in exactly 
those parts of the global marketplace where it is most needed. 

Referring especially to the Far East, Giles notes: “There are pockets 
of expertise, but many holes to fill and therefore lots of room for 
partnerships. One of the biggest trends is in the LAN marketplace, 
which is simply booming right now. Other than that, systems 
integrators face many of the same problems around the world as they do 
here. For instance, the demand for network services that the networks 
are not quite ready to handle, such as videoconferencing. So no matter 
where you look for business in the world, you’ll encounter these 
‘bleeding edge’ types of problems.” 

Colombo suggests one reason why foreign customers may find it easier 
than U.S. ones to migrate to the newest technology: “In some ways we 
suffer in this country because our infrastructure is more mature. 
Places like South America are much more able to absorb an emerging 
standard such as ISDN because it isn’t replacing anything; there’s 
been nothing there before at all. There’s an old joke about why God 
was able to create the world in six days. The answer is that He didn’t 
have an installed base he had to remain compatible with.”

Getting the Business

“We have two main ways of generating business in foreign markets,” 
Giles says. “One is through our partnerships with the vendors who want 
to work with us on a particular project overseas. The other is through 
becoming visible at trade shows. For example, we ran the 
Interoperability Booth at the recent Comdex. And we give a number of 
seminars at shows and conferences. Many foreign customers attend these 
shows and connect with us that way.” 

These efforts have proven so successful for Information Management 
Systems over the years that the company is just now hiring its first 
Director of Sales after celebrating its 10th anniversary. Up until 
now, all sales have been handled by Giles and the information 
technology people working for him. According to Giles, even small VARs 
can leverage their experience if they have a solid niche of expertise 
to offer. What they have to do is make potential customers aware of 
them. That means spending significant dollars on trade shows, 
including some overseas events. If the price of entry is too steep, he 
suggests sharing the booth with other resellers in order to cut costs 
and present a bigger public image. As for seeking out partnerships 
with vendors doing business in foreign markets, the best strateg y is 
to send a profile of your company to the branch manager or regional 
manager of a vendor’s overseas office. They’re looking for help in 
those markets, and will often be open to partnerships. You should also 
try to build relationships with local VARs and integrators in those 
markets. 

One obvious way to deal with a shrinking world is to get on the 
Information Superhighway. Any reseller who isn’t on the Internet is 
making a big mistake. Giles acknowledges, “We’re now setting up our 
own Web server to generate and handle queries from around the globe. 
And we’re about to become Internet service providers as well, because 
so many of our customers are asking for it.”

Special Problems & Partnerships

Doing business overseas entails certain unique difficulties, which in 
turn are best addressed by soliciting help from those locals with a 
vested interest. Simply getting the equipment to the customer can be a 
major problem. “If the overseas customer is large enough, they have no 
problem securing hardware and software here and taking it back to 
their home office,” Giles says. “But that’s not the majority of 
customers we deal with. 

Only the multinationals with foreign subsidiaries have a relatively 
easy time crossing borders with American-made equipment. For the most 
part, you need a sponsor within the country in which you want to do 
business. And just as you would here, you spec out the software and 
hardware requi rements for th e application. Then you look at sourcing 
and integrating the equipment. You’ll find that many local firms in 
other countries are willing to partner with you for a share of the 
proceeds. They’ll be glad to assist with the integration, too, because 
they’re looking to acquire those skills themselves. The local service 
provider wants to come up to speed, and that’s in the foreign 
customer’s interest because it’s always more convenient if service c 
an be based locally.”

Partnering with foreign VARs is really not that different from 
establishing relationships with other VARs in the United States.  But 
whereas partnering with other VARs is simply one option among many 
here, when you are selling overseas you don’t have much choice — you 
have to partner to get and keep the business. It behooves you to 
recognize this reality. One special requirement of doing business 
overseas is to make sure that you communicate your agreements with the 
utmost clarity and put everything in writing. The deliverables between 
the parties, the expectations and the conditions should be spelled out 
even more clearly than you would do in this country. This is because 
foreign transactions are complicated not only by language barriers, 
but by cultural barriers. 

As Giles notes from his own experience, not all of this cross-cultural 
communication has to be face-to-face: “I communicate a lot over the 
Internet, and that’s very cost-effective. Also, I’ve done several 
videoconferences. When you’re dealing with translations and accents, 
it helps to have a little body language to clarify things. We’ve even 
conducted some of our technology seminars via videoconferencing. We 
can accomplish knowledge transfer without ever leaving home. You can 
also use videoconferences for product integration demos. A bonus is 
that by using all of the electronic communication methods available, 
I’m able to cut my foreign travel down to about once a month.”

Staffing Excellence

If there is one significant difference between the global marketplace 
and the domestic marketplace, Giles, Colombo and other industry 
participants agree that it is in the level of excellence expected from 
a VAR’s staff. “To compete in the global marketplace, your people need 
to be fully certified by all the relevant vendors, and they’ve got to 
be top-notch individuals,” Giles emphasizes. “When they go to another 
country, they have to be able to act on their own.  They’ll be in a 
different time zone without the resources they’re used to at home. 
There’s no help line when things go wrong. So you need individuals who 
are self-starters, who can really dig in and solve problems. Foreign 
language skills are certain ly a plus, eve n though English is the 
second language in many places. Technically, your staff has to be 
very, very sharp. The global market will not tolerate marginal people, 
which is definitely something we could learn from them.”

Giles prepares his engineers in his own test lab. If they claim to 
have a certain competence, he doesn’t merely take their word for it. 
He runs them through a number of scenarios in the lab to verify their 
skill level. He also mentors them properly; a more seasoned engineer 
will accompany a novice on his or her first few assignments overseas. 
Colombo agrees that staffing excellence is crucial in doing business 
globally. 

“You need people who are not merely technically suited, but culturally 
suited to working in many different environments,” he says. “You need 
to become comfortable with the sort of staff that global customers 
will be comfortable with. I hate to use the word because it’s been 
over-used and abused lately, but diversity is the key here.

“Foreign language skills are essential, of course, but they’re not the 
be-all and end-all of diversity. Cultural norms differ widely from 
place to place, too. What’s appropriate business behavior in North 
America will not be right for South America, not to mention Europe and 
Asia. These differences affect everything from prospecting for 
business to fulfilling the contract, and it takes a degree of cultural 
awareness to recognize them, let alone deal with them.”

Small World, Big Challenge

If, after weighing the pros and cons, you don’t think that pursuing 
the global marketplace fits in with your business plans, you should 
still keep abreast of these developments. 

Colombo tells why: “Competitors from around the world will be 
targeting your customers, so you’d better get ready to deal with it. 
Therefore, be aware that this will be part of the competitive mix, and 
keep your focus on those things that are of most value to your 
customers. How do you do that? The old mantra, ‘stay close to your 
customer,’ still holds true. If outsiders come looking for your 
customers, use your natural advantage — namely, that you’re closer to 
the customer, which permits you to respond faster. 

“Look at companies like Dell or Gateway, for example. Both of them 
speak extensively about the competitive advantage they gain from being 
direct-wired to customers every day. They talk to end users 
constantly, and that closeness puts them ahead of the competition. 
Resellers, VARs and systems integrators have to start looking at their 
customers the same way, and taking advantage of the physical 
proximity, among other things. “Nor can we afford to ignore the 
electronic modes of communication that will give our competitors 
easier access to our customers. We need to be aware of those things 
and to use them wherever appropriate. But the main point is to 
capitalize on our natural advantages. We need to play to our strengths 
while shoring up any weaknesses. That way we can make it more 
difficult for competition to make headway on our own territory. I 
think this is the correct approach regardless of whether your market 
is defin ed geog raphically or by some particular niche.”

Our final advice: embrace change, embrace diversity, be prepared for a 
long learning curve and be patient. You’ll soon be playing in a global 
marketplace, so you’d best start thinking in these terms now, while 
there’s still time to choose your options.


“To compete in the global marketplace, your people need to be fully 
certified by all the relevant vendors, and they’ve got to be top-notch 
individuals.”

Roosevelt Giles, president Information Management Systems Inc., Atlanta, Ga.

Embrace change, embrace diversity, be prepared for a long learning 
curve and be patient. You’ll soon be entering the global marketplace.

Kurt Luchs is a freelance writer and editor in Wheaton, Ill., who 
frequently covers the computer industry. He can be reached at (708) 
462-9769 (phone and fax).</PRE><HR>

<CENTER><H2>Seven Sales and Marketing Success Tips for Technology 
Resellers</H2>

<STRONG>Business Builders

By George W. Colombo</STRONG></CENTER>
<PRE>
                                      
As the 21st century races toward us, it is clear that the sales and 
marketing tools and techniques that you use successfully today will 
not be adequate to meet the challenges of tomorrow’s hypercompetitive 
business environment. If your reselling business is going to thrive in 
the upcoming century, you will need to stake out an unassailable 
position in the minds of your customers. 

The tools and techniques that you employ in your sales and marketing 
efforts will need to incorporate not only the customer intim acy of 
“high touch,” but also the relentless effectiveness of “high tech.” 
Keeping this in mind, here are the top seven suggested approaches that 
can enable you to differentiate your business from the competition.  
Your skillful use of any one of these approaches can make all the 
difference in the world as you prepare your business to thrive in the 
challenging business environment of tomorrow.

BECOME AN EXPERT!

The selling process is infinitely easier when customers are coming to 
you rather than you having to pursue them. As a business owner or 
manager, one of the most effective ways that you can make this happen 
is to become visible in your marketplace as an “expert.” If your 
market is primarily local, make yourself available to business 
organizations in your community as a speaker on technology issues. You 
will be amazed at how potential customers will seek you out after a 
presentation, press their business card s into your hand, and ask if 
you could possibly find the time to give them a call! 

Another tactic that you can use to position yourself as an expert is 
to write articles on business and technology for either your local 
newspaper or, if you are focusing on a vertical market, for trade 
publications in your target industry. You can extend the impact of 
anything you write by using reprints in your company’s standard 
marketing packet.

INVEST IN TECHNOLOGY 

Resellers’ salespeople often find themselves in the same situation as 
the cobbler’s kids who didn’t have any shoes! While the entire field 
of sales support hardware and software is exploding, as a result of 
advances in technology combined with the demands of a hypercompetitive 
marketplace, resellers’ salespeople are often sent out into the 
marketplace with little more than a Day-Timer notebook and a 
loose-leaf price list. If you have not yet provided your salespeople 
with technology to facilitate contact an d account management, 
electronic presentations, E-mail based customer communications, and 
centralized sales document administration, then stop whatever else you 
are doing right now and start planning to implement this important set 
of tools! Sales force automation technology enhances sales 
productivity and lowers your cost of selling. 

Moreover, as a technology reseller, it demonstrates to your customers 
that you don’t just “talk the talk,” but you actually “walk the walk.” 
Please forgive the commercial, but I would be remiss if I did not 
mention that resellers who want to learn more about this topic can 
refer to my book, Sales Force Automation (McGraw-Hill, 1994).

ALIGN COMPENSATION WITH OBJECTIVES

There is a Golden Rule of Sales Management that is both obvious (in 
theory) and elusive (in practice): Salespeople do what they are 
compensated to do. The implications of this rule are clear. You need 
to make certain that your sales compensation structures are designed 
to support your management objectives. One VAR that I worked with 
provided a textbook example of how a misalignment in this area can 
create problems. This VAR (like everyone else in our industry) was 
struggling mightily to maintain his margins. Unfortunately, his sales 
commissions were paid on gross sales dollars. 

His constant exhortations at sales meetings about maintaining margins 
fell on unreceptive ears, since salespeople recognized that better 
margins would have little or no effect on their commission c hecks. 
This example is so blatant as to be laughable, but the principle 
applies in less obvious circumstances, as well. Do you want your 
salespeople to spend time on customer retention and customer 
satisfaction issues? Is your “connect rate” for service contracts 
important? How about your hardware to services ratio? If any of these 
areas need improvement, make sure that your compensation program is 
providing your salespeople with the blueprint they need to go after 
your strategic objectives.

INVEST IN CUSTOMER RETENTION
One of the most important facts of life for any business owner or 
manager is that repeat business is significantly more profitable than 
new business. In the computer industry, where the cost of customer 
acquisition is particularly high, this fact deserves special attention 
and consideration. In a marketplace that is more competitive than ever 
before, you need to build a fence around your existing (i.e., most 
profitable) customers.

Consider how you can follow the example of the airline industry and 
institute your own version of a “Frequent Flier” program. If you think 
about it, you can find ways to lavish all kinds of special attention 
on your regular customers. Depending on the nature of your business, 
there are many creative options you have to reward your regular 
customers: credit for free support time, regular maintenance checks 
and free upgrade installations. The important thing is to find an 
incentive that is meaningful to your regular customers. And remember 
that whatever you choose as your “Frequent Flier” reward, it will 
certainly cost significantly less than replacing a lost customer.

DEVELOP A MEDIA PLAN

Continuing with the theme of having customers come to you, the 
credibility of your business receives a tremendous boost every time it 
is mentioned in a newspaper or magazine. Publicity does not happen by 
accident. It is the result of a disciplined approach to contacting the 
media. Are you hiring a new sales manager? Have you recently taken on 
a new line of product? Have you or one of your employees completed a 
special vendor training program? Send out a press release and let the 
media know!

You should have a mailing list that is comprised of the media that 
your customers read or watch. Every significant event should then be 
communicated to those media by means of a concise, well-written press 
release. You will not get your story printed every time, but you will 
be surprised at how often you are successful. A residual benefit of 
regular media contact is that the media will begin to perceive you as 
a “player,” and will begin to call you for interviews when a 
technology story is breaking.

USE SEMINAR MARKETING

If you are taking the time to read this article, chances are good that 
you regard your business as more than a “box pushing” enterprise. 
Chances are also good that your business model calls for adding value 
to the products that you sell to your customers. The challenge is to 
educate your customers about what you are doing in order to translate 
added value into added margins. That is not always easy for your 
salespeople to do in a 15-minute sales presentation.

Sales seminars provide an excellent forum for explaining the value of 
your company and the products you sell. Moreover, in a reselling 
environment where cooperative marketing dollars are in short supply, 
seminars are a great vehicle for tapping into “hidden” marketing money 
from manufacturers. (Limited space prevents me from going into detail 
on this subject, but if you want to learn more about it, be sure to 
sit in on my presentation in August at the Breakaway Conference in New 
Orleans.)

PRODUCE A NEWSLETTER

If you are looking for a low-cost, high-impact way to keep your arms 
wrapped around your customers, consider publishing a quarterly or 
bi-monthly newsletter. The resellers I know who are doing this 
maintain that it is the single most effective marketing tool in their 
arsenal.

A newsletter combines the advantages of several of the approaches 
mentioned above. It allows you to subtlely position yourself as an 
expert, adding immeasurably to your company’s credibility. It also 
gives you an opportunity to provide your customers with information 
about your company, its products, and its services that would be 
difficult to communicate otherwise.

If you decide to produce a newsletter, remember that a low-key 
approach works best. If your customers perceive that your newsletter 
is really an infomercial in disguise, it will wind up in their 
circular file, unwanted and unread. If, on the other hand, you put 
together a newsletter with genuine value, you will be astonished at 
how quickly your customers come to rely on it for information.

A well conceived newsletter can be your single most effective tool for 
staying close to your customers and positioning your business 
effectively in their minds.

Seven Steps to Build a Better Business

To prepare your business for the 21st century, follow these seven tips 
to differentiate yourself from the competition:

        *       Become an Expert

        *       Invest in Technology

        *       Align Compensation with Objectives

        *       Invest in Customer Retention

        *       Develop a Media Plan

        *       Use Seminar Marketing

        *       Develop a Newsletter

George Colombo is president of Influence Technologies, located in 
Winter Springs, Fla. He can be reached at (407) 327-2453. </PRE><HR>

<CENTER><H2>Profit Opportunities On the Internet: Ten Information 
Superhighway Strategies for Resellers</H2></CENTER>

<CENTER><STRONG>By Kurt Luchs</STRONG></CENTER>
<PRE>


Almost in spite of the hype, the information superhighway and its most 
visible components, the Internet and the World Wide Web, have truly 
taken off this year as never before. Seemingly every other computer 
book published these days explains either how to get on the Internet, 
or how to locate other Web surfers of like mind (be they lovers of 
model airplanes or Monty Python), or how individuals and companies can 
take advantage of this new market and its new mode of marketing. At 
last count there were 8,476,5 29 of these  beginner-orientated books, 
so we won’t add to that mountain of paper. With a few exceptions, 
we’ll assume you’re already on the Net and are familiar with the 
basics.

So far, however, there has been precious little on the subject 
addressed to resellers and where they fit into this picture from a 
business perspective. Yet the Internet represents one of the greatest 
profit opportunities of the ‘90s for resellers, VARs and systems 
integrators. Following are 10 Internet-related services resellers can 
offer to their existing customers or use to gain new customers. Many 
of these are short-term opportunities that spring from the newness of 
the technology. 

(Thanks to Donald J. H olmgren and Bruce A. Vojak, owners of UES Press 
in Bloomingdale, Ill., for their insights. See the accompanying 
sidebar for more information.)

INSTALL AND CONFIGURE THE SOFTWARE

At one level, aside from the technical complexities, the Internet is 
just one more service that a VAR can offer his or her existing 
customer base. Most resellers are familiar with installing NetWare or 
LAN Manager, but the Internet requires a different protocol. There are 
some arcane details that most customers won’t want to deal with. If 
you have a good relationship with an Internet service provider and can 
offer the whole package, including setting up an IP address, this 
service will interest many business customers. 

Most larger companies will have in-house Internet experts, so this is 
more for the small to mid-sized firms. One exception might be a larger 
company that has multiple platforms or a large LAN, where getting TCP 
and NetWare to run simultaneously can be difficult. Larger firms in 
this situation might prefer to outsource Internet consulting or 
implementation. Even when a company is on the Internet, access is 
usually limited. Resellers may have an opportunity to se rvice those 
departments that aren’t getting Int ernet privileges.

CONSULT INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS 

This means performing an Internet needs analysis for your client and 
making the appropriate recommendations. To do this successfully, of 
course, you must be intimately familiar with both your customer’s 
business and the bewildering variety of Internet service providers. 
You gain an additional advantage here if you are set up as an Internet 
service provider yourself and can bid on the services you recommend.

TRACK THE COMPETITION 

Almost all companies will have a presence on the Internet eventually. 
But if none of your customer’s competitors are on it yet, or even 
intend to be, there may be no market advantage in connecting right 
now. You can still provide an essential service by keeping an eye on 
the competition and letting your customer know when it is time to jump 
in. If you surf the Internet for many clients, you can realize the 
cost efficiencies needed to make this a profitable service. 

PROVIDE INFORMATION SEARCHES

While this may be a time-consuming service for resellers to provide, 
it is also one sure to be in demand. The amount of information 
available on the Net is staggering. Access time is usually quick, but 
only if you know what you’re looking for and where to find it. 
Resellers who are constant Internet surfers will develop a skill they 
can offer to customers who are novices or simply don’t have the time 
for complex searches.

There is another possibility here. The biggest single complaint of 
Internet users is the difficulty of locating addresses. You could 
specialize by becoming an expert in finding user addresses for a 
particular market niche or industry. You could then develop and sell 
CD-ROM databases of industry or market-specific phone numbers and 
addresses on the Internet.

OFFER INTERNET TRAINING AND SEMINARS

This service can include any type or level of Internet training, from 
an overview of the technology and what it means for businesses, to 
training a customer’s in-house Web server maintenance personnel at a 
high technical level. The first is broadly applicable to all managers 
and executives who realize they have to deal with this topic. It could 
be a canny way to get your foot in the door to sell more extensive 
Internet services. Numerous Internet guides offer starting points for 
such training. However, you could best leverage your expertise by 
creating training materials specifically geared to the market niche of 
your customer base.

PROVIDE HOME PAGE SERVICES

There are two aspects to this strategy: setting up and maintaining 
home pages for clients; and using home pages to gather market 
information for clients. A home page is a firm’s graphical entry point 
on the Internet’s World Wide Web (a.k.a WWW, or Web for short). The 
Web is a collection of computers and networks linked in cyberspace, 
that can be accessed with MOSAIC or similar Web browsers. Documents on 
a Web server are written in Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), which 
looks just like a help file in a Wind ows or Macintosh software 
application. Through HTML, Web documents can contain links to other 
documents on other servers. As the hottest item on the Internet, 
getting onto the Web is sure to be one of the most frequent requests 
from your clients. They’ll want you to set up a classy home page for 
them. You can offer this service whether you have your own 
high-performance link to the Internet, or go through a major service 
provider. 

Some companies use home pages as interactive ads. Others use them for 
technical support. A home page is also a good way to graphically index 
your information on the Internet. Setting up that kind of home page 
requires programming knowledge that many potential Internet users 
don’t have and don’t wish to acquire. Remember: if you set up a home 
page for one client, you can adapt it for another client and generate 
repeat sales. Recent advances enable some Web pages to make two-way 
transfers of information. Data encryption and security measures are 
vital to this market, and are another service that resellers can 
provide.

BECOME A SERVICE PROVIDER

This, again, entails two separate strategies. You can either:  buy 
blocks of time from the major providers and resell them; or set up a 
full-scale service from scratch. The first option might make sense if 
you’re looking to service at least a 50-user node. You would market 
the service package and let a service provider handle the actual 
account maintenance. This might not be a money-maker so much as a 
distinctive value-added service you can offer your customers. In its 
simplest form, one employee could handle it. Otherwise, you should 
plan on at least two full-timers to maintain such a service.

SET UP A WEB SERVER FOR YOUR CLIENTS

You only need to consider putting up your own Web server if you’re 
giving so much data to Internet users that a regular service provider 
isn’t interested in you because you’ll just bog his system down. If 
you’re already knowledgeable and have the necessary infrastructure, 
setting up on your own can be a good bet. Otherwise, it takes a 
sizable investment in money and effort. It’s a major step up from 
writing a home page to running a Web server. Web browsers like Mosaic 
are only the client piece of the client /server software. The server 
side is the expensive one because it’s mostly Unix-based. That means 
more expensive hardware and software, as well as more costly 
maintenance. In short, this is not a low-risk strategy, but one that 
requires serious cost-benefit analysis.

DEVELOP CUSTOM DATABASES

CD-ROM recorders are finally becoming affordable for the average 
reseller. You can get one for $2,500 these days, and the price keeps 
dropping. One reason for this profit strategy is the congestion on the 
more popular areas of the Web. CD-ROMs make sense for many of these 
areas, especially the ones that don’t require daily updates to be 
useful. There will be a market for culling these most often accessed 
Web collections and selling them on disc. Corporate users tend to 
forget that the Web software doesn’t n eed the Internet to run; it’ll 
run on any local area network providing you don’t try to go across 
servers. In fact, making clients aware of the uses for the Web 
software on their own LANs is a service opportunity in itself. 

PREPARE FOR THE NEXT WAVE OF ISDN

ISDN refers to Integrated Services Digital Network. This is the 
digital phone line revolution that will soon change the way we receive 
and use information, both in our homes and at our businesses. ISDN is 
a three-in-one phone line for users: two high-speed digital lines and 
one slower analog line. The two digital lines can be combined into one 
super-fast line for connecting to the Internet, among other things, or 
they can be used separately. The analog line remains free for phone or 
fax  use.

The higher rate of data transfer speed that ISDN makes possible will 
attract a host of digital information service providers. The basic 
impact will be more access and faster access to the Internet by home 
users, making the whole market bigger for resellers. Expect a 
transition period, however, when ISDN is a luxury beyond the reach of 
most homeowners or small businesses.

ISDN will make more feasible some rather jerky, slow video, and some 
fairly good quality audio on the Internet. Video or audio file 
transfers will still not be very speedy, but will certainly be faster. 
A few enterprising cable TV companies are already providing direct 
Internet access via their own high-speed lines at remarkably low cost 
around $10 per month.

Could resellers partner with phone companies or cable companies to 
offer some of these services jointly? Perhaps. On a related note, 
computer network operators are starting to give phone companies a run 
for their money by offering long distance phone service on their 
low-cost computer lines. In this, as in all other free enterprise, 
competition between suppliers is producing the greatest benefits for 
consumers.

Kurt Luchs is a freelance writer and editor in Wheaton, Ill., who 
frequently covers the computer industry. He can be reached at (708) 
462-9769 (phone and fax).


A Hot-Picks List for Cruising the Internet 

As noted earlier, there are countless introductory guides to the 
Internet that can be purchased at any bookstore. To our knowledge, 
though, only one book concentrates on basic business concerns related 
to the Internet. It also happens to be the only overview available in 
both print and audio versions.

An Executive Briefing on the Internet and the Information 
Superhighway, by Donald J. Holmgren and Bruce A. Vojak, is exactly 
what the title implies: a concise tour of the subject from a business 
perspective. This is information you should have if you’re considering 
adding the Internet to your menu of customer services. It would also 
be an effective way to educate your customers about the benefits of 
the Internet. The audio portion consists of two 50-minute tapes with 
an informal dialog between the co-author s, covering everything from 
Internet history and terminology to using the net to achieve 
competitive advantage or maintain competitive position. Also included 
is a discussion of Internet risks, such as security, information 
control, and other issues. The accompanying 88-page book is a 
transcript of the dialog, plus a glossary and reference section. The 
combination book and audio package (they are not sold separately) 
costs $39.95, including postage and handling. There is a toll-free 
number for credit card orders, 800-879-4214; or you can send a check 
or money order to: BookCrafters Distribution Center, P.O. Box 370, 615 
Industrial Dr., Chelsea, MI 48118. Illinois residents should add 6.75% 
sales tax. 

The best technical references for Internet service 
providers are published by O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. You might start 
with Managing Internet Information Services, by Cricket Liu, Jerry 
Peek, Russ Jones, Bryan Buus and Adrian Nye. This 630-page volume will 
enable anyone with a suitable computer and Internet connection to 
become an Internet publisher. Cost is $29.95. The book can be ordered 
by phone (800-889-8969), fax (707-829-0104), E-mail (order@ora.com) or 
“snail mail” (O’Reilly & Associates , Inc., 10 3A Morris St., 
Sebastopol, CA 95472-9902).</PRE><HR>

<CENTER><H1>SoftWARR</H1></CENTER><PRE>


Tired of hassling with those multi-part warranty forms? Have you been 
wondering why your computer can’t be a substitute for your pencil in 
filling out warranty claims? 

Well, stop wondering and let SoftWARR do the work! What is SoftWARR?

SoftWARR is an easy-to-use, time saving warranty claim printing and 
tracking program developed by Electronic Commerce Solutions under the 
direction of the Computing Technology Industry Association (CompTIA). 
SoftWARR takes the hassle out of warranty claims processing. The 
program walks you through the standard claim form with a series of 
simple, fill-in-the-blank screens that capture the necessary 
information needed to quickly get reimbursed for your warranty work. 
Most major manufacturers such as Apple Computer, Compaq, IBM, H-P, 
Epson, Okidata and Toshiba accept CompTIA claim forms.

Warranty Claims Made Easy

All necessary data is displayed on your screen at the stroke of a key. 
No more hunting through manufacturers’ manuals for failure codes or 
rummaging through the notes stuck to your wall, looking for that new 
technician’s certification number. Once you have filled in the blanks, 
you can generate the form on a laser printer or use a dot matrix 
printer to print the information on the standard CompTIA form. Save 
Time!

*       No more handwritten forms
*       No more repetitive entry of standard information
*       Speeds up vendor payment cycle

Eliminate Errors!

*       Provides auto selection of CompTIA failure and transaction codes
*       Ensures required fields are completed

Save Money!

*       Creates forms on plain paper
*       Saves time and money with faster form completion
*       Reduces vendor rejections

SoftWARR retains each claim’s data for future use. If an individual 
claim form is damaged, lost in the mail, or “missing in action,” you 
can generate duplicate copies with a few simple keystrokes. In 
addition, SoftWARR keeps track of dealer authorization and technician 
certification numbers. As you hire new technicians or upgrade their 
skills, you can add their certification numbers to SoftWARR’s 
technician table. These codes are then automatically selected as you 
fill in the form on your computer screen.

System Requirements

*       MS DOS 3.3 or higher, or Windows 3.1
*       2MB RAM
*       VGA monitor
*       Hard disk

(Macintosh version will be available by the end of 1994.)

To Order SoftWARR

CompTIA members can subscribe to SoftWARR for $150 per year.* The 
non-member price is $200 per year. Checks and credit cards accepted. 
Call 305-872-1199, or fax your order to 305-872-8857.

SoftWARR Subscription Form

(Each annual subscription includes software, technical support, and 
industry code updates.)

Date
Name    
Company
Address
Address
City    
State   
Zipcode
Telephone       
FAX
Quantity	x	Price each*	=Total Price
Media Type (Circle):     Windows DOS     3.5 format      5.25 format
Payment Method:	Check #	(Make check payable to ECS)
        VISA or M/C #                        Exp. Date
	Signature

The Computing Technology Industry Warranty Claims Printing Program      
Oct. 1994

CompTIA Members pay the introductory price of $125 per year if you 
subscribe to SoftWARR by December 31, 1994.

Use SoftWARR to go . . . 

E l e c t r o n i cC o m m e r c eS o l u t i o n s


PO Box 432144US HWY 1, MM 31.1
Miley Bldg.
Big Pine Key, FL
33043-2144
(305) 872-1199
(305) 872-8857 Fax


*CompTIA member price is $150 per year (introductory price thru 
12/31/94 is $125). Non-member price is $200 per year.


</PRE> <CENTER><A HREF="http://www.comptia.org/home.htm">Return to 
CompTIA Home Page</A></CENTER> </BODY> </HTML>

</DOC>