
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-146</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B044-251</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/cu/cu6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021424 text/html 20139
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:14:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:36 GMT
Content-length: 19921
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Licit and Illicit Drugs - Chapter 6, Opium is Outlawed</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/sch_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61536" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="5"><strong>Consumers Union Report on Licit and
Illicit Drugs</strong></font></p>

<p><font size="5"><strong>Chapter 6</strong></font></p>

<p><font size="5"><strong>Opium smoking is outlawed</strong></font></p>

<p>To summarize the data reviewed so far, opiates taken daily in
large doses by addicts were not a social menace under
nineteenth-century conditions, and were not perceived as a
menace. Opium, morphine, and heroin could be legally purchased
without a prescription, and there was little demand for opiate
prohibition. But there was one exception to this general
tolerance of the opiates. In 1875, the City of San Francisco
adopted an ordinance prohibiting the smoking of opium in
smoldng-houses or &quot;dens.&quot; 1</p>

<p>The roots of this ordinance were racist rather than
health-oriented, and were concerned with what today is known as
'1ife-style.&quot; Opium smoking was introduced into the United
States by tens of thousands of Chinese men and boys imported
during the l850s and 1880s to build the great Western railroads.*
The Chinese laborers then drifted into San Francisco and other
cities, and accepted employment of various kinds at low wages
-giving rise to waves of anti-Chinese hostility. Soon white men
and even women were smoking opium side by side with the Chinese,
a life-style which was widely disapproved. The San Francisco
authorities, we are told learned upon investigation that
&quot;many women and young girls, as well as young men of
respectable family, were being induced to visit the [Chinese]
opium-smoking dens, where they were ruined morally and otherwise
* The 1875 ordinance followed, &quot;forbidding the practice
under penalty of a heavy fine or imprisonment or both. Many
arrests were made, and the punishment was prompt and thorough.- 6</p>

<hr>

<p>* Professor Jonathan Spence of the Department of History, Yale
University, presented a fascinating account of opium smoking in
nineteenth-contury China at the Conforence on Local Control and
Social Protest during the Ch'ing Period, hold at Honolulu,
Hawaii, from June 27 to July a, 1971. He reported, for example,
that &quot;opium was highly regarded in China, both as a
medicinal drug (that checked diarrhea and sorved as a febrifuge),
and as an aphrodisiac. Therefore people might become addicted
eithor becawe they took opium intensively during an illness hr
instanco in the great cholera epidemic of 1821-or bocause they
had vigor, leisure and money and wanted to make the best of it.</p>

<p>'Those who who ate regularly and well did not suffer
physiologically from their addiction, but for the poor, addiction
was a serious health hazard (even though, ironically, it was
often first taken for health reasons), since scarce cash
resources were put to opium rather than food purchases. The
rewards for the poor were a blurring of the pains of prolonged
labor, and an increase in work capacity over short periods of
time. Then there was heavy addiction among coolies and
chair-bearers, and among such groups as boatmen who had to work
their boats upstream, and stone-cutters working out-of-doors in
cold weather. The last Chinese to become addicted seem to have
been the peasants, though as they grew moro opium crops the
incidenceof heavy opium anoking rose, and by 1902 one could find
entire rural communities that were in desperate straits because
addiction had become almost total. By the late Ch'ing, it scans
that no major occupational group was without its addicts.&quot;5 </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>~* One white girl of good family and education began opium
smoking at sixteen in San Francisco in 1880, later became a
prostitute, moved to Victoria, British Columbia, and was found in
an opium den in 1884 by a Royal Comnmission. The transcript of
her answers to questions reads, in part:</p>

<p>Q. Why did you commence to smoke opium?</p>

<p>A. Why do people commence to drink? Trouble, I suppose led me
to smoke. I think it is better than drink. People who smoke opium
do not kick up rows; they injure no one but themselves, and I do
not thinlc they injure themselves very much.</p>

<p>Q.... Why do you smoke now?</p>

<p>A. Bocause I must; I oould not live without it. I smoke partly
because of the quiet enjoyment it gives, but mainly to escape
from the horrors which would ensue if I not smoke. To be
twenty-four hours without smoking is to suffer worse tortures
than the lost.</p>

<p>Q. But does not the smoking make you wretched, past as
drinking would?</p>

<p>A. No; I require about twelve pipes, then I fall into a state
of somnolence and complete rest. When I awake I feel all right,
and can attend to fixing-up the house. I am brisk, and can work
as well as anybody else. I do not feel sick or nervous, neither
have I the inclination to smoke more opium.</p>

<p>O. Then why do you return to the use of the drug?</p>

<p>A. Ah! that's it; there is a time when my hands fail me; tears
fall from my eyes, I am ready to sink; then I come here and for a
few bits have a smoke which sets me right. There is too much
nonsense talked about opium-smoking. Life without it would be
unendurable, I am in excellent health; but, I suppose, every one
has their own troubles, and I have mine.</p>

<p>Q. I do not want to be offensive, but are you what is called a
fast woman?</p>

<p>A. I am. But you would be greatly mistaken if you inagined
that all the women wbo oome here to smoke are of that character.
In San Francisco I have known some of the first people visit
opium houses, and many respectable people do the same here.</p>

<p>Q. Are women of your class generaIly addicted to
opium-smoking? </p>

<p>A. No; they are more addicted to drink, and drink does them
far more harm. Drink excites passions, whereas this allays it;
and when a fast woman drinks she goes to min pretty quick....</p>

<p>Q. Have you anything else to add . . . ?</p>

<p>A. No; I would say this, though: that if opium houses were
licensed as drinking saloons are one need not have to come into
such holes as this to smoke. There would be nice rooms with nice
couches, and the degradation would be mitigated. At all events I
think the government that will not license an opium saloon should
shut up public houses and hotels where they sell vitriol for
wbiskey and brandy, and where men idle themselves with a
certainty and a rapidity beyond the power of opium.'</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>This first law, however, like so many subsequent antinarcotics
laws, failed to worlc despite the promptness and thoroughness of
the punishment. When opium dens became illegal, &quot;The vice
was indulged in much less openly, but none the less extensively,
for although the larger smoking-houses were closed, the small
dens in Cbinatown were well patronized, and the vice grew surely
and steadily.&quot;. Indeed, the new law &quot;seemed to add zest
to their enjoyment.&quot; 7 A similar ordinance was passed in
Virginia City, Nevada, the following year.8 This also failed to
accomplish its purpose; hence the State of Nevada passed a more
stringent act a year or two later.6 Other states and cities voted
similar statutes soon after.</p>

<p>==================================================================
</p>

<p>When these laws failed as well, Congress took a hand. Before
opium can be smoked, it must be specially prepared; and weak
opium containing less than the usual amount of morphine is used
in its preparation. In 1883, Congress raised the tariff on opium
prepared for smoking from $6 to $10 a pound; '° and in 1887 it
prohibited altogether the importation of the kind of weak
opium-that containing less than 9 percent morphine- used for
preparing smoking opium. The 1887 law also prohibited the
importation of opium by Chinese, and a law three years later
limited the manufacture of smoking opium to American citizens.11</p>

<p>The results of these steps were set forth in a letter dated
January 12, 1888, from the Secretary of the Treasury of the
United States to the Speaker of the House of Representatives. The
effect, he wrote, had been &quot;to stimulate smuggling,
extensively practiced by systematic organizations [presumably the
Chinese &quot;tongs&quot; or mutual benefit societies on the
Pacific coast. Recently completed facilities for transcontinental
transportation have enabled the opium smugglers to extend their
illicit traffic to our Northern border. Although all possible
efforts have been made by this Department to suppress the
traffic, it is found practically impossible to do so.&quot; 12</p>

<p>The law was not changed, however; indeed, the tariff on
smoking opium was further increased, from $10 to $12 per pound in
1890. Then, in 1897, it was reduced to $6 a pound
&quot;experience having at last taught that it could not bear a
higher rate without begetting an extensive surreptitious
manufacture or serious smuggling operations.&quot; Following the
reduction in the tariff, &quot;the amount that passed through the
customs houses . . . progressively increased.&quot; 13</p>

<p>Throughout this period, states and cities continued to pass
laws against opium smoking;* by 1914 there were twenty-seven such
laws in effect.. Yet the amount of smoking opium legally imported
continued to rise steadily, as shown in Table 2. 14 </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>*Several of these laws also made it a crime to possess a pipe
for the smoking of opium precedent for later laws prohibiting the
possession of hypodermic needles and syringes without a
prescription. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>There was a lesson implicit in these import figures. During
more than thirty years of city, state, and federal efforts to
suppress opium smoking, the amount smoked per year increased
sevenfold-without taking account of smuggled supplies.</p>

<p>In 1909, the importation of smoking opium was prohibited
altogether.l5 This law was successful in the sense that smoking
opium imported through the customhouses fell to zero, but it did
not solve the opium-smoking problem. Congress in January 1914
found it necessary to amend the 1909 law 16 and to pass an
additional statute imposing a prohibitive tax ($300 per pound) on
opium prepared for smoking within the United States.7 In December
1914 Congress passed the Harrison Narcotic Act, with far broader
provisional~ </p>

<p>(see Chapter 8). Yet as late as 1930, according to Federal
Narcotics Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger and United States
Attorney William F. Tompkins, &quot;opium dens could be found in
almost any American city.&quot; 19<br>
<br>
</p>

<p>Pounds of Number of </p>

<p>Smokers </p>

<p>Decade Smoking Opium Imported Who Could Be Supplied a </p>

<p>1860-69 21,176 8,470 </p>

<p>1870~79 48,049 19,2l9 </p>

<p>1880~89 85,988 34.395 </p>

<p>1890~99 92,462 36,985 </p>

<p>1900~09 148,168 59,287<br>
</p>

<p>At 21/2 pounds per year.<br>
</p>

<p>Table 2. Rise in Legal importation of Opium, 1860- 1909.</p>

<p>l </p>

<p>One reason for the failure of these anti-opium-smoking laws,
and of subsequent anti narcotics laws, appears obvious. They were
aimed at private transactions between willing sellers and
willing, usually eager, buyers Thus there were no complainants.
Other such laws include the Volstead Act, since repealed, which
prohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages; the laws against
fornication, homosexual acts, and other sexual acts between
consenting individuals in private; the laws against gambling; and
the drug laws generally. The phrase &quot;crimes without
victims&quot; has been applied to such acts; they can more
accurately be called &quot;crimes without complainants.&quot; It
is hard to cite a law aimed at crimes of this class which has had
much effect in curbing the behavior aimed at..* </p>

<hr>

<p>* -all laws which can be violated without doing any one an
injury are laughed at. Nay, so far are they from doing anything
to control the desires and passions o£ men that, on the
contrary, they direct and incite men's thoughts the rnore toward
those wry objects; for we always strive toward what is forbidden
and desire the things we are not allowed to have. And men of
leisure are never deficient in the ingenuity needed to enable
them to outwit laws framed to regulate things which cannot be
entirely forbidden.... He who tries to detennine everything by
law will foment clime rather than lessen it.&quot;-Baruch Spinoza
(1632-1677).20</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The mere fact that a law fails to achieve its goal fully is of
course not a sufficient reason for repealing it; witness the laws
against murder. The basic argument against laws creating crimes
without complainants must rest on evidence that they not only
fail but also, in the process of failing, do more harm than good.
Such evidence exists with respect to the laws against opium
smoking. For one effect of these laws was to convert opium
smokers to more hazardous forms of opiate use.</p>

<p>&quot;Opium smoking is vastly less vicious than
morphine-taking,&quot; wrote an American authority on opiates,
Dr. Charles B. Towns, in 1912.21 </p>

<p>Dr. Marie Nyswander also commented on opium smoking, in 1956: </p>

<p>There is a pattern of self-limitation or restraint in opium
smoking as practiced in countries where it is socially
acceptable. It is common for natives of these countries to
indulge in opium smoking one night a week, much as Americans may
indulge in alcoholic beverages at a Saturday night party....
families who accept opium smoking as part of their culture are
mindful of its dangers much as we are mindful of the dangers of
overindulgence in alcohol.22</p>

<p>The reasons for the lesser harmfulness of opium smoking in
moderation are not hard to find. The opium used, as noted above,
is of a specially weak type containing less than 9 percent
morphine. Only about 10 percent of the morphine in this weak
opium enters the vapor, and only a portion of the morphine in the
vapor enters the human bloodstream when inhaled. Since the opium
is heated rather than burned, only smoke-free vapor is inhaled;
there are no &quot;tars&quot; or other carcinogens to cause
cancer. The so-called &quot;opium smoker&quot; is actually a
vapor inhaler. At a very rough estimate, a smoker would have to
smoke 300 or 400 grains of opium to get a dose equivalent to the
intravenous injection (&quot;mainlining-) of one grain of heroin.
Even heavy opium smokers actually smoke less than this daily..
And the opium-smoking dose is necessarily spread over a
considerable span of time rather than being absorbed into the
bloodstream almost instantaneously, as in mainlining. Surely the
nineteenth-century enemies of opium smoking did not and could not
foresee that the new laws were starting this country down the
dismal road from that relatively innocent &quot;vice&quot; to the
intravenous injection of heroin-the dominant form of illegal
opiate use today; yet that was in fact the sequel.</p>

<p>~ Dr. Charles B. Towns wrote (1912) &quot;The average
opium-smoker consuming twenty-five pills a day gets only the
equivalent of about a quarter grain [15 milligrams] of morphine
taken hypodermically or of a half grain taken by the mouth. A
beginner could not smoke a quarter of that quantity.... 22</p>

<p>Dr. Lawrence Kolb wrote (1925): &quot;Case 35, now
thirty-eight years of age, started smoking opium twenty years ago
[in 1905]. After the importation of smoking opium was prevented
by law, he used morphine, and when this could no longer be
secured, he changed to heroin.&quot; This was the common pattern.</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="4"><strong>Chapter 6 References<br>
</strong></font></p>

<p>1. H. H. Kane, Opium Smoking in America and China (New York,
1882), cited in Terry and Pellens, p. 73.</p>

<p>2. Jonathan Spence, ''opium Smoking in Ch'ing Chins,&quot;
presented at the Conference on Local Control and Social Protest
During the Ch'ing Period, Honolulu, 1971 (under the auspices of
the American Council of Learned Societies and the University of
California); unpublished.</p>

<p>3. British Columbia Study pp. 498-500. . </p>

<p>4.Kane, in Terry and Pellens, p. 73. </p>

<p>5.. ibid </p>

<p>6.Ibid. </p>

<p>7. Cited in AIfred R. Lindesmith, Opiate Addiction (Evanston,
Ill.: Principia Press. 1947), p. 186.</p>

<p>8. Kane, in Terry and Pellens, p. 808.</p>

<p>9.Ibid.</p>

<p>10. Terry and Pelllens, p. 747.</p>

<p>11. Ibid., p. 748.</p>

<p>12. Esec. Doc. No. 79, House of Representatives, 5Oth Cong.,
1st Sess., C. S. Fairchild to Mr. Carlisle, Jan. 12, 1888, cited
in Terry and Pellens, p. 747.</p>

<p>13. Terry and Pellens , pp. 747-748.</p>

<p>14. Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez, The Prevalence and Trng of
Drug Addiction in the United States, and Factors lnfuencing It,
Treasury Deparunent, U.S. Public Health Service, Reprint No. 924
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1924), p. 14.<br>
</p>

<p>15. Outlook, 91 (February 6, 1900): 275; Public law No. 221,
60th Cong., approved February 9, 19O9.</p>

<p>16. Public Law No. 46, 63rd Cong., approved January 17, 1914. </p>

<p>17. Public Law No. 47, 63rd Cong., approved Janualy 17, 1914. </p>

<p>18. Public Law No. 233, 63rd Cong., approved December 17,
1914. </p>

<p>19. Harry J. Anslinger and William F. Tompkins, The Traffic in
Narcotics (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), p. 54.</p>

<p>20. Baruch Spinoza, quoted by Joel Fort in Richard Blum and
A.ssociates, Utopiatt, (New Yo'rk: Atberton Press, 1968), p. 205.</p>

<p>21. Cbarles B. Tow=, &quot;The Peril of the Drug Habit,&quot;
Century Magazhe, 84 (1910 583.</p>

<p>22. Jerome H. Jaffe, in Goodman and Gilman, 3rd ed. (1965), p.
285.</p>

<p>23. Charles B. Towns, &quot;The Peril of tbe Drug Habit,&quot;
p. 583.</p>

<p>24. Lawrence Kolb, &quot;Pleasure and Deterioration from
Narcotic Addiction,&quot; Mental Hygiene, 9 (1925): 719-720.</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61536" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>