
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B17-89</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA060-000328-B009-433</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/RE/codes-AFTP2.html 205.168.79.27 19970115015949 text/html 75584
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 01:59:43 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:45:00 GMT
Content-length: 75409
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>DOE EREN - Mandatory Fleet Programs </TITLE>

</HEAD>
<BODY bgcolor="#FFFFFF" vlink="#843131" text="#000000" link="#323294">

<center>
<a href="/cgi-bin/imagemap.cgi/picts/eren.map"><img src="/picts/eren.gif" ISMAP border=0></a>
<H1>Mandatory Fleet Programs
</H1>
<IMG SRC="/picts/topbar.gif">
</center>
<BR>
<h2>Alternative Fuel Transportation Program,<br>
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Public Hearings<p></h2>
February 28, 1995<p>
<a name="top">
<hr>
<a href="codes-AFTP1.html#ref2">Back to --> II.  Section-By-Section Analysis</a>
<hr>
<b>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</b><p>
<a href="codes-AFTP1.html#ref1"><b>I.  	Introduction</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP1.html#ref2"><b>II.	Section-By-Section Analysis</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref3"><b>III. 	Opportunity for Public Comment</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref4"><b>IV.	Review Under Executive Order 12612</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref5"><b>V.	Review Under Executive Order 12778</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref6"><b>VI.	Review Under Executive Order 12866</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref7"><b>VII.	Review Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref8"><b>VIII.	Review Under the Paperwork Reduction Act</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref9"><b>IX.	Review Under the National Environmental Policy Act</b><p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#ref10"><b>X.	Impact on State Governments</b> <p></a>
<a href="codes-AFTP3.html#top"><b>XI.  Proposed Rule Language</b> <p></a>
<p>
<hr>
<a name="SubD">
 <b>Subpart D -- ALTERNATIVE FUEL PROVIDER VEHICLE ACQUISITION MANDATE </b><p>
<b></b><p>
<b>I.  Background</b><p>
	<p>
	The Alternative Fuel Provider Vehicle Acquisition Mandate is intended to cover
a broad range of alternative fuel providers in a flexible, workable program
that will allow for compliance in the most economical fashion possible.  The
program allows alternative fuel providers flexibility in the acquisition of new
alternative fuel vehicles via purchase, lease, or conversion, and in the
geographical placement of alternative fuel vehicles.  It also provides a
minimum of restrictions on how the alternative fueled vehicles are to be
used.<p>
	The program specifies the criteria for determining whether an alternative fuel
provider is covered and under what circumstances exemptions from the program
will be granted.  Only those alternative fuel providers who are classified as
"covered persons" are subject to the requirements of this proposed regulation
and only that affiliate, division, or other business unit which is
substantially engaged in the alternative fuels business may be subject to the
acquisition mandate requirements of the Act. <p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.300   Purpose and scope.<p>
	<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.300 defines the purpose and scope of part 490 Subpart
D as implementing the statutory requirements of section 501 of the Energy
Policy Act of 1992, which sets forth a mandate for those alternative fuel
providers, who are classified as covered persons, to acquire alternative fuel
vehicles at an escalating percentage of their new vehicle acquisitions.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.301   Definitions.<p>
<p>
       	Proposed [[section]]490.301 sets forth the definitions for part 490,
Subpart D.    	<p>
       <p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.301 defines the term "alternative fuels business" as
meaning an activity undertaken to derive revenue from: (1) producing, storing,
refining, processing, transporting, distributing, importing, or selling at
wholesale or retail any alternative fuel other than electricity; or (2)
generating, transmitting, importing, or selling at wholesale or retail
electricity.  This definition tracks the language of section 501(a)(2). <p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.301 provides definitions for the terms "affiliate,"
"division," and "business unit" which are used in section 501 of the Act and
proposed [[section]][[section]]490.303 and 490.304.  The first two are
dictionary definitions.  "Business unit" is defined to make clear the grouping
of business activities must be similar in autonomy to affiliates and
divisions.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.301 defines the term "normal requirements and
practices" as meaning the operating business practices and required conditions
under which the principal business of the covered person operates.  In a
request for an interpretive ruling or in a civil penalty proceeding, the burden
would be on the fuel provider to show that actions to acquire alternative fuel
vehicles and/or obtain alternative fuel are outside the normal practices of the
covered person's principal business.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.301 defines the term "principal business" as meaning
the largest sales-related gross revenue producing activity.  If an organization
derives a plurality of gross revenue from sales-related alternative fuels
activity then the organization's principal business is alternative fuels.  As
it is used above, plurality does not require that over 50 percent of an
organization's sales-related gross revenue be based on activities related to
alternative fuels.  Sales-related in this context means that the gross revenue
does not come from investments such as corporate stocks.<p>
	In determining whether an organization's principal business is alternative
fuels, the important criterion to look at is what is the organization's single
largest source of sales-related gross revenue.  For example, if an organization
derives 35 percent of its sales-related gross revenue from alternative fuels
and the next largest single source of sales-related gross revenue comprises 25
percent of the organization's gross revenue, the organization's principal
business is alternative fuels.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.301 defines the term "substantially engaged" to mean
that a covered person, or affiliate, division, or other business unit thereof,
regularly derives sales-related gross revenue from an alternative fuels
business.  To determine whether a covered person or affiliate, division, or
other business unit thereof is "substantially engaged" in the alternative fuels
business, it is important to look at the involvement the covered person,
affiliate, division, or other business unit has with the alternative fuels
business.  Thus, only that affiliate, division, or business unit that meets the
substantially engaged criteria, as defined above, is subject to the acquisition
requirements of this program.<p>
	The covered person is responsible for clearly defining the specific affiliate,
division, or other business unit that is substantially engaged and is therefore
subject to the acquisition requirements of this rule.  If this designation is
not made or is not made clearly, DOE will assume that the entire organization
is subject to the acquisition requirements of this rule and will enforce it as
such.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.301 defines the term "substantial portion" to mean
that at least 2 percent of a covered person's refinery yield of petroleum
products is composed of alternative fuels.  Alternative fuel is as defined in
proposed [[section]]490.2.  This proposed definition was formulated using
reliable data compiled by the Energy Information Administration and published
in its Petroleum Supply Annual 1993, Volume 1 (DOE/EIA-0340(93)/1).  Table 19
provides aggregate data on refinery yield for the Petroleum Administration for
Defense districts and can be readily verified.<p>
	The 2% threshold was chosen because it represents the average yield for the
production of alternative fuel by petroleum refiners as reported by the Energy
Information Administration.  DOE believes that the use of this percentage in
the definition of "substantial portion" allows for the initial identification
of that group of covered persons described in Sec. 501(a)(2)(c) of the Act and
provides a sound basis for identifying those affiliates, divisions, or other
business units of such covered persons which are substantially engaged in the
alternative fuel business.<p>
	The Department considered including some measure of the gross revenue
attributed to the production of alternative fuels as an alternative in the
definition of "substantial portion."  The first measure that was considered was
setting a minimum level of gross revenue from the sale of alternative fuels
that an organization would have to equal or exceed to be classified as an
alternative fuel provider.  The second measure that was considered was
establishing a minimum percentage, that reflects the percent of total gross
revenue attributed to the sale of alternative fuels, that an organization would
have to equal or exceed to be classified as an alternative fuel provider.
Unfortunately, the information available on these measures is too fragmented to
be the basis for proposed regulatory language.  DOE seeks comment on whether
reliable information exists that would allow establishment of a monetary
measure (or any measure apart from the measure in the proposed rule) for
determining whether alternative fuels production comprises a substantial
portion of a company's business.  DOE also seeks comment recommending any other
alternative definitions for "substantial portion."<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.302  Vehicle Acquisition Mandate Schedule<p>
<p>
	 Proposed [[section]]490.302 describes the vehicle acquisition schedule that
alternative fuel providers must comply with if they are classified as covered
persons.  Proposed paragraph (a) requires that of the new light duty motor
vehicles acquired by alternative fuel providers, the following percentages
shall be alternative fueled vehicles for the following model years:<p>
	(A)	 30 percent for model year 1996.<p>
	(B)	 50 percent for model year 1997.<p>
	(C)	 70 percent for model year 1998.<p>
	(D)	 90 percent for model year 1999 and thereafter.<p>
For example, if an alternative fuel provider purchases or leases 50 light duty
motor vehicles in model year 1996, 30 percent, or 15, of the vehicles have to
be alternative fueled vehicles.  <p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) states that, except as provided by [[section]]490.304,
these requirements apply to <b>all</b> new light duty vehicles acquired by a
"covered person," not just those vehicles acquired for the fleets which
initially qualified the alternative fuel provider as a "covered person." These
requirements also apply regardless of where the new vehicles are to be located.
For example, if an alternative fuel provider, which is a covered person, is
acquiring new light duty motor vehicles for a location that is not in a subject
MSA or CMSA, the required percentage of these vehicles must be alternative
fueled vehicles.  The MSA/CMSA requirement is used for classifying "covered
persons," not for determining how many light duty vehicles must be alternative
fueled vehicles.  The provisions of proposed [[section]]490.302(b) are not
discretionary because they follow the wording of section 501(a)(1) of the Act.
42 U.S.C. [[section]]13251(a)(1).<p>
	Proposed paragraph (c) provides for rounding off to the next higher number if
application of a percent to the base number of new light duty vehicles acquired
results in a requirement to acquire a fraction of a vehicle.  This procedure is
consistent with the statutory objective of promoting the acquisition of
alternative fuel vehicles.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (d) states that only acquisitions satisfying the mandate,
as described in proposed [[section]]490.305, and/or Alternative Fueled Vehicle
credits will be counted toward compliance with the acquisition schedule in
proposed paragraph (a).<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.303  Who must comply.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.303 gives an answer to the question: who is a covered
person that must comply?  This proposed section tracks section 501(a)(2) of the
Act.  There are two components to this determination. The first component
involves determining whether the organization fits the profile of an
alternative fuel provider as provided by section 501(a)(2) of the Act. The
second component eliminates from coverage those alternative fuel providers
whose principal business uses alternative fuel to create a product that is not
an alternative fuel.<p>
	Types of companies likely to be covered persons subject to the alternative
fuel providers mandate include, but are not limited to, private and public
electric and natural gas utilities; natural gas distribution companies;
pipeline companies; petroleum companies; propane producers, distributors, and
suppliers; methanol providers; ethanol providers; and fuel transport
companies.<b></b><p>
<b></b>	Municipal utilities possessing the required fleet size, fueling
characteristics, and located within the specified geographical areas are
classified as alternative fuel providers under section 501(a)(2)(B).
Therefore, they are expected to comply with the requirements of the mandate
under [[section]]490.302 and will not be subject to any future municipal fleet
mandate imposed by rule under section 507 of the Act.<p>
	If an organization produces, imports, or produces and imports in combination,
an average of 50,000 barrels per day or more of petroleum, and regularly
derives gross revenue from the production of alternative fuels, that
organization has a "substantial portion" of its business in alternative fuels.
To determine whether an organization has a substantial portion of its business
in alternative fuels it is important to look at the organization's involvement
in the alternative fuels business, not just the amount of gross revenue from
alternative fuels production or the level of investment in alternative fuels
production.  DOE's determination of whether an organization has a substantial
portion of its business in alternative fuels will be made on a case-by-case
basis.  Comment is invited as to what criteria might be used in making this
determination.<p>
	Paragraph (b) of proposed [[section]]490.303 deals with covered persons who
are excluded from having to comply with this subpart.  This section tracks the
language of section 501(a)(3)(B) of the Act.  Two types of covered persons may
be excluded from the requirements of this regulation: (1) those who transform
alternative fuels into a product that is not an alternative fuel; and (2) those
who consume alternative fuels as a feedstock or fuel in the manufacture of a
product that is not an alternative fuel. <p>
	An example of an excluded person described in paragraph (b)(1) would be a
manufacturer of windshield washer fluid.  The manufacturer would be classified
as an excluded person because it blends an alternative fuel, methanol, in
producing windshield washer fluid, which is not an alternative fuel.<p>
	An example of an excluded person described in paragraph (b)(2) would be a
company that burns natural gas to provide a heat source for a manufacturing
operation.<p>
	An example of an excluded person under paragraphs (b)(1) and (b) (2) would be
an entity whose principal business is the production of alcoholic beverages.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.304   Which new light duty motor vehicles are
covered.<p>
<p>
	Under section 501(a)(3)(A) of the Act, if the covered person has more than one
affiliate, division, or other business unit, only the vehicles of an affiliate,
division, or business unit that is "substantially engaged in the alternative
fuels business" are subject to the vehicle acquisition mandate.  Proposed
[[section]]490.304 reflects the provisions of section 501(a)(3)(A), and should
be read in conjunction with the proposed definitions of "affiliate,"
"division," and "business unit" in [[section]]490.301.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.305  Acquisitions satisfying the mandate.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.305 deals with the three types of acquired vehicles
that will count toward compliance with proposed [[section]]490.302, in addition
to alternative fueled vehicle credits under Subpart F.  These categories
provide flexibility for organizations in acquiring vehicles to meet this
regulation.  An alternative fueled light duty motor vehicle shall be considered
newly acquired, regardless of model year, if:<p>
  (a)	The vehicle is an Original Equipment Manufacturer vehicle capable of
operating on alternative fuels and was not previously under the control of the
covered person; or<p>
  (b)	The vehicle is an after-market converted vehicle and was not previously
under the control of the covered person; or<p>
  (c)	The vehicle is an Original Equipment Manufacturer vehicle that has been
converted to operate on alternative fuels prior to the vehicle's first use in
service.<p>
A vehicle that meets the description of paragraph (a) is one that is
manufactured by an Original Equipment Manufacturer to be capable of operating
on alternative fuels.  For example, if a covered person acquires a 1993
flex-fuel light duty motor vehicle during model year 1996, this vehicle is
classified as being a new acquisition for that organization. <p>
	A vehicle that meets the description of paragraph (b) is one that has been
converted by a licensed converter to be capable of operating on alternative
fuels.  A vehicle that meets the description of paragraph (c) is a vehicle that
upon acquisition by the organization is taken to a licensed converter for
conversion to an alternative fueled vehicle and is never intended to be
operated solely on petroleum-based fuel.  It is important to note that section
507(j) of the Act states that no fleet owner shall be required to acquire
converted vehicles in order to meet compliance with this or any fleet
acquisition requirement.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.306  Vehicle operation requirements.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.306 largely tracks the provisions of section
501(a)(4), which requires that all alternative fueled vehicles acquired
pursuant to section 501 be operated solely on alternative fuels, except when
these vehicles are operating in an area where alternative fuel is not
available.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.307   Option for electric utilities.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.307 deals with the statutory option for electric
utilities.  Proposed paragraph (a) tracks the provisions of section 501(c) of
the Act, which provides that a covered person whose principal business is
generating, transmitting, importing, or selling, at wholesale or retail,
electricity has the option of delaying the alternative fuel vehicle acquisition
schedule in section 501(a) of the Act until January 1, 1998, if that covered
person intends to comply with this regulation by acquiring electric motor
vehicles.  DOE considered delaying the date that electric utilities would have
to start acquiring vehicles until the beginning of model year 1999 which starts
on September 1, 1998.  But given that the California Air Resources Board
requires that 2 percent of all vehicles sold in California by major auto
producers be Zero Emission Vehicles, (emission level currently only achievable
by electric vehicles) starting September 1, 1997, DOE decided not to propose a
delay in the effective date of the 30 percent alternative fueled vehicle
acquisition requirement.  Also, the States of New York and Massachusetts have
enacted laws which adopt California standards and timetables.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) provides the date (January 1, 1996) by which
notification must be received by DOE for an electric utility to be eligible for
this delayed schedule.  That date is dictated by section 501(c) of the Act.
This notification should be in letter format and must explain the utility's
commitment to electric vehicles.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (c) describes the acquisition schedule that an electric
utility must comply with if the electric utility notifies the Secretary by the
required date.<p>
 <p>
Proposed [[section]]490.308   Process for granting exemptions.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.308 deals with the requirements of section 501(a)(5)
of the Act which provides for a simple and reasonable exemption process for
those covered persons seeking exemptions either because alternative fuel is not
available or alternative fueled vehicles are not reasonably available.
Proposed paragraph (a) describes the procedure that a covered person needs to
complete to receive an exemption.  The first category of exemption is if any
covered person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that
alternative fuels that meet the normal requirements and practices of the
principal business of that person are not available in the area where the
vehicles are to be operated.  The second category of exemption is if any
covered person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that
alternative fueled vehicles that meet the normal requirements and practices of
the principal business of that person are not reasonably available for
acquisition because they are not offered for acquisition commercially on
reasonable terms and conditions in the United States.  These exemptions would
be granted for one model year only.  To receive exemptions for additional model
years, alternative fuel providers must re-apply to the Secretary each year.
Criteria for granting exemptions will be based on documentation that
specifically relates to the availability of alternative fuels and alternative
fueled vehicles.<p>
	To determine whether alternative fuel is "not available," an alternative fuel
provider must map out the operating area and base of operations for its fleet
of vehicles.  Next it must locate on the map the alternative fueling facilities
within its MSA or CMSA.  Then, for each vehicle, it must determine whether any
location providing alternative fuel is in the area in which the vehicle is
operated.  If there is any location providing alternative fuel within the
vehicle's operating area, alternative fuel is available.  If there are no
locations providing alternative fuel, for <u>any</u> alternative fuel that
meets the normal requirements and practices of the covered person's principal
business, within the vehicle's operating area, then alternative fuel is "not
available."<p>
	The Act requires that the exemption process be reasonable and simple.  DOE
invites comment on the proposed process for exemptions, in whole or in part.<p>
	It is anticipated that alternative fuel will be available and accessible for
almost all alternative fuel providers, and that it will be difficult for fuel
providers to prove that alternative fuel is not available.  Since alternative
fuel providers stand to benefit greatly from the expanded use of alternative
fuels and the proliferation of alternative fueled vehicles, it is also
anticipated that they will help accelerate the establishment of the alternative
fuels infrastructure and be less likely to seek exemptions based on alternative
fuels being "not available."<p>
	To receive an exemption based on the criteria in subparagraph (a)(2) a covered
person must show that there are no alternative fueled vehicles available for
commercial acquisition on reasonable terms and conditions in any State.  The
covered person also must show good faith effort in attempting to obtain these
vehicles.  DOE requests comment on the extent to which vehicle cost, either
initial cost or life-cycle cost, should be considered in determining whether
vehicles are available on "reasonable terms."<p>
	If a covered person normally and historically acquires vehicles from one
automobile dealer or from one automobile manufacturer, but is unable to acquire
alternative fueled vehicles of the model type needed from these same sources,
this is not sufficient to qualify for an exemption under subparagraph (a)(2) if
appropriate alternative fueled vehicles are available from other dealers or
manufacturers.  Having to use another dealer or manufacturer is not classified
as outside the normal requirements and practices of the covered person, because
the same procedures that are currently being employed by the covered person to
obtain these vehicles can be used to obtain them from different sources.<p>
	Having to wait slightly longer for delivery of alternative fueled vehicles
than for conventionally fueled vehicles is not a sufficient reason for granting
an exemption.  If, however, the time delay will result in a covered person
violating the regulation, DOE will consider the covered person to be in
compliance with this regulation if the delivery delay was through no fault of
its own.  Thus, if alternative fueled vehicles are ordered during the model
year with expectations that they will be delivered by the end of the model
year, but are not delivered until the next model year, the covered person will
be deemed to be in compliance if it can provide DOE with proof of order date
and anticipated delivery schedule.  On the other hand, if a covered person
orders alternative fueled vehicles and knows, at the time of the order, that it
will not be receiving these alternative fueled vehicles by the end of the model
year, it will be deemed to be in noncompliance and no exemption will be
granted.<p>
	Additionally, in determining whether alternative fueled vehicles are
reasonably available, a covered person must examine whether alternative fueled
vehicles of the appropriate type are available in any alternative fuel
configuration.  Thus, the availability of the type of vehicle a covered person
needs that operates on the fuel that the covered person provides is not the
appropriate test for determining whether alternative fueled vehicles are "not
reasonably available."  The test for determining whether alternative fueled
vehicles are "not reasonably available" is whether there are alternative fueled
vehicles available that operate on <u>any</u> alternative fuel and meet the
normal requirements and practices of the business, including the vehicle
performance requirements of the business.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) sets forth the types of documentation in support of
exemption requests that should be provided to DOE.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (e) states that exemption determinations are letter rulings
binding for the covered person only and cannot be used to establish a precedent
for other exemption requests.  DOE will review each exemption request on a
case-by-case basis.<p>
	In proposed paragraphs (f) and (g) DOE is proposing an administrative remedy
for those aggrieved by the initial decision of the DOE Deciding Official, who
will be the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.  In
order to exhaust administrative remedies, it will be necessary to appeal to
DOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals.  This procedure has two virtues.  It
would be less expensive than pursuing a judicial remedy immediately.  It would
also ensure that DOE has made a record which is appropriate for judicial review
in the event a petition for review is filed in a Federal court.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.309   Annual reporting requirements.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.309 sets forth annual reporting requirements.  An
annual report to verify regulation compliance is required of all alternative
fuel providers.  Proposed paragraph (a) sets forth where and by when annual
reports should be sent.  <p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) describes the required information that would be
included in this annual report.  Most of the requirements are self-explanatory;
however, several of them deserve discussion for clarification purposes.<p>
	Proposed subparagraph (b)(2) would require covered persons to calculate the
number of new light duty alternative fueled vehicles that they are required to
acquire.  To determine this number, a covered person would multiply the number
entered for proposed subparagraph (b)(1), by the acquisition percentage from
[[section]]490.302 or [[section]]490.307 that applies for that model year.  For
example, in model year 1996, if the number of new light duty motor vehicles
acquired is 50, the number of new light duty vehicles that are required to be
acquired is 30 percent of 50, or 15 (50 x .3 = 15).  The number of new light
duty alternative fueled vehicles acquired, added to the number of alternative
fueled vehicle credits applied, from proposed subparagraph (b)(5), should be
greater than or equal to the number calculated for proposed subparagraph
(b)(2).<p>
	Proposed paragraph (c) sets forth the procedure that a covered person must
follow if it is applying alternative fueled vehicle credits against its
acquisition requirements.<p>
	Consistent with the requirements of 5 CFR Part 1320.6(f), proposed paragraph
(d) would require that records related to this reporting requirement be
maintained and retained for a period of three years.<p>
	DOE seeks comment on the reporting requirements, especially relating to the
information that is requested to be included in the report.<p>
<p>
<a href="#SubD">Return to Subpart D beginning</a>
<hr>
<a name="SubF">
<b>Subpart F -- ALTERNATIVE FUELED VEHICLE CREDIT PROGRAM</b><p>
<b></b><p>
<b>Background</b><p>
	Section 508 of the Act requires DOE to establish an alternative fueled vehicle
credit program that will allocate alternative fueled vehicle credits to a fleet
or covered person that is required to acquire alternative fueled vehicles under
Title V of the Act if that fleet or covered person acquires alternative fueled
vehicles in excess of the number that fleet or covered person is required to
acquire or acquires alternative fueled vehicles prior to the date that fleet or
covered person is required to acquire alternative fueled vehicles.  An
alternative fueled vehicle credit may be used to comply with alternative fuel
provider or fleet program requirements in a later year, or may be traded or
sold for use to another fleet or covered person who is required to acquired
alternative fueled vehicles by Part 490.<p>
	The purpose of establishing a credit program is to provide purchasing
flexibility for the regulated fleet operators without sacrificing the program's
energy security goals.  The general concept is that some fleet operators may,
at times, find it attractive to buy more alternative fueled vehicles than
required, if in doing so they can get credit against future acquisition
requirements, or can sell or transfer the credits to another party.  If the
credits program is properly implemented and managed, there will be no decrease
in energy security compared to a program based strictly on compliance through
acquisitions.<p>
	Both section 246(f) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7586(f)) and section 508
of the Act (42 U.S.C. 13258) allow for awarding credits to entities that
initiate clean fuel vehicle or alternative fueled vehicle programs sooner or in
greater numbers than required.  But the laws differ in their goals: the goal of
the Clean Air Act Amendments is to improve air quality while the goal of the
Act is energy security.  Thus, the credit programs and implementing regulations
emanating from these acts also have different goals and objectives.  <p>
	The EPA has a program called the Clean Fuel Fleet Credit Program (40 CFR
[[section]] 88.304-94) that may be confused with the Department's Alternative
Fueled Vehicle Credit program.  In the Clean Fuel Fleet Credit program, a fleet
owner obtains credits by implementing clean fuel vehicles earlier, in greater
numbers, or which meet more stringent emission standards than those established
by EPA.  Clean Fuel Fleet credits can also be obtained for Clean Fuel Vehicle
purchases in vehicle categories that are excluded from the Energy Policy Act
definition of "fleet".  These credits are awarded based on a formula that
compares the clean fuel vehicle emissions with conventional vehicle emissions.
By contrast, under section 508 of the Energy Policy Act, one credit is
allocated for each alternative fueled vehicle acquired in excess of the
required number.  Also, the Energy Policy allocates one credit for each year
the alternative fueled vehicle is acquired before the required date.<p>
	Another area of difference between the two statutes is where they allow
credits to be traded.  Under the Clean Air Act, credit trading is only
allowable within the same non-attainment area.  For example, fleet operators in
the Baltimore non-attainment area can only buy, sell, or trade credits with
other fleet operators in the Baltimore area.  Congress appears to have
concluded that it was not logical for non-attainment areas to trade credits
with other areas, because the air quality in the area where credits were
purchased and used would not be improved as a result of this transaction.  On
the other hand, the Energy Policy Act credits can be traded freely among those
organizations that are required to acquire alternative fueled vehicles, which
are located within the United States.  However, there is an exception to this
trading provision, based upon the last sentence of section 508(d) of the Act,
which provides that vehicles representing credits generated or transferred to
alternative fuel providers operate solely on alternative fuel.  (42 U.S.C.
13258).  This requirement is discussed under [[section]]490.506 of this
Supplementary Information.  Because one of the major goals of the Act is the
reduction of our Nation's foreign oil dependency, it makes little difference
where in the United States this reduction takes place.<b></b><p>
<b></b><p>
Proposed [[section]]490.500   Purpose and scope.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.500 defines the purpose and scope of part 490 subpart
F as implementing the statutory requirements of Section 508 of the Act, which
instructs the Secretary to allocate credits to fleets or covered persons that
acquire alternative fueled vehicles in excess of the number required, or obtain
alternative fueled vehicles prior to the date when they are required to acquire
alternative fueled vehicles.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.501   Applicability.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.501 deals with the applicability of the credit program
to fleets and covered persons.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.502   Creditable Actions.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.502 describes the actions associated with allocation
of alternative fueled vehicle credits by DOE.  Proposed paragraphs (a) and (b)
are consistent with the language of section 508(a) of the Act, which authorizes
the Secretary to allocate credits to fleets or covered persons that acquire
alternative fueled vehicles in excess of the number they are required to
acquire, or acquire alternative fueled vehicles in advance of the date they are
required to.  Once a fleet or covered person is required to acquire alternative
fueled vehicles the only way credits can be generated is by exceeding their
required acquisition number.  For example, an alternative fueled vehicle
acquired in excess of the number required in model year 1996 cannot be claimed
to be an early alternative fueled vehicle acquisition for model year 1999.  The
excess alternative fueled vehicle will generate 1 alternative fueled vehicle
credit only, <b>not</b> 3 credits because it was acquired 3 years in advance.
<p>
	Additionally, DOE is proposing that one credit be allocated for the
acquisition of a light duty alternative fueled vehicle in a category listed in
proposed [[section]]490.3, such as motor vehicles held for lease or rental to
the general public, law enforcement vehicles, etc.  Section 508(b) provides the
statutory basis for this proposal because it refers to the allocation of
credits for the acquisition of alternative fueled vehicles in excess of the
number required.  Therefore, the acquisition of light duty alternative fueled
vehicles in the excluded categories constitutes the acquisition of alternative
fueled vehicles in excess of the number required qualifies for the allocation
of credits.  Because these excluded vehicles are not required to be acquired
they are not eligible to earn credits for early acquisition which results in
multiple credits.  Thus, DOE is proposing that the acquisition of these
vehicles in excess of the required number will generate only one credit per
vehicle.<p>
	It is reasonable to expect that any requirements placed on alternative fueled
vehicles which are acquired to comply with alternative fuel provider or fleet
program requirements would also apply to vehicles that generate credits.  For
example, the Act requires that alternative fuel providers operate their
alternative fueled vehicles solely on alternative fuels except when operating
in an area where the appropriate alternative fuel is unavailable.  A net loss
to energy security goals would occur if a credit-generating vehicle, such as an
alternative fueled vehicle bought a year earlier than required by an
alternative fuel provider, did not also operate solely on alternative fuel.
This requirement applies only to those alternative fueled vehicles that
generate credits to be used by covered persons who are alternative fuel
providers.  The Department is unaware of any possible requirements which would
apply to vehicles purchased to demonstrate compliance and not to vehicles
purchased for credits.  Therefore, DOE is proposing that any such requirements
apply equally to both types of vehicles.<p>
	The Department considered whether to allow the acquisition of medium duty and
heavy duty alternative fueled vehicles (those alternative fueled vehicles with
gross vehicle weight ratings of greater than 8,500 lbs.), by covered persons
and fleets, to generate credits.  Many medium duty and heavy duty vehicles are
predominantly urban use vehicles, such as transit buses and delivery trucks,
and could take advantage of the anticipated fueling infrastructure within these
urban areas.  These vehicles possess larger capacity engines, which consume
significantly more fuel than light duty vehicles and result in increased
displacement of petroleum-based fuel.  However, paragraph (b) of section 508
provides that credits can only be allocated for the acquisition of the same
type of vehicles that are required under the fleet mandates of Title V of the
Act.  The only type of vehicles that are required to be acquired in Title V are
light duty vehicles.  Thus, credits cannot be awarded for the acquisition of
medium duty and heavy duty vehicles because the Act does not require any fleet
or covered person to acquire them.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.503   Credit allocation.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.503 deals with alternative fueled vehicle credit
allocation.  Proposed paragraphs (a) and (b) are consistent with the language
of section 508(a) of the Act, which describes how credits are to be allocated.
Before alternative fueled vehicle credits are allocated they must be applied
for using the procedure described in proposed [[section]]490.507.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (a) provides for the allocation of one credit for each
alternative fueled vehicle a fleet or covered person acquires that exceeds the
number of alternative fueled vehicles that fleet or person is required to
acquire.  If a fleet or covered person is required to acquire 10 alternative
fueled vehicles in a model year and they acquire 15 alternative fueled
vehicles, they can apply for allocation of five alternative fueled vehicle
credits.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) provides for the allocation of one credit per
alternative fueled vehicle for each year the alternative fueled vehicle is
acquired in advance of the date the fleet or covered person is required to
acquire alternative fueled vehicles.  These credits cannot be allocated until
the date that a fleet is required to acquire alternative fueled vehicles.
Thus, only covered persons and State fleets are presently eligible for credit
allocation.  Until such time as private and municipal fleets are required to
acquire alternative fueled vehicles, they cannot be allotted credits for early
acquisition.  At that time, all alternative fueled vehicles acquired between
October 24, 1992, and the start date of the private and municipal fleet mandate
would eligible for credit allocation.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (c) provides for the allocation of credits to alternative
fuel providers and State governments for alternative fueled vehicles acquired
from October 24, 1992, the date the Energy Policy Act was enacted.<p>
	Credit allocation is best explained by the following examples.  In the first
example a covered person acquires 10 alternative fueled vehicles in model year
1994 and 15 alternative fueled vehicles in model year 1995.  Because the
covered person is not required to acquire alternative fueled vehicles until
model year 1996, each alternative fueled vehicle acquired in model year 1994
will generate 2 credits and each alternative fueled vehicle acquired in model
year 1995 will generate 1 credit.  Thus, the covered person generates 35
credits [(10 x 2) + (15 x 1) = 35], which can be used against future
alternative fueled vehicle acquisition requirements or can be traded.   <p>
	In the second example a state fleet acquires 50 alternative fueled vehicles in
model year 1995 and 15 alternative fueled vehicles in excess of their required
acquisition number in model year 1996.  The state generates 50 credits for
acquiring alternative fueled vehicles early and 15 credits for acquiring
alternative fueled vehicles in excess of their required number.  If the state
doesn't trade away or use any credits, it will have 65 credits that it can use
against future acquisitions or can trade.<p>
	A database will be established that will keep a record of credit allocations,
trades and credit balances.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.504   Use of alternative fueled vehicle credits.<p>
	<p>
	Consistent with the language of section 508(c) of the Act, proposed
[[section]]490.504 states that a credit shall be treated as the acquisition of
a light duty alternative fueled vehicle.   Each alternative fueled vehicle
credit will represent one light duty alternative fueled vehicle and can be
applied against the required alternative fueled vehicle acquisition number for
one model year only, designated by a fleet or covered person, in lieu of the
acquisition of a light duty alternative fueled vehicle during that model
year.<p>
	<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.505   Credit accounts.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.505 deals with Alternative Fueled Vehicle Credit
accounts.  Proposed paragraph (a) states that DOE will establish a credit
account for each fleet or covered person who obtains an alternative fueled
vehicle credit.<p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) states that each fleet or covered person will receive
an annual credit account balance statement after the receipt and recording of
its annual activity report.  This statement will reflect the credit account
activity that occurred in the previous model year and can be used as proof of
the credit balance for an account.<p>
	DOE is considering whether to provide updated credit account balance
statements to fleets and covered persons upon request during the year and is
also considering whether to charge a nominal fee for this service.  These
updated credit account balance statements would provide written proof of a
fleet or covered person's credit account balance as of the date they are
printed.  These updated credit account balance statements may be required of a
credit seller by a credit purchaser before proceeding with the credit transfer.
Thus, the credit seller can use this updated credit account balance statement
to gain independent private benefit.  <p>
	The charging of a fee for this service is authorized under 31 U.S.C. 9701,
which provides that each Federal government agency may establish a charge for a
service of a thing of value provided by the agency if this service results in
independent private benefit.  This charge must be fair and based on the costs
to the Government, the value of the service or thing to the recipient, public
policy or interest served, and other relevant facts.  DOE asks for comments
related to the desirability of providing updated credit account balance
statements and what value a fleet or covered person would place on this
service.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.506   Alternative Fuel Vehicle credit transfers.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.506 deals with the transfer of alternative fueled
vehicle credits.  Proposed paragraph (a)(1) states that any fleet may transfer
an alternative fueled vehicle credit to any other fleet, which is required to
acquire alternative fueled vehicles.  In contrast, proposed paragraph (a)(2)
states that any fleet may transfer an alternative fueled vehicle credit to an
alternative fuel provider, who is a covered person, if the fleet provides
certification to the covered person that the credit represents a vehicle that
operates solely on alternative fuel.  This restriction on the transfer of
credits from a fleet to an alternative fuel provider, who is a covered person,
is necessary because of the vehicle operational requirement placed on
alternative fuel provider vehicles.  42 U.S.C. 13251(a)(4).  Section 508(d) of
the Energy Policy Act permits alternative fuel providers to use credits only if
these operational requirements are met. 42 U.S.C. 13258(d).<p>
	Proposed paragraph (c) states that proof of credit transfer should be provided
to DOE within seven days of the transfer date, and provides for the use of a
DOE form, or other written documentation containing the dated signatures of the
transferor and transferee.  This provision allows for the maintenance and
verification of credit transfer activity.<p>
<p>
Proposed Section 490.507   Credit activity reporting requirements.<p>
<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.507 describes the credit program's activity reporting
requirements.  An annual report is required of all fleets or covered persons
who have generated or traded alternative fueled vehicle credits to record and
track their credit activity.  Proposed paragraph (a) sets forth where and by
when annual reports should be sent.  <p>
	Proposed paragraph (b) describes the required information that would be
included in this annual report.  Most of the requirements are self-explanatory,
however, subparagraph (b)(4) deserves discussion for clarification purposes.<p>
	Proposed subparagraph (b)(4) would only allow a fleet or covered person to
report either the number of alternative fueled vehicles acquired in excess of
acquisition requirements or the number of alternative fueled vehicles acquired
in advance of the start date of the acquisition requirements, not both of them.
Once the first model year in which acquisition requirements apply has begun,
credits can no longer be earned for early acquisition of alternative fueled
vehicles.<p>
<p>
<a href="codes-AFTP2.html#SubF">Return to Subpart F beginning</a>
<hr>
<a name="SubG">
<b>Subpart G -- Investigations and Enforcement</b><p>
<b></b>Proposed [[section]]490.601  Powers of the Secretary.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.601 sets forth the powers of the Secretary provided
specifically by section 513 of the Act.  Some of these powers (e.g., subpoenas
for witnesses or documents) can be used either in a investigative effort begun
with orders to show cause or in connection with a civil penalty proceeding.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.602  Special orders.<p>
	Proposed [[section]]490.602 tracks the provisions of section 505(b)(1) of the
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 15 U.S.C.
[[section]]2005(b)(1).  Those provisions are applicable under part 490 because
section 505(b)(1) is cross referenced in section 513 of the Act.  Orders under
this section could be used to deal with a wide variety of circumstances.  One
example would be the failure to submit a required report.  Another would be an
order to show cause why civil penalty proceedings should not be initiated for
failure to comply with subparts C, D, or F.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.603  Prohibited acts.<p>
	This proposed regulation tracks the language of section 511 of the Act. 42
U.S.C. [[section]]13261.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.604  Penalties and fines.<p>
	This proposed regulation follows section 512 of the Act.  42 U.S.C.
[[section]]13262.  The text reflects DOE conclusions with regard to which of
the subsections of section 512 provide for civil penalties and which provide
for criminal fines. 	<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.605  Statement of enforcement policy.<p>
	In rare instances, DOE may initiate enforcement with the object of ensuring
compliance and deterring future violations.  This proposed section indicates
that DOE will not proceed with enforcement if there is a satisfactory
compliance agreement.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.606  Proposed assessments and orders.<p>
	This proposed section provides for issuance of proposed assessments of civil
penalty and an order to pay which become a final order for the Department if
the recipient fails to appeal on a timely basis to the Office of Hearings and
Appeals.<p>
<p>
Proposed [[section]]490.607  Appeals.<p>
	This proposed section provides for administrative due process if the recipient
of a proposed assessment and order to pay wishes to contest the basis
therefore.  The appeal must be filed in the Office of Hearings and Appeals on
or before 30 days from the date of the issuance of a proposed assessment and
order.  	Most of the applicable procedures for the Office of Hearings and
Appeals are in subpart H of 10 CFR part 205.  In addition, paragraph (b) of
proposed [[section]]490.607 provides that the appellant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion which is appropriate because the appellant will in most cases
have unequal access to the relevant evidence (its own records).  Paragraph (b)
also provides that a trial-type hearing on contested issues of fact may occur
only if the hearing officer concludes that cross examination will materially
assist in determining the facts in addition to the evidence available in
documentary form.  There should not be extended hearings in order to fill the
record with evidence which is largely repetitious.  <p>
<p>
<hr>
<a name="ref3">
<b>III. Opportunity for Public Comment</b><p>
<b></b>  A. Participation in Rulemaking<p>
	Interested persons are invited to participate in this proposed rulemaking by
submitting written data, views, or comments with respect to the subject set
forth in this notice.  The Department encourages the maximum level of public
participation possible in this rulemaking.  Individual consumers,
representatives of consumer groups, manufacturers, associations, coalitions,
states or other government entities, and others are urged to submit written
comments on the proposal.  The Department also encourages interested persons to
participate in the public hearings to be held at the times and places indicated
at the beginning of this notice.  Comments relating to the energy security,
environmental, or economic effects that might result from the adoption of the
proposals contained in this notice are specifically invited and desired.
Whenever applicable, full supporting rationale, data and detailed analyses
should also be submitted.<p>
  B. Written Comment Procedures  <p>
	Written comments (eight copies) should be identified on the outside of the
envelope, and on the comments themselves, with the designation: "Alternative
Fuel Provider Vehicle Acquisition Mandate and Alternative Fuel Vehicle Credit
Program, N0PR, Docket Number EE-RM-95-110" and must be received by the date
specified at the beginning of this notice.  In the event any person wishing to
submit a written comment cannot provide eight copies, alternative arrangements
can be made in advance by calling Andi Kasarsky at (202) 586-3012.
Additionally, the Department would appreciate an electronic copy of the
comments to the extent possible.  The Department is currently using WordPerfect
5.1 for DOS.<p>
	All comments received on or before the date specified at the beginning of this
notice and other relevant information will be considered by DOE before final
action is taken on the proposed rule.  All comments submitted will be available
for examination in the Rule Docket File in DOE's Freedom of Information Reading
Room both before and after the closing date for comments.  In addition, a
transcript of the proceedings of the public hearings will be filed in the
docket.<p>
	Pursuant to the provisions of 10 CFR 1004.11 any person submitting information
or data that is believed to be confidential, and which may be exempt by law
from public disclosure, should submit one complete copy, as well as two copies
from which the information claimed to be confidential has been deleted.  The
Department of Energy will make its own determination of any such claim and
treat it according to its determination.<p>
<p>
  C.  Public Hearing Procedures<p>
	The time and place of the public hearings are indicated at the beginning of
this notice.  The Department invites any person who has an interest in the
proposed regulation or who is a representative of a group or class of persons
which has an interest to make a request for an opportunity to make an oral
presentation at the hearing.  Requests to speak should be sent to the address
or phone number indicated in the "ADDRESSES" section of this notice and be
received by the time specified in the "DATES" section of this notice.<p>
	The person making the request should briefly describe his or her interest in
the proceedings and, if appropriate, state why that person is a proper
representative of the group or class of persons that has such an interest.  The
person also should provide a phone number where they may be reached during the
day.  Each person selected to speak at a public hearing will be notified as to
the approximate time that they will be speaking.  They should bring ten copies
of their statement to the hearing.  In the event any person wishing to testify
cannot meet this requirement, alternative arrangements can be made in advance
with Andi Kasarsky, (202) 586-3012.<p>
	The DOE reserves the right to select persons to be heard at the hearings, to
schedule their presentations, and to establish procedures governing the conduct
of the hearing.  The length of each presentation will be limited to ten
minutes, or based on the number of persons requesting to speak.<p>
	A Department official will be designated to preside at the hearing.  The
hearing will not be a judicial or an evidentiary-type hearing, but will be
conducted in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 553 and Section 501 of the Department of
Energy Organization Act. 42 U.S.C. 7191.  At the conclusion of all initial oral
statements, each person will be given the opportunity to make a rebuttal
statement.  The rebuttal statements will be given in the order in which the
initial statements were made.<p>
	Any further procedural rules needed for the proper conduct of the hearing will
be announced by the Presiding Officer at the hearing.<p>
	If DOE must cancel a hearing, DOE will make every effort to publish an advance
notice of such cancellation in the <u>Federal Register</u>.  Notice of
cancellation will also be given to all persons scheduled to speak at the
hearing.  Hearing dates may be canceled in the event no public testimony has
been scheduled in advance.<p>
<p>
<hr>
<a name="ref4">
<b>IV. Review Under Executive Order 12612</b><p>
	Executive Order 12612, 52 FR 41685 (October 30, 1987), requires that
regulations, rules, legislation, and any other policy actions be reviewed for
any substantial direct effect on states, on the relationship between the
National Government and the States, or in the distribution of power and
responsibilities among various levels of government.  If there are substantial
effects, then the Executive Order requires a preparation of a federalism
assessment to be used in all decisions involved in promulgating and
implementing policy action.  <p>
	This proposed rule establishes an Alternative Fueled Vehicle Credit Program
under which states may generate credits if they obtain alternative fueled
vehicles in excess of their required quantity or if they obtain alternative
fueled vehicles prior to the date when they are required and establishes a
mandate for state fleets to acquire alternative fuel vehicles.  The allocation
of credits is based on the measurable actions of obtaining alternative fueled
vehicles and is available to fleets, that meet the requirements, throughout the
United States.  <p>
	The granting of credits to states will be handled in the same manner as the
granting of credits to any other fleet operator.  The enforcement of the state
fleet mandate will be handled in the same manner as other mandate programs.
States can also apply for a hardship exemption which would exempt them from
acquiring alternative fuel vehicles in any given year.  <p>
	The Department has determined that since states are treated the same as any
other fleet operator in the allocation of credits and in the administration and
enforcement of the fleet mandate, the proposed rule will not have a substantial
direct effect on the institutional interests or traditional functions of
States.  In addition, the provision for hardship exemptions included in the
state fleet mandate precludes any possible violation in the authority that the
Federal government has over States.  Thus, preparation of a federalism
assessment is therefore unnecessary.<b></b><p>
<b></b><p>
<hr>
<a name="ref5">
<b>V. Review Under Executive Order 12778</b><p>
	Section 2 of Executive Order 12778 instructs each agency to adhere to certain
requirements in promulgating new regulations.  These requirements, set forth in
section 2(a) and (b)(2), include eliminating drafting errors and needless
ambiguity, drafting the regulations to minimize litigation providing clear and
certain legal standards for affected legal conduct, and promoting
simplification and burden reduction.  Agencies are also instructed to make
every reasonable efforts to ensure that the regulation describes any
administrative proceeding to be available prior to judicial review and any
provisions for the exhaustion of administrative remedies.  DOE certifies that
the proposed rule meets the requirements of section 2(a) and (b)(2) of
Executive Order 12778.<p>
<b></b><p>
<hr>
<a name="ref6">
<b>VI. Review Under Executive Order 12866</b><p>
	This regulatory action has been determined to be a significant regulatory
action under Executive order 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, October 4,
1993.  Accordingly, today's action was subject to review under the Executive
Order by the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA).  DOE
concluded that the proposed rule would not result in (1) an annual effect on
the economy of $100 million or more or (2) have significant adverse effects on
competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on the
ability of the United States-based enterprises to compete in domestic export
markets.  OIRA requested that DOE prepare a cost analysis.  In this section of
the Supplementary Information, DOE describes the assumptions and main
conclusions of that cost analysis.  A copy of that cost analysis is available
for public inspection in the administrative record on file in DOE's Freedom of
Information Reading Room.  DOE has also placed in that file a copy of the
notice of proposed rulemaking as transmitted to OIRA, as well as exchanges of
correspondence between DOE and OIRA showing changes in the notice agreed to by
the two agencies. <p>
	The cost analysis spans a 25-year time frame, from 1995 to 2020, which
included the incremental vehicle purchase cost and the cost differential
between alternative fuels and gasoline under five different scenarios.  The
analysis examines the effects the proposed rule will have on the acquisition of
alternative fueled vehicles by fuel providers and State fleets, exclusive of
the effects of non-mandated acquisition of vehicles by these and other fleets.
In doing so it assumes that no alternative fueled vehicles will be acquired by
these fleets prior to model year 1996.  In actuality, these fleets currently
are acquiring alternative fueled vehicles - either because of economics, State
laws or business strategies - and will probably continue to do so in the
future.  This assumption focuses the analysis on the estimated costs to fuel
providers and State fleets in complying with the proposed regulation without
distorting it in any substantial way.  Assumptions about the number of vehicles
acquired, the operating characteristics of those vehicles, fleet vehicle
replacement rates, current and future alternative fueled vehicle incremental
costs, and current and future retail fuel costs were based on previous analyses
undertaken by the Department.  <p>
	The costs to fuel providers and State fleets in complying with the proposed
rule varies depending upon vehicle type, fuel type and fuel consumption, but in
no case are the annual costs estimated to exceed $61 million per year.  More
typically, the estimated annual costs are approximately $25 million, decreasing
to $10 million per year in later years.  In reaching these conclusions, the
Department took into account the fact that some alternative fuel providers may
not operate vehicles solely on the fuel they provide and may have to purchase
other alternative fuels at retail prices.  Retail fuel prices for all
alternative fuels were used in the analysis.  These prices have three main
components: (1) the wholesale fuel cost; (2) the cost of transporting the fuel
from production points to retail outlets; and (3) the retail outlet mark-ups.
<p>
	In one scenario, the annual costs to State fleets decreased to a point where
it is estimated that these fleets would incur savings as a result of complying
with the proposed rule.  This scenario assumes that the most popular
alternative fueled vehicles will be flexible-fuel vehicles that can operate on
gasoline and/or methanol.  Because the proposed rule does not impose a fuel use
requirement on State fleets, it is logical to assume that States will choose to
operate these vehicles on the fuel which costs less at a certain point in time;
currently that fuel is gasoline.  It is expected that the nominal incremental
cost for these vehicles, together with the fact that their operation and
refueling is identical to a gasoline-only version, should make them very
attractive to State fleet managers.  The expected popularity of these vehicles,
combined with estimates that show methanol prices falling below gasoline by
model year 2001, result in annual cost savings to State fleets, starting with
model year 2005, in the range of $400,000 to $1 million.<p>
	In order to provide commenters with a better understanding of the effects of
this proposal, the Department plans to make revisions and improvements to its
analysis before the close of the comment period.  To aid in this effort, the
Department seeks comments on all aspects of its analysis.  In particular, the
Department is interested in comment on the following elements of the analysis:
the retail and net-of-excise-tax future price projections for gasoline and
alternative fuels;  the assumption that alternative fueled vehicle purchases,
that would result in apparent life-cycle cost savings, would not occur in the
absence of this rule; and the assumption that the cost per gallon of gasoline
displaced falls as the amount of gasoline displaced increases.  The Department
would also be interested in data that would aid in estimating the extra
refueling costs for "covered persons" whose fleets use fuels other than the one
they themselves provide, e.g., a natural gas pipeline company whose alternative
fueled vehicles operate on methanol or ethanol.<p>
<p>
<hr>
<a name="ref7">
<b>VII. Review Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act</b><p>
<b></b>	The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, 5 U.S.C. 601-612, was enacted
by Congress to ensure that small entities do not face significant negative
economic impact as a result of Government regulations.  In instances where
significant impacts are possible on a substantial number of entities, agencies
are required to perform a regulatory flexibility analysis.<p>
	DOE has determined that this proposed rule will not have a significant
negative impact on a substantial number of small entities.  To be covered by
this rulemaking, an organization must own, operate or control at least 50 light
duty motor vehicles, of which at least 20 light duty motor vehicles used
primarily within a single MSA or CMSA must be capable of being centrally
fueled.  An organization that fits this description is usually not a small
organization, but one of medium size or larger.<p>
<b></b><p>
<hr>
<a name="ref8">
<b>VIII. Review Under the Paperwork Reduction Act</b><p>
    New information collection requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction
Act, 44 U.S.C. 3501, et seq., and recordkeeping requirements are proposed by
this rulemaking.  Accordingly, this notice has been submitted to the Office of
Management and Budget for review and approval of paperwork requirements.  The
information DOE proposes to collect as reporting requirements is necessary to
determine whether an organization is in compliance with the proposed regulation
and whether they are eligible for the allocation of alternative fueled vehicle
credits.  The frequency of the information collection is annually and is due
four months after the end of the compliance period.  It is estimated the number
of organizations submitting reports will be approximately 1000 for the years
1996 through 1999.  The estimated number of organizations who will be
submitting reports after that date has not been determined and is subject to
the DOE decision on future rulemakings.  <p>
    The public reporting burden is estimated to average 12 hours per response,
including time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and retrieving the
collection of information.  The collection of information contained in this
proposed rule is considered the least burdensome for the Department of Energy
functions to comply with the legal requirements and achieve program objectives.
However, comments are requested concerning the accuracy of the estimated
paperwork reporting burden.<p>
<p>
<hr>
<a name="ref9">
<b>IX. Review Under the National Environmental Policy Act</b><p>
<b></b>	The provisions of this proposed rule would establish procedures for the
implementation of an Alternative Fuel Transportation Program to assist in and
monitor the progress of State fleet and certain alternative fuel providers
compliance activity.  The proposed rule provides for reporting procedures to
demonstrate compliance with the alternative fueled vehicle acquisition mandates
as specified by Title V of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, and includes proposed
procedures for interpretive rulings, exemption, appeals, and the approval
process for State plans.<p>
	The proposed rule would also establish and define the parameters for who must
comply, the parts of a vehicle inventory which are affected by the acquisition
mandates, the allocation of credits for voluntary acquisitions, the
investigation and enforcement in the assessment of civil penalties, and the
contents of a State's light duty alternative fueled vehicle plan.  Because of
the foregoing non-procedural parts of the proposed rule, the Department has
determined that preparation of an Environmental Assessment (EA) is appropriate.
The Department will complete the EA and any further analysis found to be
required prior to the issuance of a final rule.<b></b><p>
<b></b><p>
<hr>
<a name="ref10">
<b>X. Impact on State Governments </b>                        <p>
<p>
Section 1(b)(9) of Executive Order 12866 ("Regulatory Planning and Review"), 58
FR 51735 (September 30, 1993) established the following principle for agencies
to follow in rulemakings: "Wherever feasible, agencies shall seek views of
appropriate State, local, and tribal officials before imposing regulatory
requirements that might significantly or uniquely affect those governmental
entities.  Each agency shall assess the effects of Federal regulations on
State, local, and tribal governments, including specifically the availability
of resources to carry out those mandates, and seek to minimize those burdens
that uniquely or significantly affect such governmental entities, consistent
with achieving regulatory objectives.  In addition, agencies shall seek to
harmonize Federal regulatory actions with regulated state, local and tribal
regulatory and other governmental functions."  Executive Order 12875
("Enhancing Intergovernmental Partnership"), 58 FR 58093 (October 26, 1993)
provides for reduction or mitigation, to the extent allowed by law, of the
burden on State, local, and tribal governments of unfunded Federal mandates not
required by statute.  <p>
Section 507(o) of the Act explicitly prescribes the alternative fueled vehicle
acquisition mandate which is reflected in subpart C of today's proposed
regulations, but does not specifically authorize appropriation of funds to
defray the costs of compliance.  However, it is important to observe that the
effect of the mandate is mitigated in terms of its impacts and costs in a
number of respects. <p>
First, section 507(o) authorizes approval of acceptable alternative State plans
to comply with the acquisition mandate by enlisting the voluntary commitments
from other fleet operators with fleets that are not subject to vehicle
acquisition requirements under the Energy Policy Act of 1992.  Second, section
507(i) authorizes the Department to grant exemptions from vehicle acquisition
requirements for States in cases of financial  hardship.  Third, Congress has
authorized and appropriated some fiscal year 1994 and fiscal year 1995 funds
for financial assistance to State alternative fuel transportation programs some
of which may include plans to fund the incremental costs of acquiring
alternative fueled vehicles.  Section 409 of the Act specifically authorizes
financial assistance to States for this purpose.  However, the funds, even if
exclusively used to pay for such incremental costs, may not be sufficient to
fund all such costs incurred by each State annually. <p>
The Department preliminarily estimates that, in the aggregate, the costs to
States in model year 1996 will be between $3.3 million and $7.4 million.  The
annual aggregate costs should never exceed $13 million in FY 1995 dollars.  A
copy of the analysis which includes these figures is in the public file in the
DOE Freedom of Information Reading Room and is available upon request from the
information contact identified at the outset of this notice.  The Department
does not have estimates for each State.  The Department would welcome comments
from State financial officials knowledgeable about near term State plans for
replacing existing vehicles so that DOE can refine its estimates of incremental
costs attributable solely to the section 507(o) mandate.<p>
In developing today's notice of proposed rulemaking, the Department consulted
with a focus group of State officials from the National Association of State
Energy Officials which represents energy offices in 53 States, territories and
the District of Columbia.  The principal concern expressed by some of these
officials was conflict between the DOE program and similar programs operating
under EPA or State regulations.  With respect to EPA, DOE has attempted to
avoid unnecessary differences between its proposed regulations and those
already promulgated by EPA.  When asked for comments on a draft of today's
notice, EPA did not suggest any changes to eliminate or mitigate unnecessary
differences.  <p>
Earlier in this notice, DOE noted that the overlap between the proposed
regulations and the EPA regulations is limited because the DOE program would
apply in MSAs and CMSAs with a 1980 Bureau of Census population of 250,000 or
more and the EPA program applies only in non-attainment areas.  EPA has
published a table, 59 FR 50043, listing the 22 non-attainment areas as follows:
<p>
<p>
States and Areas Affected by the Clean Fuel Fleet Program<p>
<u>            Affected area                              State(s)
</u><p>
 1. Atlanta                                            Georgia<p>
 2. Baltimore                                          Maryland<p>
 3. Baton Rouge                                        Louisiana<p>
 4. Beaumont-Port Arthur                               Texas<p>
 5. Boston-Lawrence-Worcester (Eastern Massachusetts)	Massachusetts,<p>
                                                       New Hampshire<p>
 6. Chicago-Gary-Lake County                           Illinois,<p>
                                                       Indiana<p>
 7. Denver-Boulder                                     Colorado<p>
 8. El Paso                                            Texas<p>
 9. Greater Connecticut                                Connecticut<p>
10. Houston-Galveston-Brazoria                         Texas<p>
11. Los Angeles-South Coast Air Basin                  California	<p>
12. Milwaukee-Racine                                   Wisconsin<p>
13. New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island           Connecticut,<p>
                                                       New Jersey,<p>
                                                       New York<p>
14. Philadelphia-Wilmington-Trenton                  	Delaware,<p>
                                                       Maryland,<p>
                                                       New Jersey,<p>
                                                       Pennsylvania<p>
15. Providence (All Rhode Island)                      Rhode Island<p>
16. Sacramento Metro                                   California<p>
17. San Diego                                          California<p>
18. San Joaquin Valley                                 California<p>
19. Southeast Desert Modified AQMA                     California<p>
20. Springfield (Western Massachusetts)                Massachusetts<p>
21. Ventura County                                     California<p>
22. Washington (District of Columbia)                  Maryland,
                                                Virginia<p>
<p>
As indicated above, 11 of these 22 areas have applications to opt out of the
EPA Clean Fuel Fleet Program which are still pending as of the date of
publication of this notice.  <p>
With respect to the State programs, DOE is unaware of any that would be in
conflict with the program proposed today.  If DOE has overlooked any such
conflicts, State officials are invited to submit comments explaining the
conflicts.<p>
<p>
<p>
List of Subjects in 10 CFR Part 490<p>
<p>
	Appeal procedures, Energy, Energy conservation, Fuel, Gasoline, Motor
vehicles, Oil imports, Petroleum, Recordkeeping and Reporting requirements, and
Utilities.<p>
Issued in Washington, D.C. on<p>
<p>
__________________________________________________<p>
Christine A. Ervin<p>
Assistant Secretary<p>
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy<p>
<p>
<hr>
<a href="codes-AFTP3.html#top">To next section...</a>
<hr>
<BR>
<IMG SRC="/picts/erenbar.gif">
<center>
<pre>
</pre>
<p><H4>
Return to <A HREF="/">EREN Home Page <IMG ALIGN=BOT SRC="/picts/return1.gif"></A><P>
</center></H4>

<IMG SRC="/picts/erenbar.gif">
<P>
Please send comments to:<br>
<A HREF="mailto:webmaster.eren@nrel.gov">webmaster.eren@nrel.gov</A><P>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>