
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B37-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B016-134</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev44.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002419 text/html 55093
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:22:20 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:07 GMT
Content-length: 54906
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev44.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet <BR>
November 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>***MEXICO***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Mexico Is Undergoing Environmental Protection Revolution</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(534 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***BRAZIL***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Brazil Awaits Financing to Clean Up Sao Paulo's Polluted Tiete&nbsp;River</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***THE SOUTHERN CONE***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Argentina to Create Environment Secretariat by Early 1992</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(614 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Argentine Leather Processor Threatens Public Health</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Spanish Bank Funds Santiago Air Pollution Study</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(425 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Chilean Officials Review Environmental Laws and Plan New Ones</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(254 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Chilean Salmon Farmers Oppose Planned Aluminum Foundry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***THE ANDEAN NATIONS***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Venezuela Takes Steps to Clean Up South America's Biggest Lake</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(510 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Peruvian Officials Push US Copper Mining Company to Cut Emissions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(574 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Environmentalists Force Texas Oil Company to Scrap Exploration&nbsp;Plans in Peruvian Nature Reserve</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(437 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Peruvian Green Law Faces Uncertain Future</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(352 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Environmental Articles Included in Colombia's New Constitution</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(392 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Columbian Salt Plant Shut Down for Polluting the Rio Bogota</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Texas Petroleum to be Fined for Polluting Colombia's Waters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(406 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Bolivia to Enact Sweeping Environmental Legislation by Year's End</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(576 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***CENTRAL AMERICA***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Central American Nations to Ban Toxic Waste Imports</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>"Chemical Prospecting" Unites Costa Rica and US Pharmaceutical&nbsp;Firm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(333 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>Hotline:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(93 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Mexico Is Undergoing Environmental Protection Revolution

     The Mexican government, headed by President Carlos Salinas de
Gortari, is starting to seriously address a myriad of severe
environmental problems that 40 years of uncontrolled industrial
development have created.  Salinas' speeches, including his 1
November "State of the Nation" address, sound more like speeches
from "Green" conventions than those of a president of a third
world country, say political analysts.  Until recently the
environment had not been much of worry for Mexicans and their
government -- economic growth, illiteracy, and malnutrition were
the top priorities -- but Mexico's environmental problems --
especially in Mexico City -- are beginning to wake people up, say
observers.  For example, television programs, radio reports, and
banner headlines about the environment are commonplace in Mexico
today.  Mexico's intellectuals are also putting pressure on
government and industry to clean up and protect the environment.
"We have a silent disaster under way that is threatening Mexico's
development," Homero Aridjis, Mexican novelist and president of
the Group of 100, a group of prominent Latin American
intellectuals working to protect the region's environment.
     Mexico's environmental problems include Mexico City's
permanent blanket of brown smog -- the result of five million tons
of pollutants spewed into its air yearly by three million cars and
36,000 factories -- rivers and lakes polluted with untreated human
and industrial waste, rapid deforestation, and the polluted
US-Mexican border area littered with "maquiladoras," or inbound
assembly plants.
     The country's first environmental legislation controlling
emissions was passed in 1988, and the Ecology and Urban
Development Secretariat (SEDUE) showed industry it meant business
by conducting spot checks in April and May.  Two-thirds of the
industries inspected failed, resulting in hundreds of factories
being temporarily shut down and fined.  SEDUE kicked off the
campaign in March by closing a major state-owned oil refinery
operating in Mexico City.  "Industry didn't think it would happen;
they didn't believe we would enforce the law," said SEDUE
spokesman Eduardo Garcia.  The crackdown involved not only
Mexican firms, but also such multinationals as German chemical
giant BASF AG and US-based Dow Chemical Co.  "The law is being
enforced, and it's causing Mexican companies to run around like
chickens looking for help with and information on cleaning up
dirty emissions," said Alfonso Cipres of the Mexican Ecological
Movement.
     The Mexican government is also working closely with US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) authorities to develop ways
to clean up and protect the Mexico-US border area from further
environmental contamination, which some critics fear is a
possibility if trade and industrial activity are allowed to flow
freely across the border.  President Salinas has acknowledged that
Mexico's border area needs cleaning up, but has steadfastly vowed
not to allow Mexico's environment to deteriorate further and
"become a haven for polluters" when, and if, trade barriers are
removed.  Mexico -- out of necessity -- is undergoing an
environmental protection revolution that promises to radically
change how things are done in Mexico, particularly the way
business is conducted.  In coming issues, EWLA will examine in
detail how environmental protection laws and regulations in Mexico
are affecting industrial operations.
     For more information: Eduardo Garcia, SEDUE, Avenida
Constituyentes 947, Colonia Belen de las Flores, Mexico, D.F.
0110, Mexico.  Tel: +525-271-8765; Fax: +525-271-6614.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Brazil Awaits Financing to Clean Up Sao Paulo's Polluted Tiete
River

     The state of Sao Paulo is preparing to start a US $1 billion
project to clean up the state's most important -- and polluted --
river, the Tiete, by the year 2005.  On 4 October, Sao Paulo
Governor Luiz Antonio Fleury, accompanied by other Brazilian
officials, discussed the cleanup plan and possible financing
arrangements with the president of the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB) in Washington, DC, USA.  Brazilian officials hope the
IDB will finance about half the cost of the project, or about US
$500 million.  According to IDB officials, the bank is studying
the request and putting it through the normal review process,
which could take up to several years, before any decision is made.
However, one IDB official told EWLA that the bank feels it's a
worthwhile project that should be funded.  The rest of the funds
needed for the project are slated to come from Brazil's federal
government, Sao Paulo's state government, and private groups.
     The Tiete River runs from the Atlantic highlands in eastern
Sao Paulo through the Sao Paulo metropolitan area, where it
becomes highly polluted from 3.5 billion liters of mostly
untreated domestic (two-thirds) and industrial waste (one-third)
dumped into it daily, and then feeds into the river Parana.
Brazilian officials say that only about 16% of the waste
discharged into the river is currently treated.  Discharging
untreated waste in Brazil isn't illegal yet, but government
officials say that is about to change.
     The project's initial goal, according to Fleury, is to cut by
50% to 60% the amount of untreated effluent entering the river by
1994.  The funds are to be spent on constructing water-treatment
plants along the river to treat domestic waste.  The plan will
also require the more than 1,000 industries operating along the
river to clean up their own effluent; many industries plan to work
together and build common water-treatment plants to save money.
When the project is completed in the year 2005, "it will be
possible to fish once again in the river," said the governor.
     Despite Fleury's optimism, it appears the project may already
be heading for problems.  According to the state's constitution,
the first water project in the state of Sao Paulo must be the
cleanup of the Billings Dam area, a seriously polluted reservoir
that provides much of metropolitan Sao Paulo's water.  In
addition, environmentalists have criticized the governor's plan
because they say he will simply use the money to give
antipollution equipment to private industries to clean up their
effluents.
     For more information on the project's technical aspect:
Companhia de Tecnologia de Saneamento Ambiental, Praca R.A.
Cortez, 67, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.  Tel: +5511-246-4411.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Argentina to Create Environment Secretariat by Early 1992

     Argentina plans to have its first ministerial-level
environment secretariat in place and operating by early 1992.
President Carlos Menem, seeking to be Argentina's "environment
president," recently created the secretariat by presidential
decree because the current constitution allows for only eight
ministries, and the environment had never been one of them.  "We
are in the process of amending the constitution to allow for a
secretariat of the environment at the highest level," said Alberto
Barbuto, president of the National Commission for Environmental
Policy.  The presidential decree allowed the Menem government to
legally circumvent the constitution until it's changed;
administration officials are working with legislators in both
houses of Congress and expect routine passage of the proposed
constitutional amendment when it is brought before Congress.
     The new secretariat, which will employ approximately 200
people, will be in charge of national environmental policy, help
Congress write modern environmental laws, and ensure that the new
laws are enforced, Barbuto told EWLA.  The secretariat will work
with the country's 23 provincial environment ministries on
environmental matters of overlapping jurisdiction.  Committees are
now writing coordinated environmental laws that will carry
penalties for offenders.  "Today, for example, there is no penal
code in Argentina for contaminating water, only for deliberately
poisoning it," said Barbuto.  A general environmental law will
outline basics, such as a requirement that all construction
projects conduct environmental impact studies.  More specific laws
will protect natural resources and establish toxic waste penal
codes.
     Critics charge, however, that in reality the Argentine
government has no real environment policy and is simply trying to
improve its "green" image by creating another government agency.
"If this government really wanted to come up with a national
environmental policy, it would be consulting with nongovernmental
organizations and industry, and would not be picking Maria Julia
Alsogaray, a person with no environmental protection background,
to head up the new secretariat," said Patricia Gay, executive
director of Friends of the Earth Argentina.  Environmentalists say
that instead of creating more agencies, the government should
concentrate on enforcing environmental laws and regulations, which
are now being "totally ignored by industry in Argentina."  Pedro
Tarak of the Foundation for Natural Resources and the Environment
doubts this new secretariat will ever write any environmental laws
 -- or enforce them -- because the existing agency, he said,
doesn't write laws or enforce them now.
     "The private sector in Argentina is starting to take
environmental protection more seriously, although the topic isn't
as intense here as it is in other parts of the world," said
industrialist Federico Zorraquin, president of Grupo Zorraquin, a
group of large industrial companies.  According to Jorge Rivara of
DuPont Argentina, there is indeed a group of industries --
especially chemical and petrochemical -- that are starting to
worry about the changes to come.  "However, they are waiting to
see how this new environment secretariat will operate and, above
all, how much power it will have," he told EWLA.  Zorraquin is
also a member of the Business Council for Sustainable
Development, an international group of business leaders
coordinating industry's contribution to the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in
1992.  He said the reason environmental protection isn't very high
on the business agenda in Argentina is because "Argentina's
environmental problems aren't very visible."  For example,
environmental degradation in Buenos Aires is mainly a problem in
the poorer sections of the city and doesn't directly effect the
majority of the population, according to Zorraquin.  Nevertheless,
he does believe that the government needs to strengthen its
ability to enforce environmental regulations.
     For more information: Alberto Barbuto, National Commission
for Environmental Policy, Corrientes 1302, 1 piso, Buenos Aires
1043, Argentina.  Tel: +541-406-721; Fax: +541-451-817.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Argentine Leather Processor Threatens Public Health

     The Argentine leather processing factory Inducuer, located in
the city of Florencio Varela (30 km southeast of Buenos Aires), is
threatening the local population's health as it continues to
allegedly discharge chromium illegally into nearby streams and
land.  (Chromium is a toxic metallic chemical element.)
     Although Florencio Varela officials have occasionally fined
 -- recently US $25,000 -- and temporarily closed down the plant
several times over the past two decades for local environmental
law violations, they have not closed down the plant permanently
due to economic considerations.  Company sources say privately
that they would prefer to close down permanently, putting 180
people out of work, before investing US $2 million needed to
remove chromium from its wastewater and properly dispose of the
waste material.  The federal government has not been involved with
this case because there is no federal law in Argentina prohibiting
the discharge of chromium, but this may soon change (see previous
story).
     Since the plant opened in 1974, many of the city's 6,000
residents have suffered from skin infections and lung and kidney
problems due to high levels of chromium in the water and air.  In
early October, two newborn infants in a neighborhood close to the
factory died from chromium poisoning.  The neighborhood's drinking
water, recently tested by local water officials, was determined to
be highly contaminated with chromium.  "The water even came of the
spout green, the color of chromium," said one water official.
Carlos Bralo, a lawyer representing the affected community, told
EWLA that new tap water standards are beginning to improve the
quality of water somewhat, but the air continues to be polluted
with chromium.  "We are breathing in chromium," he said as he
pointed to deteriorating metals on houses in the area.  Bralo has
filed a suit against Inducuer on behalf of the families who lost
their children, but observers say it will be years before there is
any justice.
     For more information: Martin Drozzo, Director General of
Inspections, Municipality of Florencio Varela, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.  Tel: +541-255-1003.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Spanish Bank Funds Santiago Air Pollution Study

     The Banco Santander, a Spanish bank with subsidiaries in
Chile, is currently assembling a team of international
environmental experts who will collaborate with local
environmental officials and scientists at the University of Chile
to study Santiago's severe air pollution problem and come up with
viable solutions.  The bank initiated and is funding the year-long
project, which will cost an estimated US $250,000.
     Bank President Emilio Botin expressed the bank's desire to
organize and fund such a team to work on this problem while
visiting Chilean President Patricio Aylwin on 2 September in
Santiago.  Sources say Aylwin was appreciative and pointed out to
Botin that Banco Santander was the first and only private
enterprise in Chile to donate economic support to help fight the
air pollution problem.  At the meeting, Botin said: "I am
convinced that Santiago will resolve this problem, and we at the
Banco Santander will be very proud to have actively participated
in it."  According to Federico Ysart, corporate communications
manager with the bank in Madrid, Spain, the idea came from bank
employees in Santiago, "who live with the smog daily."  "The
bank's management in Spain saw this as a good opportunity to share
some of the benefits the bank has been enjoying from its
operations in Chile recently," he told EWLA.
     The environmental team, which begins work in November, will
consist of about 10 people.  "Although the team will principally
study sources of air pollution, it will also look at sources of
water and noise pollution," said Ysart.  Currently a steering
committee with members from the three institutions involved in the
project -- Banco Santander, University of Chile, and
Decontamination Commission for the Metropolitan Area -- are
selecting team members.  By this time next year, the team is to
publish its findings and recommendations in a so-called "White
Book," which will be presented to government authorities and the
general public for review and comment.
     According to Urban Air Pollution in Latin America and the
Caribbean, a report published in September by the Pan American
Health Organization, Santiago is the third most polluted city in
Latin America, just behind Mexico City and Sao Paulo, Brazil.
According to the researchers, the air pollution problem in
Santiago, while exacerbated by geographic and climatic conditions,
is primarily caused by mobile sources.  Mobile sources are
responsible for 83% of the total nitrogen dioxide emissions, 78%
of the hydrocarbons, and 98% of the carbon monoxide."
     For more information: Federico Ysart, Corporate
Communications Manager, Banco Santander, Castellana 75, 28046,
Madrid, Spain.  Tel: +341-581-3700; Fax: +341-581-3633.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Chilean Officials Review Environmental Laws and Plan New Ones

     The National Commission for the Environment (CONAMA), Chile's
governmental agency responsible for coordinating environmental
policy, is currently preparing an inventory of existing envi-
ronmental laws.  The objective is to better organize current laws
on the books, and find out where more laws are needed.  CONAMA
officials say many of the environmental laws on the books in Chile
are unknown, due to a lack of past enforcement.  Rafael Asenjo,
executive secretary of CONAMA, estimates that the inventory will
come up with about 2,000 existing environmental regulations.
     So far, CONAMA has found that current environmental
regulations do not adequately assure the protection of public
waterways from industrial or municipal waste, nor do they require
that toxic waste be treated and disposed of safely.  Asenjo
concedes that his agency has no information on how or where the
country's toxic waste, mainly from industry and hospitals, is now
being disposed.  CONAMA officials have also discovered that there
are no laws requiring that environmental impact studies be
undertaken before major projects are approved.  This will change
shortly.  Asenjo told EWLA that CONAMA expects to propose many new
environmental laws by the end of the year, including one that
will require such environmental impact studies.  Although
environmental impact studies are not currently required, a
majority of the large firms operating in Chile reportedly already
conduct environmental impact and feasibility studies on their own.
     For more information: Rafael Asenjo, Executive Secretary,
National Commission for the Environment, Av. Alameda Bernando
O'Higgins 280, Santiago, Chile.  Tel: +562-222-2903; Fax:
 +562-222-2717.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Chilean Salmon Farmers Oppose Planned Aluminum Foundry

     La Cooperativa de Salmoneros de Aysen (COSA), an association
of salmon producers, is alarmed at the prospect of having an
aluminum foundry built near salmon farms in the Aysen region in
southern Chile, about 1300 km south of Santiago.  Proyectos de
Aysen SA, a Chilean company, and Noranda Inc. of Quebec, Canada,
want to construct an aluminum foundry and a 360 megawatt
hydroelectric facility in the Aysen region, which would cost US
$1.2 billion.
     Salmon farmers argue that the pristine fjords in the Aysen
region, where most of the salmon farming is done, would
undoubtedly become contaminated, hurting both salmon harvests and
the environment, with an aluminum foundry operating nearby.  The
Aysen fjords are one of the few ideal places in the world for
raising Coho salmon.  The region is expected to produce 4.5
million tons of Coho salmon next season, worth approximately US
$140 million.
     COSA officials point to instances in Canada and Argentina
where aluminum foundries have contaminated waters and damaged
salmon farms.  Alcan Ltd. in British Columbia, Canada, is running
an aluminum foundry similar to the one Projectos de Aysen intends
to construct in Chile.  Alcan's foundry has been discharging 400
metric tons annually of fluorine gases into the atmosphere.  COSA
says tests conducted on the Columbia River in Canada in the early
1980s indicated the presence of fluorine in the water.   Fluorine
is the principal chemical associated with the production of
primary aluminum, and adversely affected the health and survival
of salmon there.  A similar situation occurred in Argentina.  In
the early 1970s, Aluar SA built an aluminum plant in Puerto
Madryn, which has needed more than US $70 million worth of
environmental protection equipment installed in recent years.
Salmon producers also say that even with the best purification
systems only 98% of the fluorine produced can be removed from
waste effluents, and typically the percentage is much lower.  More
alumina and chemicals are also lost to the environment in the
loading and unloading of ships at the docks, they warn.
     Proyectos de Aysen, however, is trying to assure the salmon
producers that they plan to take every precaution to protect the
environment.  For instance, they intend to use a closed circular
suction system to load and unload materials to avoid anything
escaping to the environment.  In addition, Proyectos plans to
conduct a comprehensive environmental impact study, and says it
will be in "constant contact" with salmon producers.
     For more information: Hernan Contreras, Director, La
Cooperative de Salmoneros de Aysen, Casilla 309, Puerto Aysen,
Chile.  Tel: +56-67-332-967.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Venezuela Takes Steps to Clean Up South America's Biggest Lake

     After years of studying the problem, it appears that the
Venezuelan government is now taking concrete steps to begin the
cleanup of South America's largest -- and possibly dirtiest --
freshwater lake, Lake Maracaibo located in northwestern Venezuela.
Venezuela's Ministry of the Environment and Renewable Natural
Resources (MERNR) recently contracted with Delcan International
Corp., a Canadian environmental engineering firm, to design and
manage the construction of two sewage treatment plants and six
pump stations for the lakeside cities of Cabimas and Ciudad Ojeda,
at a total cost of about US $52 million.  The cities, which have a
combined population of approximately one million people, have been
discharging untreated sewage into the lake for decades.  In
addition, an Israeli firm is currently building two sewage
treatment plants at the lake's biggest city, Maracaibo, which has
more than a million inhabitants.
     According to Pablo Emilio Colmenares, president of MERNR's
Institute for the Control and Conservation of Lake Maracaibo, the
Venezuelan government began looking into the need to clean up the
lake as early as 1977.  The government spent years conducting
studies, coming up with grand plans and writing environment laws,
but in essence accomplished nothing concrete until now.  "The lake
should be healthy and cleaned up to international standards by the
year 1999 with the installations of municipal sewage treatment
plants, and new, tough environmental laws in the works that will
stop industry from polluting the lake," Colmenares told EWLA.
Government officials concede that industry has found it easy to
pollute the lake over the years because the weak environmental
laws on the books haven't been enforced much.  Government
officials say that will change soon.  (EWLA will examine in the
next issue the new penal environmental law the Venezuelan Congress
is drafting.)
     Environmentalists are very skeptical of the government's
plan.  "For 30 years we have been hearing about projects to clean
up the lake, and so far we have seen nothing," said Aldemaro
Romero, executive director of the Venezuelan Foundation for the
Conservation of Biological Diversity.  Romero said that because
nothing has been done, the lake is "a complete disaster, filled
with mercury, sewage, agrochemicals, and oil."  As far as he is
concerned, the government is all talk and no action.  "I don't
believe that the government is going to sanction or close down
state-owned enterprises, and I will have to see these sewage
treatment plants up and running -- not plans on paper -- before I
believe it," he told EWLA.  Meanwhile, business leaders say that
although the program has been delayed for years, they believe that
growing public pressure on government and industry is getting
things moving.  Said Guillermo Cardenas of Petroquimicas
Venezuela, a state-owned petrochemical firm: "Environmental
consciousness is growing in Venezuela, especially around the
Maracaibo lake, and industry realizes it has to take steps to
clean up."
     For more information: Pablo Emilio Colmenares, President,
Institute for the Control and Conservation of Lake Maracaibo,
Calle 72 con Ave. 2B, Urbanizacion Virginia, Edificio San Jacinto,
Sector del Lago, Maracaibo, Estado Zulia, Venezuela.  Tel:
 +58-61-913-873; Fax: +58-61-914-089.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Peruvian Officials Push US Copper Mining Company to Cut Emissions

     Peru's Ministry of Energy and Mines recently ordered the
Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPCC) to completely clean up its
sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions and other pollutants within the
next five years by building sulfuric acid plants and taking other
environmental remediation steps at its main site in the southern
coastal city of Ilo.  Such action will cost the company an
estimated US $90 million.  (Sulfuric acid plants capture SO2
emissions from smelters and turn them into sulfuric acid -- a
marketable commodity itself -- resulting in less atmospheric
pollution.)  SPCC, 52% of which is owned by the North American
copper giant ASARCO Inc., mines 60% of Peru's annual copper
production, making it the country's largest copper mining outfit.
     SPCC officials say, however, they were involved in initiating
this project as well and therefore are not being "ordered" to
clean up emissions.   "When the government of Peru issues an
order, it does so only after things have been agreed to," said an
ASARCO official.  But the same official admitted that "Latin
American countries are all becoming much more environmentally
aware, and this whole effort is an outgrowth of that."
     A multisectoral commission was convened in 1989 to study the
pollution problem at SPCC and develop a solution.  The commission
issued a report, which then became a supreme decree in 1989,
outlining short-, medium-, and long-term steps that SPCC needed to
take to rectify the situation at Ilo.  SPCC cooperated and
outlined steps it would take, including construction of a 140,000
ton-per-year sulfuric acid plant, at a cost of US $76.6 million,
which will treat 35% of the SO2 emissions produced at its Ilo
foundry.  SPCC will also pipe the tailings from the Cuajone and
Toquepala mines offshore at the bay of Ite, at a cost of US $16.93
million plus yearly operating costs of US $500,000.  The company
has also promised to build a water-treatment plant to treat the
sewage from its camp, Ciudad Nueva, in Ilo.  The commission
determined that a 140,000 ton-per-year sulfuric acid plant would
not be enough to clean up the emissions, and told SPCC that it
would have to double the capacity of the plant to 300,000 tons
within five years to take care of all the emissions.  "SPCC wasn't
planning to use all the emissions from its smelters to produce
sulfuric acid," said Manuel Pulgar Vidal, an environmental lawyer
at the Peruvian Environmental Law Society.
     SPCC has appealed the commission's decision.  The copper
company is reluctant to increase the sulfuric acid plant's
capacity to 300,000 tons per year because, company executives say,
the domestic market for sulfuric acid isn't large enough to absorb
all of the sulfuric acid that would be produced by such a large
facility.  They also say SPCC isn't well-positioned to compete in
the international sulfuric acid market.  However, SPCC is coming
up with uses for their sulfuric acid.  Sources told EWLA that SPCC
has begun working on a heap leaching project, which will require
the use of sulfuric acid to exploit several million tons of copper
oxides and secondary sulfates that have accumulated at their
Toquepala and Cuajone mines.  Officially, however, government and
company officials are currently negotiating to resolve their
differences.
     For more information: John J. Youle, Vice President of
Institutional Relations, Southern Peru Copper Corporation, Avenida
Caminos del Inca No. 171, Chacarilla del Estanque, Santiago de
Surco, Lima 33, Peru.  Tel: +5114-36-1565; Fax: +5114-35-6619.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Environmentalists Force Texas Oil Company to Scrap Exploration
Plans in Peruvian Nature Reserve

     Texas Crude Exploration Inc. of Houston, Texas, USA, decided
in September not to explore for oil in Peru's Pacaya Samiria
National Reserve, even though the Peruvian government had
tentatively approved in early April a US $24 million oil
exploration contract between Texas Crude and Petroperu (the state
oil company) for a one million-hectare northern jungle oil block,
known as Block 61.  Texas Crude's decision came in the wake of
protests by environmental groups and congressmen in Peru and the
US who argued against oil exploration in the wildlife reserve.
The company received over 1,000 protest letters, and an
environmental group picketed its Houston offices.
     Environmentalists bolstered their campaign with environmental
legislation enacted in September 1990 by President Alberto
Fujimori.  The legislation outlawed exploring for or exploiting
nonrenewable resources in a reserve.  The government, however, was
interpreting the law its own way and was set to give Texas Crude
the go-ahead.  After Texas Crude gave up its exploration plans,
the Ministry of Energy and Mines and the Ministry of Agriculture
repealed this law, known as article 71, due to pressure from local
investors.  Environmentalists, who are working to restore it, say
that foreign oil companies will still look carefully at where they
drill in the future.  Texas Crude said the whole episode has cost
them at least US $1 million: $500,000 on seismic data it bought
from Petroperu and another $500,000 it will now have to spend to
clean up its image in the US.
     The block was especially attractive to Texas Crude because of
its potential oil-bearing structures and its proximity to the
North Peruvian Pipeline.  The 856-km-long pipeline takes Amazon
crude oil from producing fields to Petroperu's marine terminal at
Bayovar on Peru's north coast.  Created in 1982, Pacaya Samiria is
a vast, swampy 2.08-million-hectare network of oxbow lakes,
lagoons, and flooded forest that is also home to the almost
extinct Amazon manatee and the pink river dolphin.  In the 1970s,
exploration companies pulled out of the area after drilling three
dry wells and making one noncommercial find.  Petroperu, however,
still operates in the reserve.  The cash- strapped state oil
company's environmentally unsound operations are a result of poor
maintenance and sloppy management, say environmentalists.
According to the Iquitos-based Institute of Amazonian Research,
over 200 hectares of jungle surrounding Petroperu's wells in
Pacaya Samiria are already contaminated by untreated water and
toxic chemicals used in drilling operations.
     For more information: Scott G. Baum, Vice President, Texas
Crude Exploration Inc., 801 Travis, Suite 1200, Houston, TX
77002-5764, USA.  Tel: +1-713-228-8888; Fax: +1-713-228-0494.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Peruvian Green Law Faces Uncertain Future

     Peruvian environmentalists fear that a new private investment
law being drafted by the government could sabotage sweeping
environmental legislation signed by President Alberto Fujimori in
September 1990.  Undermining the green law, Peru's first, wouldn't
be new to the Fujimori administration.
     Earlier this year the Fujimori government repealed two
important articles in the environmental law when it passed
petroleum and agrarian investment laws.  The agrarian law, for
instance, repealed article 71 of the environmental law, which
prohibited the exploitation of nonrenewable resources in protected
areas.  Article 71 formed the legal basis for environmental
lawyers' arguments that stopped Texas Crude Exploration Inc., a
petroleum company based in Houston, Texas, USA, from exploring for
oil in the Pacaya Samiria National Reserve.  (See previous story.)
     Industry in general, and the mining and petroleum sectors in
particular, have been especially critical of the controversial
green law.  For example, Luis Rodriguez Mariategui, former
president of the National Society of Mining and Petroleum, sees
environmental impact studies, which are stipulated in the law, as
just one more obstacle to starting up business ventures in Peru.
"The cost of an environmental impact study carried out by a local
company can run anywhere from US $20,000 to US $120,000, depending
on the size and complexity of the job," he said.  However,
Environmental Services of Fort Collins, Colorado, USA, which has
carried out environmental impact studies in Peru for such
companies as Mobil Exploration & Producing Peru, a division of
Mobil Corp., New York, USA, is telling its clients that "to meet
the full letter of intent of the environmental law an
environmental impact study would cost from US $400,000 to US
$500,000."
     Meanwhile, efforts by a multisectoral commission appointed by
Fujimori to outline regulations for the environmental law have
been stymied at the cabinet level.  Jorge Caillaux, president of
the Peruvian Environmental Law Society (SPDA) and a former member
of the commission, blames the impasse on the Fujimori
administration's "lack of political will" to make environmental
protection a priority.
     For more information: Jorge Caillaux, SPDA, Plaza Arrospide
9, San Isidro, Lima 27, Peru.  Tel: +5114-22-4033; Fax:
 +5114-42-4565.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Environmental Articles Included in Colombia's New Constitution

     Environmental protection is on the front burner in Colombia,
as evidenced by the passage in August of the country's new
constitution containing 43 articles specifically addressing
environmental protection.  The old constitution did not mention
the environment.  The environmental articles range from
prohibiting nuclear and toxic waste from entering the country to
requiring the government to protect the nation's biodiversity and
undertake environmental awareness campaigns.  The constitution
also mandates that the principles of sustainable development be
adhered to when exploiting natural resources, and gives
individuals, even though they may not have been directly affected,
the right to bring legal action against polluters.  According to
Guillermo Perry, Colombia's ex-minister of mining and energy, this
means that companies or individuals damaging the environment in
Colombia will now be held legally responsible, and will pay fines
and be forced to clean up their environmental damage.
     A new Congress, to be elected by December, will develop the
specific laws and regulations needed to comply with the new
constitution.  However, the government in power has already taken
some concrete steps to bridge the gap between the ideal
environmental goals set forth in the constitution and what really
occurs.  According to Manuel Rodriguez Becerra, director of
Inderena, Colombia's environmental protection agency, the
government approved in August the National Environmental Policy
Plan (NEPP), which outlines how the government plans to enforce
the environmental articles mandated in the constitution.  "The
NEPP calls for the complete overhaul of the government's existing
environmental protection sector, which is currently very weak,
uncoordinated, and operates on a shoestring budget," said
Rodriguez.  The new budget should about double, with money coming
from new taxes on firms exploiting nonrenewable energy sources,
and fines for violating environmental laws.  Rodriguez says the
government intends to create a Ministry of the Environment and a
National Environmental Council, which will include representatives
from all government ministries.   The government also will create
a series of decentralized regional environmental protection
offices throughout the country to carry out protection programs
and law enforcement.
     The environment will also become an important factor in the
marketplace, say government officials.  For example, the NEPP
proposes pollution taxes for polluters and subsidies for companies
that switch to cleaner, more environmentally benign technologies
and undertake reforestation and conservation projects.
     For more information: Manuel Rodriguez Becerra, Director of
Inderena, Carrera 10 #20-30, Bogota, Colombia.  Tel:
 +571-283-3562.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Columbian Salt Plant Shut Down for Polluting the Rio Bogota

     In September the Colombian government decided to permanently
shut down Alcalis de Colombia, an old state-owned sodium chloride
processing plant that operated along the Rio Bogota, just a few
kilometers from downtown Bogota.  The reason was that an
environmental impact study performed by the US-based consulting
firm Arthur D. Little concluded that the factory was responsible
for most of the pollution found in that river.  Alcalis, which
produced 18,000 metric tons of sodium chloride yearly, was
discharging about 680 metric tons of chloride into the river each
day, five times the permitted level.
     The Public Interest Defense Foundation, which demanded that
the government close down the factory three years ago, said the
extremely high concentration of chloride in the river (213 parts
per million, against a permissible level of 150) was a serious
health threat to the local population, as well as nearby farming
and pasture lands.  Sources say that some pastures and cows in the
area may have been contaminated by the river's polluted waters.
     The National Council of Social and Economic Policy (NCSEP), a
high-level interministerial council operating under the president
of the republic, Cesar Gaviria, made the final decision to close
the factory.  NCSEP authorities admit that the plant was closed
down for economic, as well as environmental reasons.  "Alcalis was
using old technology, in debt, and losing money," said one
official.  NCSEP calculated that the state would have had to
invest more than US $10 million in new, cleaner technology for
Alcalis to meet the current environmental regulations.  The 300
workers who lost their jobs due to the closing are demanding that
the government help them.
     For more information: German Sarmiento, Director, Public
Interest Defense Foundation, Calle 71 #5-83, Bogota, Colombia.
Tel: +571-211-7077.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Texas Petroleum to be Fined for Polluting Colombia's Waters

     Colombian environmental protection authorities are
threatening to fine Texas Petroleum Company, of Dallas, Texas,
USA, for not properly treating drilling operation wastewater from
its Velazquez fields.  Authorities say the wastewater is polluting
the Magdalena River, Colombia's most important river.  "There is a
strong possibility that Inderena [the government agency in charge
of protecting natural resources and the environment] will be
sanctioning Texas Petroleum for contamination of waters near its
Velazquez fields," said Alfonso Avellaneda, head of the
environmental department at Inderena.  "Our legal department will
be announcing the sanctions shortly, and these may include a fine
or the closure of the Velazquez fields."
     Inderena officials claim that Texas Petroleum, knowing that
Inderena officials could not (until quite recently) inspect the
area because it was controlled by paramilitary groups, was
deliberately discharging untreated effluent into two streams.
Furthermore, Texas Petroleum allegedly tried to deceive Inderena
officials when they inspected the area.  Avellaneda said Texas
Petroleum stopped the discharge of all effluent to one of the
streams and tried to convince Inderena authorities that the stream
with no effluent was the one that received all the treated
effluent.  Texas Petroleum maintains that the Inderena inspector
confused the two streams due to a lack of familiarity with the
area.  "We clean up effluents as a matter of course, as you would
sweep and clean your house," said Joaquin Escobar, chief
environmental officer for Texas Petroleum in Columbia.
Furthermore, Inderena says there's a big difference between the
way Texas Petroleum and Colombia's oil company (Ecopetrol) operate
in the area.  "We want to demonstrate with these sanctions that
it's possible to exploit the oil in this area without
contaminating its waters, as Ecopetrol does," said Avellaneda.
Despite all the rhetoric from the government, Texas Petroleum says
it has yet to be officially contacted about the matter, and argues
that it is innocent.  "Our conscience is clear, and we are certain
that once the technical information is examined, the company's
worldwide reputation for environmental excellence will be
confirmed," said Escobar.
     In 1987, Texas Petroleum was admittedly involved in
contaminating La Cienaga de Palagua, a freshwater lake near its
Velazquez fields.  It discharged into the lake salty wastewaters
loaded with chlorides, strontium, vanadium, lead, and mercury,
resulting in the death of millions of fish.  Ecopetrol was also
implicated in this environmental disaster.
     For more information: Alfonso Avellaneda, Departamento de
Medio Ambiente del Inderena, Carrera 10 #20-30, Bogota, Colombia.
Tel: +571-283-3562.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Bolivia to Enact Sweeping Environmental Legislation by Year's End

     The Bolivian Congress is putting the finishing touches on the
country's first-ever piece of comprehensive environmental
legislation.  The environmental bill, which is expected to become
law before the end of the year, will also create a
ministerial-level National Environment Secretariat responsible for
developing appropriate regulations and seeing that they are
enforced.  "The principal goal of this legislation is the
protection and conservation of the environment and natural
resources in Bolivia," said Gerardo Aguierre, Bolivia's Secretary
General of the Environment and one of the bill's authors.
"Bolivia needs to develop economically, but not at the expense of
the environment; therefore, there will be incentives for
businesses to protect the environment as well as penalties for
noncompliance," he told EWLA.
     When this bill becomes law, say its drafters, the conduct of
business will change drastically in Bolivia.  For example, fines
and prison terms of up to 10 years will await those who import or
traffic in toxic waste in Bolivia, and for those who bring into
the country contaminating technologies that have been outlawed in
their country of origin.  In addition, the law will establish
penal codes for polluting the air, water, and land.  Environmental
impact studies will be required for all new projects, both public
and private, before authorities grant approval.
     Bolivian environmentalists are generally pleased with the
bill, although they say developing regulations and enforcing them
will be a tough task.  "The fact that there is an environment bill
that will soon become law is a big step in the right direction,
but we have to make sure that the laws and regulations are
enforced," said Christian Vallejos of the Friends of Nature
Foundation, based in Santa Cruz, Bolivia.  Luis Alberto Rodrigo,
director of the Environmental Defense League, an umbrella
environmental organization in Bolivia, praised the government for
having the political will to work with many diverse groups to come
up with the comprehensive environmental bill, but likewise
expressed reservations about how effectively the new laws will be
enforced.  "I feel that it will be very hard for the government
to enforce the laws and regulations without adequate mechanisms
and funds," he told EWLA.  He believes that industries operating
in Bolivia will have to start taking environmental protection very
seriously.
     The legislation originated about a year and a half ago in the
Environment Committee of the House of Deputies, the lower house in
the bicameral parliament.  For the executive branch, the office of
the Secretary General of the Environment was also involved in
drafting the bill.  Two previous environmental bills did not
survive, according to Aguierre, because they tried to cover too
much and thus were too vague.  The current bill, however, is
expected to survive the process and become law.  "A general draft
of the bill unanimously passed in the House in early October, and
now legislators are carefully reviewing each of the 121 articles
and making any needed changes," Aguierre told EWLA.  Once the
House passes the entire bill, including all of the articles, it
will go to the Senate for a similar process.  But if the Senate
makes any changes, then it will have to be approved again by the
House.  The exact same bill has to be approved in both chambers
before it can go to the president of the republic, Jaime Paz
Zamora.
     For more information: Gerardo Aguierre, Secretary General of
the Environment, Av. Camacho 1471, Edificio Maca, La Paz, Bolivia.
Tel: +591-2-361-647; Fax: +591-2-357-535.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Central American Nations to Ban Toxic Waste Imports

     The Interparliamentary Central American Commission of
Environment and Development (ICACED), which convened with all its
42 members for the first time 23-26 October in Guatemala City,
Guatemala, urged all member nations to ban the importation of
toxic waste.  "We recognize that we have serious environmental
problems to address, the principal one being to protect Central
America from the industrialized nations' intent on making us their
toxic waste dump," said Arturo Amiel Escobar, a Guatemalan
legislator and the general coordinator of the event.  The
commission, which is made up of legislators from each country's
congressional environment committees, also called for steps to be
taken to clean up Central America's cities, and halt deforestation
on the Central American isthmus.
     Panama and Belize are the only two Central American countries
that have already outlawed toxic waste imports, but sources say
the remaining five are not far behind.  "Following the meeting,
the Guatemalan Congress began working on modifying the nation's
environmental law to include the prohibition of any type of toxic
waste from entering this country," Amiel told EWLA.  In addition
to calling for a ban on toxic waste imports, the participants at
the meeting also called on Central American industry to work
together with the governments to protect the environment.  "Our
objective is to give the private sector incentives to protect the
environment, and work toward a consensus between government and
industry on how to protect the environment, because otherwise it
won't work," said Amiel.
     The ICACED was created in August 1990, with the ratification
of the Central American Environmental Protection Agreement by the
member nations.  The Central American presidents decided at a
summit in February 1989 to create the pan-Central American
organization to allow the region's governments to work together to
develop coordinated environmental laws.  The commission's
executive committee, which consists of the presidents of each
country's congressional environment committee, meets every three
months to discuss legislative initiatives in the areas of
environmental protection and economic development and takes back
the commission's recommendations to their colleagues for action.
     For more information: Lic. Arturo Amiel Escobar, Congreso de
la Republica, 9a, Avenida 9-44, Zona 1 Guatemala City, Guatemala.
Tel: +5022-21-260/69.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

"Chemical Prospecting" Unites Costa Rica and US Pharmaceutical
Firm

     Merck & Co., Inc., one of the word's largest pharmaceutical
firms, has agreed to pay a Costa Rican conservation group US $1
million to provide Merck with plant and insect samples that might
lead to the development of new products.  The two-year renewable
agreement is believed to be one of the first in the world, said
Rodrigo Gamez, director of Costa Rica's nonprofit National
Institute of Biodiversity of Costa Rica (INBio).  INBio will
supply Merck with the chemical makeup of environmental samples
exhibiting desirable characteristics, such as freedom from fungus
or other biologically destructive organisms.
     The agreement calls for INBio to receive royalties from the
sales of any marketable products that result from the research.
INBio will use some of the US $1 million to pay for certain
start-up expenses, but part of the money, and later a percentage
of the royalties, will be earmarked for Costa Rica's conservation
efforts, including its famed national parks system, which covers
25% of the country.
     "This agreement gives Merck access to the amazing collection
of biological specimens found in Costa Rica, while working with an
organization that will protect and conserve the habitats from
which these samples are drawn," said Merck's Pamela Adkins.  Gamez
said other large companies are interested in the idea of "chemical
prospecting," but he was reluctant to reveal who they were.  He
was optimistic, though, that agreements such as the one with Merck
could become a lucrative source of income to the country.  "This
could become as lucrative as the country's coffee and banana
exports," he said.
     The INBio, created in 1989 at the recommendation of the Costa
Rican government, is currently engaged in the inventory,
identification, and classification of the country's diverse wealth
of flora and fauna.  At least a half a million species of
organisms exist in Costa Rica's tropical habitat.
     For more information: Dr. Rodrigo Gamez, Director, Instituto
Nacional de Biodiversidad, Apdo. 22-3100 Santo Domingo, Heredia,
Costa Rica.  Tel: +506-40-9287; Fax: +506-36-2816.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet
November 1991

Hotline:

     The Mexican government recently unveiled a three-year, US$460
million environmental protection program for its northern border,
which EWLA will examine in the next issue ... In July Venezuela's
government created its first biosphere reserve, an area of eight
million hectares in the Alto Orinoco region, to protect indigenous
populations along with flora and fauna ... According to
Guatemala's Ministry of Energy, unleaded gasoline is now available
in that Central American country ... For more information on any
article in this issue, contact the EWLA Hotline; Tel:
 +1-617-641-5108, Fax: +1-617-648-8707.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>