
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B03-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B043-36</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020813 text/html 22723
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:58 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:47 GMT
Content-length: 22505
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Barbiturates</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p> </p>

<h3>BARBITURATES </h3>

<p> </p>

<p>45. The term 'barbiturate' generally refers to drugs which are
derivatives of barbituric acid. Barbital, the first drug of this
class to be synthesized, was introduced into medicine in Germany
in 1903. Barbiturates rapidly gained a wide usage as
tranquillizers, sedatives and hypnotics (sleep inducers) which
continues to this day. In the past half-century, over 2,000
different barbiturates have been synthesized, although less than
a dozen make up the bulk of current use. Among these are
amobarbital (Amytal*), pentobarbital (Nembutal*), phenobarbital
(Luminal*), and secobarbital (Seconal*). These drugs are
frequently referred to as 'barbs', 'nemmies', 'goof balls',
'yellow jackets', 'red devils', 'downers' or 'sleeping pills'. </p>

<p>The barbiturates are often classified by the duration of their
sedative or hypnotic action at a standard dose. Since the
similarities among these drugs exceed the differences, they will
be discussed in general terms as a group. </p>

<p>46. Barbiturates are among the most widely used psychoactive
drugs (medically and non-medically) in our society, and are the
toxic agents in thousands of accidental or intentional deaths
annually in North America. In addition, the barbiturates have
considerable potential for producing psychological and
physiological dependence, and are probably second only to alcohol
in frequency of drug-induced debilitation in modern society.
While a considerable body of research exists into the many
medical applications of these drugs, there has been relatively
little careful investigation of non-medical use. </p>

<p>Although the medical and non-medical use of barbiturates
appears to be widespread across age groups and social class, the
chronic use of these drugs, as with alcohol, seems to be
primarily an adult practice. Good epidemiological data in this
area are not available. Since prescription control is only
partially effective and possession of these drugs for personal
use without medical authorization is not a criminal offence and,
perhaps, because the users do not appear to form any homogeneous,
cohesive or easily recognized minority, the usual medical and law
enforcement statistics are of little assistance in assessing the
extent of non-medical use. </p>

<p>47. It has been frequently said that in Canada, the supply of
barbiturates lawfully manufactured or imported greatly exceeds
the requirements of legitimate medical use. It appears that many
current non-medical users were initiated into barbiturate use for
medical reasons. Numerous medical users develop dependence and
continue use long after the original medical purpose or
prescription is absent, and there are indications that most
chronic barbiturate users obtain the drugs through legitimate
channels.98 Since many physicians do not adequately maintain or
monitor prescription records, a patient may be able to arrange an
increase in the frequency and/or quantity of drug prescribed. In
addition, many chronic barbiturate<i> </i>(and other prescription
drug) users obtain 'legitimate' prescriptions from a number of
different doctors simultaneously, without the physicians'
awareness.79 Because of these patterns, the distinction between
medical and non-medical use of barbiturates is often particularly
difficult. Essentially all of the medical and non-medical
barbiturate supply in Canada is legitimately and professionally
manufactured; 'home-made' versions have not been identified. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Medical
Use </h3>

<p>48. Barbiturates are commonly used in medical practice today
and it would seem likely that many households have had first-hand
experience with them. Most of the medical uses are based on the
sedative, hypnotic, and anti-convulsant effects of the drugs.
Barbiturates are widely prescribed where a general depression of
nervous system activity is desired. In low doses, they are widely
used as day-time sedatives or tranquillizers. The hypnotic effect
of these drugs is familiar to thousands of Canadians who use
barbiturates in higher dose in the form of the common sleeping
pill. Barbiturates are also often administered alone, and in
conjunction with other drugs, as anaesthetics in surgical and
related medical situations; but they are poor analgesics if used
alone. The anti-convulsant effects of certain barbiturates have
been very important in the treatment of acute convulsions
associated with drug dependence withdrawal symptoms, various
neurological disorders (including epilepsy), and poisoning due to
the overdose of such stimulants as strychnine, nicotine and
cocaine. </p>

<p>Other medical applications include diagnosis and attempted
therapy of certain psychiatric disorders. In these instances the
drug is usually administered intravenously in a dose adjusted to
keep the patient in a semi-conscious state in which inhibitions
are reduced and various suppressed and emotionally charged
material may be released. This procedure is essentially that used
in the so-called 'truth serum' application in criminal
investigations. This effect, then, is really just a carefully
monitored dose-response to ordinary short-acting barbiturates
and, while this procedure frequently results in information
different from that communicated normally, there is little
evidence that it really exposes the 'truth' as such. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Administration,
Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate </h3>

<p>49. In crystalline form, barbiturates are odourless, white or
yellow powders, with a slightly bitter taste. They are available
as powders, elixirs, injections, suppositories, capsules or
tablets (both in sustained and delayed release forms). They are
frequently marketed for medical use in mixtures with other drugs,
such as other sedatives or tranquillizers, analgesics, belladonna
alkaloids (e.g., atropine or scopolamine), various stimulants
(e.g., amphetamine or caffeine), vitamins and various
gastrointestinal agents. </p>

<p>Barbiturates are usually administered orally for both medical
and non-medical purposes and are readily and efficiently absorbed
by the stomach, small intestine, and rectum. Absorption is more
rapid on an empty stomach than if the drug is taken immediately
after eating. Both intramuscular and intravenous injections are
also effective, but they are more prone to physiological
complication and are generally avoided except for special
purposes. While most chronic dependent users take barbiturates
orally, those who are experienced with self-injections (e.g.,
opiate narcotic or amphetamine dependents) may use the
intravenous route. </p>

<p>After absorption into the bloodstream, barbiturates are
initially distributed rather uniformly throughout the body, with
the latency of the psychological response being partly a function
of the facility of the particular drug in entering the brain. The
body eliminates barbiturate activity in several ways. Most
barbiturates are broken down or metabolized in the liver into
relatively inactive substances which are excreted by the kidney
in the urine, along with various quantities of the unaltered
drug. Temporary binding of drug molecules by plasma and tissue
protein soon after distribution, plus the affinity of certain
barbiturates for body tissue fats, may further shorten the
initial central nervous system (CNS) effects (and possibly
prolong other more subtle reactions). The preceding factors of
metabolism, excretion, and distribution are largely responsible
for the differences in potency and duration of action among the
different barbiturates. Acute and chronic barbiturate use can be
identified from blood and urine samples. 198 </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Psychological
Effects </h3>

<p>50. Many of the psychological and behavioural effects of<b> </b>hypnotic
doses of barbiturates are quite similar to the alcohol
inebriation syndrome and consequently do not need much
elaboration. While the drug user may be able to discriminate
between the alcohol and barbiturate states subjectively, it is
extremely difficult to tell the difference from the user's
behaviour. </p>

<p>Although high doses invariably produce behavioural sedation,
drowsiness, and sleep, the effects of mailer quantities may be
quite unpredictable. As with alcohol and other sedatives,
barbiturates may initially produce behavioural excitation,
stimulation and lack of inhibition (especially at low doses),
rather than sedation, depending on the situation and the
individual. In certain persons, sedation is not produced until a
considerable quantity has been administered, whereas other
psychological and behavioural effects may be quite pronounced.
The user may become happy, pleasant, euphoric or 'mellow' on one
extreme, or possibly hostile, suspicious, aggressive and violent
on the other. Emotional depression, self-pity, and withdrawal are
also not uncommon, and barbiturate-related suicides are
frequently reported. Although low-dose effects are often erratic,
moderate to high doses generally slow down reaction time, impair
complicated mental functions, and produce a lessening of
inhibition, a reduction in emotional control, and an impairment
of physical co-ordination as well as a variety of other effects
resembling alcohol inebriation. Acute toxic psychoses are rare.
The extreme variability in response, even within the same
individual over a short period of time, is illustrated by
Wikler's report.243 </p>

<p>After intravenous injection of 0.25 to 1.0gm of amobarbital, a
subject may fall asleep if he lies in bed undisturbed, yet he may
be awake and voluble if interviewed by a psychiatrist, or he may
exhibit ataxia on attempting to walk back to his bed, but he may
'sober up' promptly when instructed to pose for a motion picture
demonstration of ataxia. </p>

<p>51. Frequent mention is made of a phenomenon called 'drug
automatism', associated with toxic barbiturate overdose,
although, many observers have expressed doubts as to its
significance. In this situation, the individual, in a
drug-induced state of confusion or stupor, is said to administer
additional doses of the drug without being fully aware of the
previous administration.148 </p>

<p>52. Although it appears certain that driving skills would be
diminished by barbiturate intoxication, little direct
investigation has been conducted. Related behavioural studies do
suggest such an effect. Low therapeutic doses may not reduce
driving ability, however, if the drug is not taken in conjunction
with other sedatives such as alcohol.72 </p>

<p>53. On the basis of existing evidence it would appear that the
long-term psychological effects of moderate barbiturate use are
negligible for most users. Some of the complications of chronic
high-dose use will be dealt with later. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Physiological
Effects </h3>

<p>54. The short-term effect of moderate to high doses of
barbiturates is a general depression of neural and muscular
activity. As with psychological and behavioural effects, the
response to low dose is much more variable. Initially, the
electroencephalogram (EEG) may suggest cortical activation,
although this pattern is usually soon replaced by signs of
drowsiness or sleep. The sleep induced by hypnotic doses
generally resembles normal sleep with the exception of a marked
reduction in the rapid eye movement (REM) stage, the significance
of which is only beginning to be understood. Drowsiness or
'hangover' symptoms may follow acute intoxication or drug-induced
sleep. Although the sedative action of the barbiturates has
frequently been attributed to their effects on the reticular
activating system of the brain, little is known of the specific
details, and this action might occur through a variety of
different pharmacological mechanisms. </p>

<p>A variety of other transient or temporary physiological
changes may occur with moderate barbiturate use; the majority of
these apparently reflect a general 'slowing down' of
physiological activity (in the respiratory, cardiovascular and
other systems) normally occurring with behavioural sedation, and
are of little clinical significance. After even chronic
non-medical use there is generally a fairly complete recovery of
psychological and physiological capabilities following withdrawal
instances of permanent psychological or neurological disorder, or
of irreversible liver or kidney damage are rarely reported. This
is a rather surprising picture in light of the vast number of
disabilities attributed to chronic alcoholism and the general
pharmacological similarities between alcohol and the
barbiturates. It may be significant to note here that persons
physically dependent on barbiturates seem to be more likely to
maintain a reasonable state of nutrition than do chronic
alcoholics. </p>

<p>The toxic or poisoned state induced by barbiturate over-dose
is characterized by coma, a general shock syndrome (e.g., weak
rapid pulse, low blood pressure and cold sweaty skin) and may
result in death due to respiratory arrest, cardiovascular
collapse or kidney failure. If the over-dose is not fatal, a
temporary jaundice due to impaired liver function is likely to
follow and skin reactions may result. Some of these responses
will also occur to normal doses in individuals allergic to or
abnormally sensitive to the barbiturates. Because of the well
documented additive or potentiating effects (as well as
cross-tolerance) among the sedatives, users of related drugs,
such as alcohol, must be especially attentive to dose levels. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Tolerance
and Dependence </h3>

<p>55. Tolerance to some of the effects of barbiturates can be
demonstrated, although the degree and rate of tolerance
acquisition varies considerably with the dose, frequency of
administration and the individual. The potential for tolerance is
much lower with barbiturates than with the opiate narcotics, and
appears to level off at a maximum of 1.0 - 2.5gm. per day. (A
normal sleep-inducing dose might be around 0.1 - 0.3gm.) While
this loss of drug sensitivity is quite general and applies to
both sedative and mood effects, no tolerance appears to develop
to the lethal toxicity level since chronic users are as
susceptible to fatal over-doses as are initiates. In other words,
the safety margin decreases with increased tolerance. Several
mechanisms operate in producing tolerance. Barbiturates stimulate
the body's production of the metabolic enzymes which inactivate
the drug. Also, some insensitivity to the depressant effects
appears which might reflect a general neurological adaptation.
Certain learning processes are also probably involved in changing
the character of the response upon repeated administrations. Most
aspects of tolerance disappear after a few weeks of abstinence
from the drug. </p>

<p>Although barbiturates were not recognized as 'addictive' drugs
for decades after their general medical acceptance and usage, in
chronic users, physical dependence may develop along with
tolerance. Barbiturate dependence is in some respects similar to
opiate narcotic dependence, although barbiturate (and alcohol)
withdrawal symptoms are frequently more severe and are more
likely to result in death. The abstinence syndrome following
withdrawal of the drug in chronic heavy users may begin with a
reduction in intoxication and an apparent improvement in
condition. Within a few hours, however, general physical
weakness, dizziness, anxiety, tremors, hyperactivity, nausea,
abdominal cramps and vomiting may occur. These may be followed
after one-and-one-half to five days by muscle spasms and grand
mal (epileptic) seizures. Between the third and seventh day,
delusions and hallucinations may appear; this psychosis may last
for days or even months although recovery usually occurs within a
week or two. Death during the convulsive phase occasionally
occurs. 111, 89 </p>

<p>56. The full picture of barbiturate withdrawal only appears
after heavy chronic use, and the effects of abstinence following
more moderate consumption are considerably less severe, and may
manifest only a few of the classic symptoms. Many regular users
of therapeutic doses develop neither significant tolerance nor
physical dependence. As is the case with alcohol and opiate
narcotics, babies born of mothers physically dependent on
barbiturates are also physically dependent on the same drugs. </p>

<p>Psychological dependence also occurs in some users, and
anxious or tense individuals may become dependent on even small
doses in order to function in<b> </b>a manner which they consider
satisfactory. Many persons depend upon the hypnotic effects of
the barbiturates and can not sleep without a pill. In other
individuals, the drug may be depended upon for a variety of
subjective effects which the user considers essential to his
well-being. The problem of psychological and behavioural
dependence on barbiturates has not been adequately explored,
however, and remains in the area of clinical impression and
conjecture. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Barbiturates
and Other Drugs </h3>

<p>57. Because of the many similarities between barbiturates and
other sedatives, they are often used interchangeably. A certain
amount of cross-tolerance exists among these drugs, and chronic
users of barbiturates are generally quite resistant to many of
the effects of alcohol, minor tranquillizers and volatile
anaesthetics, as well. This cross-tolerance, however, does not
appear to affect the lethal dose, and large quantities of alcohol
and barbiturates taken simultaneously (acting in an additive
fashion) may produce a toxic or fatal reaction. In addition, the
sedative drugs have the capacity to be substituted for each other
in diminishing withdrawal symptoms, and barbiturates are
frequently used therapeutically to reduce the severity of
withdrawal in alcoholics. Since the sedatives show this
cross-dependence, individuals dependent on one may turn to other
sedatives if the supply of the preferred drug is restricted.
Consequently, chronic barbiturate dependents are usually heavy
alcohol users as well. Such multiple users often refer to the
barbiturate intoxication as a 'dry drunk'. Barbiturates have the
advantage of producing inebriation without the obvious odour of
alcohol. </p>

<p>The relationship between barbiturates and the opiate narcotics
is more complicated. These drugs may not show significant
cross-tolerance, although barbiturates can be useful in the
treatment of opiate narcotic withdrawal symptoms and<b> </b>may
effectively reduce the unpleasantness of the abstinence syndrome.
The drugs do interact in some sort of complementary way since
barbiturates are frequently, used by opiate narcotic dependents
to strengthen or reinforce a weak heroin dose or as a substitute
in an emergency. Many opiate users, however, avoid barbiturates
and consider the barbiturate-dependent person to be at the bottom
of the 'addict' community, together with the alcoholics. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Barbiturates are often used in conjunction with
        amphetamines. Dexamyl*, for example, is a combination of
        dextroamphetamine and amobarbital which supposedly
        produces stimulation without certain of the irritation or
        tension-producing effects of the amphetamines. More
        important clinically, is the frequently noted alternating
        cycle of sedation and stimulation which many medical and
        non-medical drug users demonstrate. A stimulant may be
        used to overcome the drowsy hangover the day after a
        hypnotic dose of barbiturate. By evening, another
        sedative dose may be necessary to overcome the insomnia
        potentiated by the day's amphetamine. This continuing
        cycle is apparently not at all uncommon among otherwise
        socially respectable drug users. A somewhat related
        pattern has been demonstrated by some amphetamine
        injecting 'speed freaks' who use barbiturates to
        terminate the stimulant effect or produce sleep after a
        'high' of several days' duration. </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>