
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B03-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B043-197</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020938 text/html 29298
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:59:47 GMT
Content-length: 29080
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Opiate Narcotics</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h3>OPIATE NARCOTICS </h3>

<p> </p>

<p>223. The term narcotic has had wide and inconsistent usage in
lay, legal and scientific circles. Some use the word to
characterize any drug which produces stupor, insensibility or
sleep; many apply it only to derivatives of the opium plant
('opiates'); others consider the term equivalent to
addiction-producing; and in legal matters, 'narcotics' may refer
to almost any allegedly dangerous drugs (for example marijuana
and cocaine are often considered with opiate compounds in
narcotics regulations in spite of the fact that they have little
in common with them). To reduce some of this ambiguity, the
specific phrase opiate narcotic will be used in this report, and
will be restricted to drugs which are derivatives of, or are
pharmacologically similar to products of the opium plant <i>papaver
somniferum</i>. </p>

<p>224. The earliest unambiguous description of opium to which we
have access was written in the third century B.C., although some
scholars have cited references to opiate-like drugs dated more
than 5,000 years ago.29 Many believe that Homer's 'Nepenthe' was
opium. These drugs are obtained from the juice of the unripened
seed pod of the opium poppy plant soon after the flower petals
begin to fall - no other part of the plant produces psychoactive
substances. </p>

<p>Although 'opium eating' has been known in Asia for thousands
of years, widespread use of the drug did not occur until the
development of the British East India Company's wholesale opium
empire in the eighteenth century. The practice of smoking opium
developed in China soon after American tobacco was introduced to
the Orient. Chinese prohibition of the British opium precipitated
the 'opium war' in which the world's greatest naval power forced
China to open its door to the British (opium) trade. 223 </p>

<p>225. In 1805, the major active constituent in opium was
isolated - an alkaloid given the name morphine, after the Greek
God of Dreams, Morpheus. In the next half century, various other
alkaloids were discovered, such as codeine and papaverine, both
if which are in general use today. Since then, a variety of
semisynthetic (e.g., heroin, in 1874) and synthetic (e.g.,
methadone, Demerol* and Alvodine*), opiate-like drugs have been
developed. These compounds have the potential of producing
qualitatively similar actions (at different doses), although
there is considerable variability among them in the potency of
the different opiate effects. Heroin, more potent on a weight
basis than morphine, is usually the choice of the chronic opiate
narcotic user. This drug was originally considered
'non-addictive' when put on the market. Those members of the
medical and related profession who use these drugs non-medically,
as well as others who have become dependent as a result of
medical use, tend, to use morphine or the synthetics. Because of
the similarities among these drugs, they will, with a few
exceptions be dealt with as a group. Heroin (and sometimes other
opiate narcotics) is often referred to as 'H', 'horse', 'junk',
'scrag' or 'smack'. </p>

<p>226. Until the nineteenth century, 'raw' opium was either
smoked or taken orally. There is a decidedly lower dependence
liability -with these techniques than: with 'practices' which
followed and it was not until the isolation of morphine and the
invention of the hypodermic needle that the opiate narcotics
became a serious problem in the Western World. Morphine was
widely acclaimed among medical practitioners and was used freely,
to treat pain during the American Civil War, sometimes producing
a dependency called 'soldiers' disease'. General use of tincture
of opium in many patent medicines (e.g. Paregoric) made the quasi
-medical use of opiates a common practice in North America at
that time. On the West Coast, the influx of Chinese labourers,
some of whom smoked opium, apparently stimulated non-medical use
to some degree. The extent of opiate narcotic problems in the
nineteenth century is difficult to ascertain, however, it would
appear that the use of these drugs was not a major moral issue.
In the early part of the twentieth century, some of the problems
of morphine and heroin dependence became apparent, and most
opiate products were removed from the open market in North
America and non-medical possession was prohibited. </p>

<p>227. Because characteristics fluctuate with social change, a
description of drug users is necessarily tied to a given
population at a given point and time and may have little general
application. There is little information on opiate narcotic users
in North America prior to this century, but many researchers
contend that far more women than men made use of these drugs at
that time. Since the general opiate prohibition in the early part
of this century, men have become the predominant users. While
Chinese opium smokers were not uncommon a half century ago, there
appear to be very few Orientals in North America using opiate
narcotics today. In recent decades, the use of these drugs in
Canada has tended to centre on a few urban areas. Medical and
related professions represent a frequently noted high-risk group
with respect to the development of drug dependency. For various
reasons, statistics on the incidence of dependency in this group
are quite inadequate. Many researchers contend that health
profession dependents constitute a significant proportion of the
total chronic opiate narcotic using population.28 For many years,
the known opiate narcotic users have made up about 0.02 per cent
of the overall Canadian population. </p>

<p>228. Although many observers do not feel that the non-medical
use of opiate narcotics is currently a major public health
problem in Canada, there are numerous reasons for directing
attention to this group of drugs. Historically, the popular
conception of the 'narcotics addict dope fiend' has established
an image of the non-medical drug user which persists and intrudes
into almost every examination or investigation of drug use today.
Furthermore, the opiate narcotics have played an important role
as a model in much of the past and present drug legislation, and
in general crimino-legal approach to the control of socially
censured drug use. Although many important questions about the
opiate narcotics are still unanswered, it is clear that much of
what has commonly passed for fact, is fiction, and often bears
little resemblance to scientific information. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Medical
Use </h3>

<p>229. Most of the current medical uses for the opiate narcotics
were fairly well understood and established in Europe by the
middle of the sixteenth century, and were probably well known in
certain areas long before that time. These drugs are primarily
used in the relief of suffering from pain, in the treatment of
diarrhoea and dysentery, and to reduce cough. Hundreds of related
compounds have been synthesized in attempts to retain the
clinical benefits but reduce the dependence liabilities of the
opiate narcotics. These efforts have not been very successful,
and thus morphine and related drugs are still considered by
physicians to be among the most valuable drugs available to the
practitioner today. Heroin is no longer used medically in North
America. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Administration,
Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate </h3>

<p>230. Opiate narcotics are produced in a variety of tablets and
capsules, elixirs, cough syrups (with codeine), injections,
rectal suppositories and, on the illegal market, are also
available in a gummy solid or powdered form. Codeine is often
mixed with other non-opiate analgesics (e.g. APC &amp; C*;
222's*). While the opiate narcotics are well absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, this route is often erratic and
unpredictable compared to injections. Among non-medical users,
subcutaneous ('skin popping') and intravenous ('mainlining')
injections are commonly used with heroin and morphine. Raw opium
is usually eaten or smoked and the powder is sometimes sniffed
('snorted'). Only a minute fraction of the drug absorbed actually
enters the central nervous system. The duration and intensity of
the effects vary considerably with the different drugs in this
class (and as a function of dose), although the major action
might typically last from three to six hours. These drugs are
usually inactivated in the liver and excreted in the urine, often
along with small quantities of free morphine. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom"><img
src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Physiological
Effects </h3>

<p>231. Pure opiate narcotics produce few significant
non-psychological effects in therapeutic doses. The immediate or
short-term physiological response usually includes a general
reduction in respiratory and cardiovascular activity, a
depression of the cough reflex, a constriction of the pupil of
the eye, and minor reduction in visual acuity, slight itching,
dilation of cutaneous blood vessels, warming of the skin, a
decrease in intestinal activity (often causing constipation),
and, in some individuals, nausea and vomiting. In higher doses,
however, insensibility and unconsciousness result. The primary
toxic overdose symptoms are coma, shock and, ultimately,
respiratory arrest and death. </p>

<p>232. There appears to be little direct permanent physiological
damage from chronic use of pure opiate narcotics. Numerous
complications are observed, however, if the overall drug use
pattern involves adulterated street samples, unsterile
administrations, unhygienic living standards, poor eating habits
and inadequate general medical care - all of which are commonly
part of the criminal-addict behaviour syndrome. Commonly reported
disorders in street users are hepatitis, tetanus, heart and lung
abnormalities, scarred veins ('track marks'), local skin
infections and abscesses, and obstetrical problems in pregnant
females. At one time, malaria was also commonly seen in this
population. </p>

<p>233. The general mortality rate among heroin dependents is
considerably higher than normally expected for their age group.
Sudden collapse and death following intravenous injection has
been reported in a number of these individuals. Such fatalities
have often been attributed to overdose resulting from erratic and
unexpected variations in the purity of drugs obtained from the
black market. However, there is considerable evidence that many
of these deaths are not merely due to overdose but are a
consequence of partly soluble contaminant substances in the
sample and, perhaps, some drug hypersensitivity phenomenon.43 </p>

<p>234. The subjective effects of narcotics may vary considerably
among different individuals and situations. Most persons
reportedly do not enjoy the experience and may actively avoid its
repetition in a controlled or experimental situation, while
others describe feelings of warmth, well-being, peacefulness and
contentment. Euphoria or dysphoria, nausea, drowsiness,
dizziness, inability to concentrate, apathy and lethargy are
commonly noted. Certain individuals, especially when fatigued may
be stimulated into feelings of energy and strength. Higher doses
produce a turning inward and sleep. Often a pleasant dreamlike
state occurs. Some regular users describe their drug experiences
in near ecstatic, and, often sexual terms (especially the 'rush'
of intravenous injection). </p>

<p>The potential of the opiate narcotics to relieve suffering
from pain depends upon several mechanisms. The major effect is
not on the sensation directly, but on the psychological reaction
to it. Often individuals can still feel the pain sensation, and
rate its intensity reliably, in spite of the fact that much or
all of the negative or unpleasant aspects are absent. In other
words, they may still feel the pain, but it does not bother them
to the same extent. Morphine has little effect on the other
senses and unlike non-narcotic analgesics and sedatives, it can
often control pain at doses which do not necessarily produce
marked sedation, gross intoxication or major impairment of motor
coordination, intellectual functions, emotional control or
judgement.110 In addition to reducing the anxiety of pain and
therefore the motivation to avoid it, the opiate narcotics also
tend to decrease other primary motivation associated with sex,
food, and aggression. </p>

<p>235. The psychological effects of chronic opiate narcotic use
are often rather straightforward extensions of the short-term
response. In regular users, much of the variability and
unpredictability of the immediate response is lessened, partly
because individuals who find the experience unpleasant tend to
avoid additional exposure, and also because many who were
initially upset by the unusual physiological and psychological
sensations caused by the drugs learn to tolerate and even seek
them and may no longer be distressed in the situation. While some
individuals who become dependent on the opiate narcotics withdraw
from regular social activities, and live what might appear to be
an immoral, criminal and slovenly existence, others are able to
lead an otherwise normal life with little change in work habits
or responsibilities. Possible factors underlying these
differences will be discussed later. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Tolerance
and Dependence </h3>

<p>236. Tolerance to the different actions of opiate narcotics
varies with the magnitude and frequency of administration, and
the response being measured. In chronic use, a considerable
degree of tolerance occurs to the sedative, analgesic, euphoric
and respiratory depressant (and, therefore; potentially lethal)
effects; less tolerance develops to the constipating and
pupil-constricting activity. Consequently, persons who are
motivated by the chronic avoidance of pain or other unpleasant
subjective conditions, or perhaps simply by the positive euphoric
effects of the drug, are likely to increase dose and may
eventually tolerate several times the quantity which would be
lethal to a normal individual. Occasional use does not produce
tolerance, however. </p>

<p>237. The degree of physical dependence acquired to these drugs
is closely related to the tolerance developed. With low dose or
infrequent use, little dependency occurs and withdrawal symptoms
may be nonexistent, or merely resemble the symptoms of a mild
flu. Withdrawal of the drug after chronic high-dose use results
in a severe and painful pattern of responses which are similar to
those associated with alcohol and barbiturate dependence
(although it is not as physically dangerous). Usually less than
half a day after the last administration, the dependent begins to
feel irritable, anxious and weak; he sweats and, shivers and his
eyes and nose become watery. A few hours of uneasy sleep may
intervene before he begins the 'cold turkey' phase. The skin
becomes clammy, the pupils dilate, chills, nausea, vomiting, and
severe abdominal cramps occur with uncontrollable defecation;
tremors and, rarely, convulsions may develop. While death has
been reported, fatalities are much rarer than with sedative
withdrawal. The major symptoms of the abstinence syndrome
generally last several days, and gross recovery usually occurs
within about a week, although complete recuperation may take up
to six months .145 Tolerance is eliminated or greatly reduced
with withdrawal. Babies born of dependent mothers are also
physically dependent on the drug, and may die if withdrawal
symptoms are not recognized and treated soon after birth. It
should be noted that the different opiate narcotic drugs have
varying dependence-producing potentials, and physical dependence
is rarely seen in opium smokers or users of codeine (although
strong psychological dependence may occur). </p>

<p>238. Considerable cross-tolerance and cross-dependence exists
among the opiate narcotics. An intravenous injection of any of
these drugs, in sufficient dose, can completely eliminate the
withdrawal syndrome in a matter of minutes. Methadone can prevent
withdrawal symptoms at doses which provide little psychological
effect, and is frequently used in chronic 'maintenance'
programmes designed to rehabilitate dependents. Although the
sedatives and opiate narcotics do not usually show significant
cross-tolerance and dependence, barbiturates can ease the pain of
opiate withdrawal. Nalorphine (Nalline*) antagonizes the effects
of the other opiate narcotics and precipitates the withdrawal
syndrome in dependent individuals. This drug has been used to
'test' for dependence in suspected users. </p>

<p>219. ' The role of physical dependence in the overall picture
of chronic opiate narcotic use has been the subject of much
controversy and many observers feel that the psychological
components are the most important. Some investigators argue that
the fear of withdrawal is often the primary motivating factor
behind continued use, while others emphasize the profound craving
seen in some individuals, or the drug's positive reinforcing or
reward potential. Many dependent persons return to the drug at
some time after withdrawal, and some have occasionally been known
to voluntarily undergo withdrawal in order to lose tolerance (for
economic reasons), and immediately initiate chronic use again, at
a less expensive level. This practice suggests that, with some
individuals, psychological factors other than mere avoidance of
the abstinence syndrome can be dominant in the drug dependence.
Whether this motivation is related to the desire to escape or
avoid a life that is unpleasant, or emotionally painful or
depressing, or perhaps a more directly hedonistic demand for
pleasure or 'kicks', or even a disguised attempt at
self-destruction is not clear - no simple answer could be
expected to have much generality or validity. It has frequently
been observed that some individuals become dependent on the
hypodermic syringe (or 'point') in a way which is, in some
respects, independent of the pharmacological properties of the
drug. Persons showing such conditioning are often called 'needle
freaks'. </p>

<p>240. It is interesting to note that there are only a few
middle-aged persons who are dependent on opiate narcotics. Most
individuals spontaneously lose interest in the drugs before they
turn 45 years of age (barbiturate and alcohol dependents show no
such decline in use). Whether this is due to psychological or
physiological factors is uncertain. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Opiate
Narcotics and Crime </h3>

<p>241. A consensus exists among medical, law enforcement and
research authorities, as well as drug users themselves, that few
crimes of violence are directly produced by the use of the opiate
narcotics. On the other hand, there is a considerable
relationship between crime and opiate narcotic dependence in
North America and many drug dependent persons have non-drug
criminal records. This apparent paradox can be explained by two
important factors. To begin with, both in Canada and in the
United States, many individuals who become dependent on opiate
narcotics have a prior history of behavioural problems and
delinquency and have continued these practices. The second factor
is economical, and is associated with the high cost of heroin on
the black market and the demands made by extended tolerance. </p>

<p>Because of the illegal nature of the drug, the cost of a heavy
heroin habit may run anywhere from $15.00 to $50.00 a day and
higher, in spite of the fact that the medical-cost of the drugs
involved would just be a few cents. There are very few legitimate
ways in which most individuals can afford to meet that kind of an
expense. Consequently, when tolerance pushes the cost of drug use
above what the user can afford legitimately, he is forced into a
decision - either quit the drug and go through withdrawal, or
turn to easier, criminal, methods of acquiring the necessary
money. While many users refuse to become involved in such
activities and stop using the drug, at least temporarily, many
turn to petty crime, small robberies, shoplifting and
prostitution. These are the individuals who regularly come to the
attention of the law enforcement officials. More affluent persons
may be able to support the habit and continue indefinitely
without running afoul of the law. Medical profession dependents,
for example, apparently have less tendency to commit non-drug
offences - perhaps (in addition to predisposing psychological and
sociological factors) because they can often steal with little
risk or purchase the necessary drugs at low cost. </p>

<p>As Jaffe has stated:111 </p>

<p>The popular notions that the morphine addict is necessarily a
cunning, cringing, malicious and degenerate criminal who is
shabbily dressed, physically ill and devoid of the social
amenities, could not be farther from the truth. The addict who is
able to obtain an adequate supply of drugs through legitimate
channels and has adequate funds, usually dresses properly,
maintains his nutrition and is able to discharge his social and
occupational obligations with reasonable efficiency. He usually
remains in good health, suffers little inconvenience and is, in
general, difficult to distinguish from other persons. Good health
and productive work are thus not incompatible with addiction to
opiates. However. ... such continued productivity is the
exception rather than the rule. </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">The
Development of Dependence </h3>

<p>242. There have been a number of popular misconceptions about
the pattern of development of opiate narcotic dependence. Rumours
have frequently been heard that marijuana and hashish had been
spiked with heroin to produce opiate addiction in the
unsuspecting user. Similar rumours have been heard about 'spiked'
LSD. In fact, there are no known documented cases in Canada of
opiate narcotic adulteration of other drugs alleged to be pure.
The high price of illicit heroin renders such a hypothesis
extremely improbable. Furthermore, it would be highly unlikely,
if not impossible, for tolerance and dependence to develop
without the user knowing it. The majority of users, both here and
in the United States, were apparently first 'turned-on' by their
friends and peers. Blum (in the United States Task Force Report)
points out:28 </p>

<p>There is no evidence from any study, of initiation as a
consequence of aggressive peddling to innocents who are 'hooked'
against their will or knowledge. . . The popular image of the
fiendish pedlar seducing the innocent child is wholly false. </p>

<p>243. The once popular notion that the opiate narcotic
experience is intrinsically so pleasurable, or that physiological
dependence develops so rapidly, that most who are subjected to it
are promptly addicted is without support. In one experiment,
injections of morphine were given to 150 healthy male volunteers.
Only three were willing to allow repeated administration and none
indicated that he would have actively sought more. The
investigators42 conclude: </p>

<p>. . .opiates are not inherently attractive, euphoric or
stimulant. The danger of addiction to opiates resides in the
person and not the drug. </p>

<p>Lasagna et al 126 also report that the majority of normal
pain-free individuals found effects of opiates quite unpleasant.
Beecher22 reports that only ten per cent of a normal population
liked the morphine experience. Furthermore, many individuals who
developed tolerance and physical dependence in a medical
situation show little interest in the drug experience itself and
tend not to resume use after withdrawal. Even in non-medical
cases, there is evidence that only a small proportion of drug
users who have experimented with opiate narcotics in the streets
become physically dependent on them.42 </p>

<p>244. Many observers contend that certain, social and
personality factors predispose some individuals to drug
dependence and that otherwise normal individuals rarely, if ever,
become chronically dependent. There is considerable evidence that
both the ready availability of the drug and a social milieu
tolerating or encouraging drug use (either medical or
non-medical) are also important factors. Although there are
numerous individuals who have gradually worked up from occasional
'skin popping' to chronic 'mainline' dependence, there is at
present, little evidence that a large proportion of the Canadian
population is running this particular risk. However, there is
cause for apprehension because of the rapidly growing incidence
of heroin use among the young in the United States. Although
there are no known methods of predicting the likelihood of
dependence for any individual at this time, the use of opiate
narcotics involves a risk of considerable proportions for anyone.
</p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom">Opiate
Narcotics and Other Drugs </h3>

<p>245. In the United States, the opiate narcotic offender coming
to the attention of the law enforcement officials was often
reported to have previously and concurrently been a heavy user of
alcohol, barbiturates, tobacco, and marijuana. In Canada, the
pattern appears to be much more variable and heterogeneous.
Alcohol and barbiturates (and probably tobacco) have apparently
been the drugs most often associated with opiate narcotic use
here246, 215, although recent indications suggest that many new
heroin users may have experience with marijuana and other
psychedelic drugs as well. 170a There are reports that LSD is
generally not popular with regular heroin users, however.41 Some
opiate narcotic users also make use of stimulants such as
amphetamine and cocaine. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Much attention has been and is now being given to the
        'stepping-stone' or 'progression' theory of opiate
        narcotic dependence. Although there is no pharmacological
        basis for the hypothesis that one drug creates a 'need'
        for, or necessarily leads to another, there are numerous
        social factors which might link together the use of
        various drugs. It may well be that the questions of
        'progression' or predisposing experiences can never be
        definitively answered. Like other characteristics
        associated with deviant behaviour, they must be
        continually evaluated anew as the social context changes.
        Some observations on the possible relationship between
        marijuana and opiate narcotic use were presented in the
        previous section on cannabis. </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>