
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B17-199</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA060-000329-B016-203</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/superconductivity/section1.htm 205.168.79.27 19970115033545 text/html 6277
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 03:35:42 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Fri, 13 Sep 1996 14:56:48 GMT
Content-length: 6103
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<head>

<title>Superconductivity</title>

</head>

<body>

<P>

<H3><a name="conduct">Coated Conductors:   1995</a></H3>

<P>

The entire field of high-temperature superconductivity got a boost last 
April 

when Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) made worldwide news with 
their 

announcement of unprecedented current levels. The LANL announcement was 
for 

manufacture of a flexible HTS tape with current density of more than 1 
million 

amperes per square centimeter at liquid nitrogen temperatures-a current 


density nearly 100 times greater than other flexible HTS conductors. 
This 

current density correlated with the ability to carry an impressive 
critical 

current of 200 amps across the one-centimeter-wide tape.

<P>

Equally important, good current densities are maintained under fields of 


several Tesla. These results were obtained by Xin Di Wu and his 
colleagues by 

coating a specially treated nickel tape with YBCO, using pulsed laser 

deposition (PLD). LANL film deposition expertise was critical both in 
the PLD 

of superconducting thick films, as well as in the preparation of the 
nickel 

substrate, which was done by using two beams of ions to deposit and 
align a 

thin layer of cubic zirconia on the nickel. One of the ion beams removes 


material from a target block of yttria-stabilized cubic zirconia and 
deposits 

it onto the nickel. The second ion beam, focused on the metal at a 
specific 

angle, orients the crystal grains so they align properly as they grow.  
The 

effect of this second beam in causing alignment suggested the name of 
this 

technique-ion beam assisted deposition, or IBAD. When the superconductor 
is 

then deposited, YBCO crystals grow with essentially the same degree of 

in-plane alignment as in the zirconia buffer layer. 

<P>

The importance of this development, both to science and to 
superconductivity, 

was put in perspective by Dr. Edward Teller, Emeritus Director of 
Lawrence 

Livermore National Laboratory, at a July 6, 1995, meeting in Albuquerque 
held 

to discuss the LANL breakthrough with industry.  Dr. Teller's view was 
that, 

"Los Alamos has made a wonderful accomplishment-the ability to make a 
single 

crystal infinitely long." The YBCO alignment solves the problem that has 


plagued those attempting to make YBCO electrical wires-the grain 
boundary 

interference with current flow. Now, YBCO has again become a leading 
candidate 

for high-field, liquid-nitrogen-cooled use. 

<P>

<strong>RABiTS</strong>

<P>

In parallel with the IBAD work at LANL, Amit Goyal and his colleagues at 
Oak 

Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) have demonstrated excellent alignment 
in YBCO 

coatings on flexible metal strips, but by an entirely different method. 
The 

ORNL results were achieved by using industrially-scaleable techniques 
primarily 

involving rolling to create alignment that YBCO crystals copy when the 
strip 

is coated. The ORNL critical currents are less than 100,000 amperes per 
square 

centimeter, but show the same independence to high magnetic fields as 
the LANL 

IBAD results. Perhaps more important, the alignment in the substrate is 


somewhat better than reported from IBAD, raising the strong possibility 
that 

the ORNL process will ultimately give similar results. ORNL calls their 


process RABiTS, for Rolling Assisted Biaxial Textured Substrates.

<P>

Both the LANL and ORNL developments were totally supported by DOE funds, 
so 

licenses are available to companies wanting to commercialize these 
processes.  

The Electric Power Research Institute and several dozen companies are 
strongly 

interested. 

<P>

<H3>IBAD Buffer Layers</H3>

<P>

High critical currents in YBCO deposited on IBAD buffer layers were 
reported 

in 1992 by Paul Berdahl's group at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) 
and 

Iijima in Japan (Iijima et. al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 769 [1992]). The 
two 

groups were working independently. LBL reported 600,000 amperes per 
square 

centimeter in 1992 at the DOE annual program review, which remained a 
record 

for some time.  The LBL work, which was also entirely supported by DOE, 
was 

dropped from the program due to the strong focus on bismuth 
powder-in-tube 

conductors that has been the program's principal emphasis since then. 
LBL

received a patent this year for their innovative work and are discussing 


future industrial development with private companies.  Los Alamos began 
to 

emphasize IBAD in 1994 and reported 800,000 amperes per square 
centimeter at 

that year's annual program review.  Results continue to improve at LANL, 
as 

well as in Japan where the critical current measurements reported remain 
lower 

than LANL's. The excellent alignment in the zirconia buffer layer (which 
is 

later mirrored in the superconductor) results from the ion beam blasting 
away 

zirconia grains growing with the wrong orientation.  But the beam 
doesn't 

affect grains which grow with the desired orientation, instead it passes 


harmlessly through channels in their crystal lattice.

<P>

A key question is whether IBAD is too slow for large-scale 
manufacturing.  The 

rate governing parameters are the thickness of the buffer layer and the 


deposition rate. So far the work has been at a research level and a 
potential 

manufacturer has not been found to begin process optimization.

<P>

<H3>Buffer Layer Thickness</H3>

<P>

IBAD rate is largely determined by the required thickness of the 
zirconia 

buffer layer. Presently, LANL uses a 5000 Angstrom buffer layer, but is 


investigating whether layers as thin as 100 Angstroms may be adequate as 


suggested by Bob Hammond of Stanford University. Xin Di Wu of LANL also 
has 

another strategy: "If good YBCO requires a 5000 Angstrom buffer layer, 
it may 

be possible to grow a minority of that layer by IBAD and the rest by a 
faster, 

less expensive technique." An important task in 1996 is to determine 

experimentally the minimum thickness of the IBAD layer needed for 
high-quality 

YBCO coatings.

<P>

</body>

</HTML>

</DOC>