
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B37-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B017-16</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002741 text/html 43141
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:25:40 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:04 GMT
Content-length: 42954
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev62.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 10, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS AND TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(441 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>UKRAINE, G-7 FINALLY AGREE&nbsp;TO REMEDIATE CHERNOBYL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(402 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NORWAY, RUSSIA WILL COMBINE EFFORTS&nbsp;TO CLEAN UP SPENT FUEL NEAR BORDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>LOCKHEED TAKES-ON CLEANUP&nbsp;SPARGING FROM HORIZONTAL WELLS&nbsp;ATTACKS VOC PLUME IN PINELLAS, FLA.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(771 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>OAK RIDGE OFFERS FIELD SITES&nbsp;FOR COLLABORATION, RESEARCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(744 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>MODULARIZATION, AUTOMATION CUT&nbsp;N.Y. SUPERFUND SITE CLEANUP COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(433 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>GETTING INTO THE ACT&nbsp;AGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS ANNOUNCE&nbsp;ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP COOPERATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>GEL COMPOUND&nbsp;AUSTRALIAN RESEARCHERS PREVENT&nbsp;FUELS FROM REACHING DOWN UNDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(751 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>ENVIRO HAZ TECH OF PA.&nbsp;MOBILE INJECTION TREATMENT&nbsp;FOR DENSE CONTAMINATED SOIL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(641 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>RADIATION ASSESSMENT&nbsp;ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION&nbsp;TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(524 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>INFO FOR INVESTMENT?&nbsp;RECENT EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS&nbsp;KEY TO BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(681 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

SLANTS AND TRENDS


Bioremediation Shifts: FIND/SVP Inc., a New York-based
worldwide consulting and research firm, recently published a
170-page report, The Market for Bioremediation Products and
Services. The study focuses on the restoration market as
trends shift from research to actual cleanup. Since its
birth in the mid-1980s, the remediation market has grown
rapidly. "Bioremediation is not only the most
environmentally benign cleanup technology, it is often the
least expensive and the fastest. At a recently documented
groundwater contamination site, non-biological cleanup
methods would have taken up to 50 years to purify the water
and surrounding soils, while bioremediation took only two
years to do the job."

   But there are "formidable challenges" despite the growing
number of sites that require cleanup. The report puts into
perspective the mood of the 104th congress which appears
ready to eliminate the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA). There also is a complicated entanglement of
regulations that inhibit growth and practical application of
research. "Not only is hazardous waste assessment and
cleanup frequently a complex process, negotiating the
bureaucratic bidding process can be even more daunting."
Ethical implications surrounding the introduction of
genetically engineered life forms to degrade contamination
are another area of concern.

   These formidable challenges are not enough, however, to
prevent a compound annual growth rate of 16 percent to the
year 2000, according to FIND/SVP. Although the mood in
congress is hostile to EPA, there is support for military
site cleanup and the timing is such that results from
research are ready for large-scale implementation. "The
development of many new cost-effective and time-saving
bioremediation technologies...will [be favored] over other
cleanup methods." FIND/SVP also predicts cleanup
responsibilities will shift from federal to state and
private-party payers. The report should prove beneficial to
businesses that seek to expand and streamline efforts in a
fairly optimistic market. The Market for Bioremediation and
Services is priced at $2,250 and can be obtained by
contacting FIND/SVP, Department RGV, 625 Avenue of the
Americas, New York, NY 10011-2002. To see the table of
contents, visit Web site http://www.findsvp.cpm/. For more
information, call David Weiss at FIND/SVP at (212) 807-2604.


EMERGING MARKETS: Interest in environmental goods and
services continues to grow in Central Europe and the former
Eastern Bloc despite political and economic unrest. Many
countries like the Czech and Slovak Republics, Hungary and
Poland are adopting Western-style environmental regulations.
Privatization also has put cleanup and preventative concerns
in the hands of individuals rather than unaccountable,
state-run bureaucracies. Still, creating a climate conducive
to sustaining a development ethic is difficult in tight
economic times. Pollution prevention and remediation
programs could slow without adequate funding or enforcement
of regulations.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

UKRAINE, G-7 FINALLY AGREE
TO REMEDIATE CHERNOBYL


   Closure and remediation of Ukraine's troubled Chernobyl
nuclear power plant may soon begin as a result of the Dec.
20 accord between Kiev and the Group of Seven (G-7) most
industrialized countries. Meeting in Ottawa, the parties
signed a memorandum of understanding that $2.3 billion in
international financial aid would be made available to help
Ukraine close Chernobyl by 2000, according to a statement
issued after the event.

   Canada presently holds the G-7 chairmanship and the deal
was signed by Canadian Environment Minister Sheila Copps and
Ukrainian Environment Minister Yuri Kostenko. The European
Union also is a signatory.

   In addition to closure and remediation, the plan calls
for the development of replacement energy sources, including
the construction of two water-cooled reactors, the statement
says. The two new reactors meet all Western safety
standards, officials said. Western nuclear officials
repeatedly have said they would like all the graphite-
moderated RBMK reactors to be dismantled, replaced with
water-cooled units or otherwise upgraded to meet
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) standards. The
problem, they say, is funding.

   "The closure of Chernobyl will be an important step
toward improving nuclear safety, not only in Central and
Eastern Europe, but throughout the entire world as well,''
the statement quotes Copps as saying.

   Kostenko has criticized Western governments for focusing
too much attention on Chernobyl while ignoring safety
concerns associated with the former Soviet Union's 11
similar graphite-moderated reactors. Following the signing,
however, he appealed to the West to be promptly forthcoming
with the financial assistance. The Ukraine Environment
Minister said he is concerned about a meltdown occurring at
Russia's Khorsk facility which, because it is near Ukraine,
would be as devastating to Ukraine citizens as was the
Chernobyl accident.

   Although not legally binding, the MOU creates a backdrop
on which concrete closure plans can be based, Kostenko said.
The fact the deal is not binding prompted outrage from
environmental groups, which said such errors as failing to
set a specific shutdown date are major problems. In its
statement, Greenpeace International said offering to help
Ukraine finish work on two more reactors was
counterproductive.

   Aid package specifics include: $498 million in grants
from G-7 member states, $349 million of which will go to
nuclear safety and decommissioning; and $1.8 billion in loan
financing from international agencies. Of the total $2.3
billion, nearly $1.9 billion will be invested in new energy.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

NORWAY, RUSSIA WILL COMBINE EFFORTS
TO CLEAN UP SPENT FUEL NEAR BORDER


   In a bid to dispel concerns about radiation hazards posed
by waste facilities on Russia's Kola Peninsula and Novaya
Zemlya Island, Moscow and Oslo agreed to cooperate on
routine inspections and public notifications. In an
agreement reached in Moscow Dec. 15 between Russian Defense
Minister Pavel Grachev and Norwegian Defense Minister
Joergen Kosmo, the two countries will work together to
monitor and eventually dispose of military nuclear waste,
especially spent fuel held near the Norwegian border.

   Russian authorities have denied there are any major
radiation risks on Kola or Novaya Zemlya and want to use
cooperation with an internationally trusted state like
Norway to help dispel some of the negative press. Although
no concrete evidence of radiation leaks has been reported,
people working with such organizations as Norway's Bellona
environmental group say Russian authorities deny them
permission to inspect many military sites.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

LOCKHEED TAKES-ON CLEANUP
SPARGING FROM HORIZONTAL WELLS
ATTACKS VOC PLUME IN PINELLAS, FLA.


   An ambitious air sparging system at Lockheed-Martin's
Pinellas Plant, near Largo, Fla., aims at remediating an
entire vinyl chloride plume. Since September, the process
has dramatically reduced contaminant concentrations at all
monitoring wells. Air sparging consists of injecting
compressed air below the water table. As air bubbles upward,
volatile compounds partition into the gas phase and are
carried out of the ground water by rising air. Although air
sparging has been the subject of much research, often in
small field test cells, large-scale deployment of the
technology has been rare. The ground water contaminant plume
being remediated is ideal for  a  pilot  study,  said  Brent
Weesner, engineer in charge of the project at Lockheed-
Martin's Pinellas Plant near Largo, Fla. The plume is about
175 feet long and 75 feet wide, and contains vinyl chloride
at concentrations up to 40 ppb. The plume is well-
characterized. It occurs in an aquifer consisting of very
fine sand about 30 feet thick. A survey using numerous
Hydrocone probes defined the bottom of the aquifer
accurately. The plume is confined mostly to the upper
portion of the aquifer, as shown by Hydrocone samples. All
but two of about 30 samples taken at 25 feet depth showed no
vinyl chloride.

Forget the Monitoring

   Weesner's concept was to go straight for remediation of
the plume, rather than taking the more conventional approach
of carrying out extensive monitoring. Costs for air sparging
were expected to be similar to those for an extended
monitoring program.

   Seven horizontal wells were installed at a design depth
of 28 feet beneath the plume. Lengths ranged from 460 to 560
feet. Wells were drilled from two locations using the "river
crossing" method, in which the drill string was brought back
to the surface at the far end of the drill run. This allowed
pulling the casing through the borehole with a cable, rather
than pushing it into a blind hole from the drilling
location.

   Well installation was relatively uneventful, Weesner
said, in part because of "a great team effort" by the
contractors, GTS Inc., Meriden, Conn. (203-238-4567) and
Consutec, Tampa, Fla. (813-889-7181). The pipe-pulling head
used at first allowed sand to enter the end of the casing.
The contractors designed a better pulling head and had it
built locally.

Special Slotting

   The well casing consisted of two high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) pipes, of 2-inch and 4-inch diameters,
with sand pre-packed between them. Inner and outer casings
had 15 mil slots, cut parallel to the length of the casing
rather than across the casing. Although lengthwise slots are
unusual, they were used in this case to preserve the tensile
strength of the casing, because it had to be pulled through
the borehole. Consutec developed special slotting methods
for this job.

   Another unusual feature of the installation is that the
seven horizontal wells are divided into 15 control zones for
air injection, with one to three control zones per well.
Each control zone is separated from adjacent parts of the
same well, and has its own air control and metering equip-
ment. This arrangement allows concentrating the sparging
efforts in the most contaminated portions of the plume, and
avoids wasting air on portions that have already been
cleaned up. One well with only a single control section was
placed in the middle of the plume so that if sparging had
not worked as planned, the well could have been pumped to
control the spread of the plume.

   Sparge air is collected by a system of pipes laid in
trenches 2 feet deep and backfilled with pea gravel. Pumps
draw the air to a treatment pad, where a carbon filtration
system traps the vinyl chloride for later destruction.

   Results have been very encouraging so far. Sparging
operations started in early September. By October, sampling
showed 1.9 ppb vinyl chloride in one of 19 monitoring wells,
and no detectable concentration in the other 18 wells.
Weesner was concerned, however, that filter packs in the
monitoring wells might act as conduits for air, so that
sparging would be most effective close to the wells - in
other words, the well samples might not be representative of
most of the aquifer.

   During the November sampling, well purging was more
intensive to assure representative sampling. The sparging
system was shut down on a Tuesday, and wells were purged
both Wednesday and Thursday. This time, concentrations were
higher, but still much lower than before sparging - vinyl
chloride concentrations of 1.0 ppb, 1.2 ppb, and 1.9 ppb
were detected in three wells, and none in the remaining 16
wells.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

OAK RIDGE OFFERS FIELD SITES
FOR COLLABORATION, RESEARCH


   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,
Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites at
the laboratory for collaborative ground water research.
Research at these sites has focused on water and contaminant
movement in heterogeneous fractured media. Some of the
specific sites available are:

   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:
These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)
are particularly suitable for studies of subsurface
transport processes. Each has a trench excavated across its
outflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, and
contain six pans pressed against the face of the trench to
collect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracer
distribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects of
solution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are located
throughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipment
is interfaced for computerized data collection.

   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site was
developed for investigating new ground water tracer
techniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and has
been instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some of
them multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels and
temperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals for
two years. During the last three years, three principal
tests have been conducted at this field site:

A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neon
to test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport;

A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-size
tracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,
to measure fracture-flow velocities; and

A test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers of
fracture flow.

   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has been
used for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methods
in fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil and
saprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.
The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20
m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20
m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling ports
installed close to the pairs of wells. Many data are
available from the site, including six pumping tests,
natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfur
hexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,
bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,
mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemical
analyses.

   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium were
released in a open borehole in a fractured shale. Tritium
was monitored in the injection well and in five monitoring
wells for the first five years, with an additional sampling
after 16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium by
pumping were unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium was
still present after 16 years. Results of this test have been
interpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-
treat methods.

   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and Engineering
Sciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory; (423) 576-0567; fax: (423) 576-3989; e-
mail: gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the World
Wide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/

   The trend toward fast, field-based assessment of soil and
ground water contamination received a boost from a new
standard developed by the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM). The standard, PS 3, Provisional Standard
Guide for Accelerated Site Characterization of Suspected
Petroleum Release, is aimed at petroleum-contaminated sites,
but clearly indicates the growing interest in rapid site
characterization. The standard does not offer prescriptive
advice for cleanups. Instead, it lists tools than can be
used to collect samples and tests to analyze the samples.
The standard also provides guidance on conducting site
characterizations.

   In the past, field investigators at contaminated sites
usually drilled borings, took samples and had them analyzed
in a laboratory. This produced data that were often very
accurate, but at the cost of waiting weeks for results.
Often the results showed that additional samples were
needed, and a drilling rig had to be re-mobilized to the
site.

   "The task group believes that it is better to get more
data in a matter of days, even though it may be of slightly
less quality, than a few data points with a higher quality
for which you might have to go back and forth to the site
over the course of a couple of years," said Gilberto Alvarez
of Subcommittee E50.01, part of ASTM Committee E-50 on
Environmental Assessment.

   Contact: Gilberto Alvarez, EPA, (312) 886-6143.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

MODULARIZATION, AUTOMATION CUT
N.Y. SUPERFUND SITE CLEANUP COSTS


   Capital and operating costs for ground water and soil
cleanup at a Long Island Superfund site have been minimized
by modularization and automation, said Steve McInerney,
senior process engineer and project manager for Retec Co.,
Concord Mass. The Shore Realty Superfund Site is a former
handling facility at Glenwood Landing in Hempstead Harbor,
N.Y., and was heavily contaminated with petroleum and
solvent hydrocarbons during 36 years of operation.

   Retec selected four technologies for site cleanup - soil
vapor extraction, air sparging, ground water pump and treat,
and bioremediation. The ground water system captures free
product at the downgradient side of the site. EPA's pre-
construction estimate of construction cost was $2.3 million.
Actual construction costs, however, were $2 million, a
savings of about 15 percent.

Components Pre-Assembled

   McInerney attributed a significant part of the saving to
modular construction of treatment plant components. Tanks,
mixers, pumps and other components were pre-assembled into a
few modules at the factory, rather than being assembled
piece by piece at the site. Although this somewhat increased
the cost of the components, it allowed greater savings in
the cost of installation at the site.

   Electrical power and control wiring also were assembled
and terminated in boxes on the modules. Each module thus had
only two connection points where it was tied into power and
control wiring. Except for the thermal oxidation unit that
destroys vapor-phase contaminants, no controls were
installed on the modules. All units were tied to controls
located on a central panel.

Estimates Exeeded Actuals

   Operating costs were estimated at $500,000 per year at
the feasibility study stage, but actual costs are about
$300,000 per year. One reason for lower costs is careful
control of electrical consumption. About half the total
operating costs are for a large compressor that drives the
sparging system. Retec has put much effort into optimizing
the system operation. Sparging rates are kept as low as
possible, and sparging is pulsed to increase system
efficiency.

   The plant is highly automated to keep operating costs
low. The plant is computer-operated; the human operator
visits the plant as needed. If a problem develops, the
computer system automat-ically calls the plant operator's
beeper and notifies the operator of the problem's severity -
from level 1, for minor problems, to level 4, for a total
automatic shutdown. The computer system also continuously
collects data from the system for monitoring its operation.
McInerney downloads these data by telephone every two to
three weeks for inspection of the plant's operations and
continuing efficiency.

   Contact: Steve McInerney, Retec; (508) 371-1422.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

GETTING INTO THE ACT
AGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS ANNOUNCE
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP COOPERATION


   The American Crop Protection Association (ACPA) and the
Agricultural Retailers Association (ARA) announced joint
guidelines to assist the environmental cleanup of retail
agricultural chemical dealer sites. These sites often have
been sources of ground water contamination because of spills
and improper waste disposal.

   The guidelines call for both voluntary and fee-based
reimbursement mechanisms aimed at accelerating assessment
and remediation of contaminated sites. Common elements of
the guidelines, whether voluntary or fee-based, include the
following:

Confidential environmental audits;

Cleanup standards keyed to the future use of the site; and

Acceptance by state authorities of completed remedial
programs.

Incentives

   Key features of voluntary programs include incentives to
property owners, provided sites do not represent immediate
threats to health or the environment, and flexible cleanup
schedules. Key features of fee-based programs are maximum
and minimum balances for the remedial fund, significant
financial deductibles for dealers and growers who initiate
cleanups, ceilings on total reimbursement per remediation
and collection of fees at the retail dealer level.

   To date, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Illinois have enacted
legislation establishing chemical cleanup programs.
Approximately 20 more states, including Ohio and
Pennsylvania, have established voluntary remediation
programs available to everyone, including dealers, growers
and industrial users of agricultural chemicals.

   ACPA is a trade organization of manufacturers,
formulators and distributors of agricultural crop protection
and pest control products. ARA is an organization that
provides information and education to retail farm supply
dealers.

   Contacts: Allan Noe, ACPA; (202) 872-3840, and Jim
Egenrieder, ARA; (202) 457-0825.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

GEL COMPOUND
AUSTRALIAN RESEARCHERS PREVENT
FUELS FROM REACHING DOWN UNDER


   Remediators concerned about safe transportation of
hazardous liquids such as organic solvents, can look to
research being conducted at the University of South
Austrailia where an in-situ gelation process is being
developed. Techsearch, a non-profit group that functions as
a laision with the community, is working with the
University's Polymer Science Group at the Ian Wark Research
Institute to lessen the risk of hazardous liquid cargo
which, if spilled in large quantities, can cause deleterious
affects and long-term environmental damage. Explosion,
flammability, noxious fumes, poisoning, smoke, odors,
irritants and ground water contamination have been a result
of past spills.

   By rapidly injecting a mixture of materials into the
organic liquid, chemical cross-linking occurs in a short
time and a solid network is formed. Solidification prevents
the volatile liquid from escaping holes or ruptures in the
walls of containers damaged during an accident. Gelation
also decreases concentrations of petrol fumes and reduces
the explosion front of fuel which cuts back the possibility
of fire.

10 Percent Solid

   Geoffrey Swincer and Janis Matisons of the University's
School of Chemical Technology discovered the catalytic
process and tested it in laboratory experiments. Certain
compounds - rapidly reacting polymers, monomers, and
functional molecules such as silanes - undergo a rapid
cross-linking action when in contact with fuels which become
trapped in individual cells. The cellular network that
results resembles that of a honeycomb structure. Hard or
gel-like to the touch, the compound may only be 10 percent
solid, 90 percent liquid, when measured by weight.

   The ratio of compound to fuel is relatively low - one
part compound to 30 parts fuel - which is less than 4
percent by volume. Swincer and Matisons feel that continued
research to produce even more efficient gelling compounds
with lower reactive ratios. They also believe that the real
advantage of the process is its speed and that this factor
will lend itself to successful comercialization. Reaction
times have been less than one minute in low-level laboratory
demonstrations. Large volumes of fuel can be gelled in
ruptured tanks or large storage facilities through the use
of a progressive injection system. These delivery systems
can be an integral part of any storage facility or
transportation container. The gel forms a cork or seal
around the point of rupture to prevent further outflow, and
the solidification of the liquid fuel into a mass prevents
it from running underground or into sewer lines and streams.
Damage is quickly limited to the immediate vicinity of the
spill.

Multi-Point Injection

   Conceptualized by Swincer and Matisons, the strategy
behind successful delivery of the gel compound in
transportation tanks is to create a multi-point injection
system, similar to sprinkler systems in large buildings,
around the inner circumference of the container. Activation
would occur upon some predetermined signal, via automatic
detection or manually from a control station. Following the
signal, the entire body of fuel would be surrounded by gel,
the point of rupture sealed, and the core of the liquid
penetrated. A secondary system of directional nozzles, like
those in fire extinguishers, can be applied to any fuel that
has escaped initial treatment. This backup can be used by
ocean going tugs and other emergency vehicles.

Fuel Recycling

   Once the gel compound has done its job, it has to be
cleaned up with shovels and loaders, or by heavy industrial
suction. A gelled slick at sea can be controlled with booms
before being collected and transported by tanker to be
dumped or recycled. One significant advantage of the process
is that fuel can be retrieved by breaking up the gel
structure in a specially designed mixer followed by a
process of filtration and distillation. Compared to more
conventional means of cleanup and recycling, the amount of
fuel lost is far less. Recycling crude after gelation could
be part of the refining process. Researchers estimate
remaining non-toxic solids after recycling to be less than
10 percent of volume and suitable for landfill disposal.

   Researchers also will have to evaluate potential
exothermic reactions of rapid gelation of large volumes of
fuels. The production of heat generated from the process
does not pose a problem in the laboratory, but may in the
field. Evaluating this risk will form part of the next
study.

   Contact: Jani Matisons or Geoffrey Swincer at the Ian
Wark Research Institute, Warrendi Road, The University of
South Australia, The Levels, South Australia 5095,
Australia; phone: +61 8 302 3694; fax: +61 8 302 3683.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

ENVIRO HAZ TECH OF PA.
MOBILE INJECTION TREATMENT
FOR DENSE CONTAMINATED SOIL


By Elena Marcheso Moreno

   Turning contaminated land into usable construction sites
has great appeal in the competitive world of building
development. Enviro Haz-Tech, an environmental remediation
company in Hegins, Pa., has developed a series of Mobile
Injection Treatment Units (MITUs) that can help remediate
difficult soil conditions, both on unbuilt and built sites.

   Enviro Haz-Tech specializes in treatment of all types of
soils contaminated with petroleum or other hazardous
materials. The patented MITU technology particularly appeals
to building developers because it can handle dense
subsurface contaminated soils under buildings. Cleaning the
soil in place saves developers the costs of transportation
and disposal associated with the alternative solution of
dumping the contaminated soil into landfills, or
incinerating it.

Huge Cost Savings

   By actually treating the soil on-site, the MITU system
can help a land owner save between 40 percent and 60 percent
compared to removing it, Enviro Haz-Tech estimates. Once the
treatment is completed, new soils are not required in order
to develop and build on the site.

   Enviro Haz-Tech's soil treatment unit is comprised of a
John Deere modified hydraulic excavator mounted on a custom
trenching unit equipped with a series of interchangeable
injection systems and full vapor recovery. It includes
proprietary manifolds, pumps, storage tanks, computers,
monitors, and hydraulic controls. The operator can
manipulate all controls from within the cab of the self-
contained unit.

   In addition, the trencher is completely enclosed and has
air emission collection systems that transfer vapors to on-
board treatment equipment. Compliance with air-quality
standards is achieved through computerized monitoring of
organic and inorganic vapors, and other toxic or combustible
emissions.

Soil Injection

   The MITU operator excavates contaminated land within a
predetermined grid, trenching contaminated soil and
injecting it with hot-air, bio-chemicals, slurries, and
stabilization compounds, as required for remediation. All
units use rotary carbide cutting blades that can penetrate
all soils, even dense rock, to depths of 9 meters. A MITU
Mini model was also developed to inject and mix soils to a
maximum depth of 2.5 meters beneath building basements,
concrete slabs, and other structures. The unit's carbide
teeth rotate at three speeds to  break  up  soil
formations   in   46-centimeter widths. Once it has reached
the required depth, one of a variety of injection units
distributes the Enviro mitigating agent into the soil. Soil
passes through the sealed housing, where it is treated.
Microbial and nutrient mixtures are delivered into the
chamber to enhance bioremediation; hot air to encourage
volatile stripping; cement slurry for slurry wall
construction; and absorbants to collect free product. Once
the soil is treated, it is pushed through the undercarriage
of the MITU, reappearing as a clean, fine-grained topsoil.
In all but the most difficult site conditions, the MITU can
treat up to 55 metric tons per hour.

MITU Versatility

   In the past, bioremediation strategies have succeeded
only when employed on porous or semi-porous soils. The new
MITU approach handles all types of soils, according to
Enviro Haz-Tech. In addition to vapor recovery, oils
contaminated with metals or pesticides can be cleaned with
this multiple injection system, which has the ability to
inject remediation agents in the necessary form-solid,
liquid, gas, or slurry.

   When the MITU completes its job, the land left can
immediately be used for buildings that will be occupied by
people. The company recently completed a clean-up project in
Pottsville, Pa., on a site when petroleum had been
distributed. Although the storage tanks were no longer
present, the site was contaminated by past seepage of
petroleum, kerosene, and bunker fuel. Enviro Haz-Tech
cleaned upthe site, which is now being developed for a
100,000 mixed-use warehouse and shopping mall project.

   For more information about the MITU system, or to inquire
about domestic and international joint ventures. Contact:
Bruce Bruso at EHT/CBA (717) 682-8742.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

RADIATION ASSESSMENT
ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION
TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE


by Gordon Feller

   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little has
been awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the former
Soviet republic of Belarus solve environmental problems
related to its former Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.
The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense Nuclear
Agency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction
(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugar
legislation intended to assist the countries of the former
Soviet Union in the elimination, and to prevent the
proliferation, of weapons of mass destruction.

   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel to
assess the radiation and conventional environmental damage
at sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles were
based, transported, operated, or maintained, and help the
country restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,
at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-
25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclear
state and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.

   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number of
different technical resources within the program to provide
training and technical assistance to the Belarus officials
and experts. The consultants will work with the Belarus
personnel to analyze the environmental problems at one
missile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee the
Belarus technicians as they do environmental restoration
work at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transfer
enough knowledge to Belarus so that they can complete the
environmental restoration work at the remaining sites.

   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal and
low-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,
spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around the
sites' perimeters which have unexploded ordnances. As part
of the effort to transfer expertise in the environmental
restoration field, Arthur D. Little will conduct
international conferences co-sponsored by DNA and the
Belarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the world
will be invited to Belarus to discuss a variety of
environmental restoration experiences, technologies, and
management issues.

   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed in
l993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarus
to assist in development of the Environmental Restoration
Project. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugar
include assistance in defense conversion, export control
systems and training, government-to-government
communications links, and emergency response equipment and
training.

   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has an
especially high water table and active groundwater movement,
which can exacerbate groundwater pollution. Other
organizations involved with Arthur D. Little on the
Environmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps of
Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Los Alamos Technical
Associates, Technology Management Company, the Environmental
Chemical Corp., the Environmental Hazards Specialists
International, Environmental Careers Organizations, the
World Environment Center, and Clean Sites, Inc.

   Arthur D. Little, which conducted the largest
environmental impact assessment ever conducted in the Former
Soviet Union by a Western company, has handled more than
3,000 environmental audits and assessments in 30 countries
throughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered in
Cambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around the
world. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,
health, and safety consulting; management consulting; and
technology and product development.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev62.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY 10, 1996

INFO FOR INVESTMENT?
RECENT EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS
KEY TO BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES


Russia Having Trouble With CFCs: Russia is asking for more
time to cut ozone-threatening substances. At a major
international conference of government representatives
convened in Vienna to review the 1987 Montreal Protocol on
ozone protection, Russian Federation Environment Minister
Viktor Danilov-Danilyan said Russia needs more time and a
larger pool of investment aid in order to develop
substitutes to ozone-harming substances such as
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Under the Montreal Protocol,
signed by 150 countries, such industrialized countries as
Russia are to stop producing CFCs by 1996 and the rest of
the signatories by 2010. Minister Danilov-Danilyan said the
Russian Federation is now producing only half the ozone-
threatening chemicals it was in 1987, but he added that the
drop was a by-product of the fall in industrial output. The
minister was quick to point out that he and his government
would  have  preferred  to  be able to meet the deadline, as
other governments are doing, but that the economic
conditions prevailing within his country are making it
impossible for the principal factories from even paying
their workers, let alone their taxes and electric bills. It
will be impossible for the Russian government to force such
enterprises, even if they are state-owned (and many are not)
to comply with the protocol when the ministry has no
financial capacity to support the enterprise's change-over
to non-CFC production or usage.

German, Swiss, Finnish Waste: Germany and Switzerland have
decided not to send spent nuclear fuel to Krasnoyarsk-26 for
processing, Krasnoyarsk Krai Deputy Governor Sergei Arinchin
was quoted as saying. The waste would have been processed at
the RT-2 plant - still under construction - in the formerly
secret nuclear center in Siberia. The Russian authorities
had hoped to finance the project by accepting foreign waste,
enabling them to process their own stocks. The Swiss and
German pullout will deal a major blow to the project. The
decision is likely to be hailed by environmental groups,
which have strongly opposed the importation of nuclear
materials, arguing that Russia's waste storage sites are
already overflowing. Meanwhile, a trainload of spent nuclear
fuel from a Finnish nuclear power plant reportedly has
arrived in Russia for processing at the Mayak plant in
Chelyabinsk-65. An English translation of the Komsomolskaya
Pravda newspaper says it is not yet clear whether the
nuclear residue remaining after processing will be shipped
back to Finland or kept inside the Russian Federation.

Nuclear Safety Threatened: Nuclear safety may be threatened
by workers at Russia's nuclear power plants, who say they
may shut down the facilities unless they receive overdue
wage payments. Officials say they have scheduled warning
protests, but it is not clear what form they will take.
Energy consumers owe nuclear power plants about 2.5 trillion
rubles (US$555 million), and on average workers have not
been paid for three months, according to the deputy head of
Rosenergoatom in Moscow.

German Assistance: A German company has signed a contract
with Russia's Kursk nuclear power plant to construct a
nuclear waste storage facility and to provide 240 containers
to store the plant's radioactive waste. The German Company
for Nuclear Containers, a Nukem subsidiary, will control
production quality, train specialists and provide the know-
how for production. According to Gosatomnadzor, Russia's
nuclear safety agency, the solid waste storage facilities at
the Kursk plant are full.

Troubled Kazakhstan: The amount of radioactive waste
accumulating at uranium mining and processing plants in
Kazakhstan reportedly is reaching alarming proportions.
Since this large, very poor Central Asian country became
independent in 1991, the quantity of radioactive waste
stored in Kazakhstan has grown to 219 million metric tons.
The republic's Ministry of Ecology and Biological Resources
claims the aggregate radioactivity from the waste comes to
250,000 curies, which is "many times more than the accepted
norm." Kazakhstan does not have the means to deal with the
waste because under the Soviet Union's regime disposal was a
national responsibility carried out by the government in
Moscow. Today, there are neither any Kazakh laws nor
bilateral agreements with Russia which adequately address
this type of nuclear waste disposal dilemma.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>