
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B15-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA027-000293-B027-305</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/08_news.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021808 text/html 24301
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:09:15 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 24129
Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 06:50:03 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
   <TITLE>08_news.html</TITLE>
   <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//SQ//DTD HTML 2.0 HoTMetaL + extensions//EN"> <!-- WEBMAGIC VERSION NUMBER=&amp;amp;amp;quot;2.0.1&amp;amp;amp;quot; --><!-- WEBMAGIC TRANSLATION NAME=&amp;amp;amp;quot;ServerRoot&amp;amp;amp;quot;
   SRC=&amp;amp;amp;quot;/var/www/htdocs/&amp;amp;amp;quot;
   DST=&amp;amp;amp;quot;/&amp;amp;amp;quot; --><!-- WEBMAGIC TRANSLATION
   NAME=&amp;amp;amp;quot;ProjectRoot&amp;amp;amp;quot;
   SRC=&amp;amp;amp;quot;./&amp;amp;amp;quot;
   DST=&amp;amp;amp;quot;&amp;amp;amp;quot; -->
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">

<P ALIGN=CENTER><A HREF="image12.map"><IMG ISMAP SRC="image12.gif"
WIDTH=468 HEIGHT=94 BORDER=0 ALIGN=bottom></A></P>

<H1 ALIGN=CENTER><A NAME="anchor651044"></A>Looking to the
Future--What's News</H1>

<P>It's hard to read an article on medicine today and not find
mention of some new discovery in biotechnology. During the last
decade, the pharmaceutical industry has focused more and more
Research &amp; Development efforts on the miracles possible through
biotechnology.</P>

<P>However for companies involved in research and development of
vaccines, "biotechnology" is old-hat!
<A HREF="09_aboutberna.html">BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP.'s parent company,
The Swiss Serum &amp; Vaccine Institute Berne</A> has utilized
biotechnology for years. An excellent example is the research and
development of <A HREF="05_vaccination.html#anchor572783">VIVOTIF
BERNA</A> which began in 1969.</P>

<P>Developed over a 12 year period, this unique vaccine for typhoid
fever resulted from working on the of the Ty21a strain of the
bacteria that causes typhoid fever, <I>Salmonella typhi</I>, to make
it so it doesn't cause the disease. This "weakened" bacteria is then
used to produce a vaccine that will stimulate the body to produce
antibodies that will protect against the regular, disease-causing
bacteria</P>

<UL>
   <LI><B><A HREF="#anchor852289">Trends in Typhoid Fever</A> </B>
</UL>

<P><A NAME="prod"></A>The BERNA product line will continue to benefit
from this dedication to innovative research. Each year, a substantial
amount of the operating revenues are committed to research and
development. As a result, there are some exciting products on the
horizon:</P>

<UL>
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor857294">Cholera</A>
   
   <LI>Hepatitis A
   
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor859465">Hyperimmune Globulin</A>
   
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor686642">Rabies</A>
   
   <LI><A HREF="#anchor792269">Tetanus</A>
</UL>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P><A HREF="02_conshmpg.html">Return to Berna Home Page</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H3><A NAME="anchor857294"></A>Oral Cholera Vaccine</H3>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P>Another revolutionary BERNA vaccine, is one against cholera.
Similar to <A HREF="05_vaccination.html#anchor572783">VIVOTIF
BERNA</A>, CVD 103 HgR is the first ORAL cholera vaccine made from
"weakened "bacteria.</P>

<UL>
   <LI><B><A HREF="#anchor617951">Could it be Cholera?</A> </B>
   
   <LI><B><A HREF="#anchor24920">Genetic Engineering Technology Being
   Applied to Cholera Vaccine</A></B>
</UL>

<P><HR></P>

<H3><A NAME="anchor859465"></A>Hyperimmune Globulin</H3>

<P>One of the largest hospital-based clinical trials ever conducted
in the U.S. has been done to test another BERNA product, NOSOCUMAN
BERNA. Together with Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and the
Veterans' Administration, 5,000 patients at 10 medical centers have
been involved in testing this hyperimmune globulin developed to fight
hospital-acquired infections, due to 2 bacteria Klebsiella spp and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The fact that hospital-acquired infections
contribute to approximately 30% of the deaths in hospital intensive
care units underscores the importance of this product to the hospital
physicians.</P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H3>Hepatitis A Vaccine</H3>

<P><HR></P>

<H3><A NAME="anchor686642"></A>Rabies Vaccine</H3>

<P>A new inactivated, human-diploid cell vaccine effective for both
pre-exposure and post-exposure use has been used in clinical trials
in 3 U.S. Veterinary Schools</P>

<UL>
   <LI><B><A HREF="#anchor42428">An Epidemic Moving Up and Down the
   East Coast </A></B>
</UL>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H3>Tetanus Toxoid</H3>

<P>Even though effective preventative vaccine has been available
since the 1940's, cases of tetanus still occur.</P>

<UL>
   <LI><B><A HREF="#anchor792269">What Do Travelers, Women &amp;
   Older Patients Have in Common?</A> </B>
</UL>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor852289"></A>In the literature: <I>TRENDS IN
TYPHOID FEVER</I></H2>

<P>Even with the availability of effective vaccines, typhoid fever
continues to affect U.S. travelers. Dr. Jacques Mathieu from the
Division of Disease Intervention, NY City Department of Health and
colleagues from Field Epidemiology of the CDC felt that New York City
"offers a unique opportunity to study trends in typhoid fever."</P>

<P>In an article published in the AMA publication, <B>Archives in
Internal Medicine</B>,* they document the frequency of typhoid fever
over the last decade.</P>

<P>Since the early 1970s, importation of typhoid fever has changed
the "appearance" of the disease. Their research indicated that
frequency of typhoid fever increased 110% in New York City in the
three year period from 1987-1990. Furthermore, this increase was
almost exclusively due to travel-related cases. Specifically, they
found:</P>

<UL>
   <LI>The highest age specific rate of typhoid fever was among 10-19
   year olds
   
   <LI>30% of those infected were students
   
   <LI>91 % of patients with travel-related typhoid fever required
   hospitalization
   
   <LI>27% of households had at least I member other than the patient
   who tested positive for S. typhi
</UL>

<P>Based on their findings, they concluded: The trends of <I>S.
typhi</I>infection in New York City followed the trends observed in
the United States since 1978, which demonstrates the importance of
international travel.</P>

<P>Although food and water precessions may be effective for
short-term travelers, selective use of<B> oral </B>antityphoid
vaccine for New York City travelers to high-risk endemic countries
should be encouraged.</P>

<P><I>Archives of Internal Medicine. Vol. 154: ppl 713-1718, August
8. 1994</I></P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor617951"></A>With no history of recent
travel--Could it still be Cholera?</H2>

<P>As healthcare workers in the Midwest found out, the answer is YES!
The severe diarrhea was consistent with cholera, but none of the
patients had traveled outside the country or eaten raw shellfish
within the last month. Yet, stool cultures confirmed <I>V.
cholera</I></P>

<P><B>The explanation: </B>While they hadn't traveled, the food they
ate had. The canned palm fruit brought to them from El Salvador was
the culprit.</P>

<P>This is not the first food-related occurrence. Recently; three
other U.S. outbreaks have been traced to food transported from
countries where cholera is widespread.-crabmeat from Ecuador and
commercial frozen coconut milk from Thailand. The CDC recommends that
<B>all international travelers be advised not to transport any food
items from cholera-infected areas-regardless of its form or
preparation!</B></P>

<H4>The BIGGER risk-International Travel</H4>

<P>During 1994, 384,000 cases were officially reported to the World
Health Organization. Overall, 94 countries reported cholera cases
including 13 countries in Central and South America, India, Southeast
Asia, Africa and individual republics of the former Soviet Union.
</P>

<P>Admittedly, international travel in countries where cholera is
widespread is responsible for most cases of cholera seen in North
America and Western Europe. In 1995, an unconfirmed number of
travelers from the U.S., Holland, Spain and Switzerland, as well as
over 200 Japanese tourists returned home from the Indonesian island
of Bali, infected with cholera.</P>

<P>Although vaccines against cholera have been available for years,
they have not proven to be effective and are therefore not
recommended by the WHO. In response to this worldwide need, a new
oral cholera vaccine has been developed by the
<A HREF="09_aboutberna.html">Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne,
the parent company of BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP</A>, and the Center for
Vaccine Development of the University of Maryland School of Medicine.
</P>

<P>Identified as " V cholerae CVD 103-HgR", it is the first
genetically engineered, live but weakened vaccine licensed for human
use. Another benefit is the fact that it is <B>orally
administered.</B></P>

<P>Switzerland has been the first country to approve CVD 103 HgR in
1994. It is also available under a special release procedure from the
governments in several European markets, including Italy, Austria and
the United Kingdom. Approximately 10,000 doses have been used under
these special procedures. A license application for this vaccine has
been submitted to the Canadian Bureau of Biologics and a similar
submission to the U.S. FDA it planned in the near future.</P>

<P>Until widespread availability of the CVD I03-HgR vaccine, the only
defense against cholera is to avoid exposure. <B>The CDC recommends
that all international travelers be reminded of the following
precautions:</B></P>

<UL>
   <LI>only drink water that is commercially bottled, boiled or
   treated
   
   <LI>avoid ice unless positive it has been made from sanitary water
   
   <LI>eat only foods that are thoroughly cooked and are still hot
   
   <LI>eat fruit only if it has been peeled by the person consuming
   it
   
   <LI>avoid undercooked or raw fish or shellfish-including cerviche
   
   <LI>only eat vegetables that have been cooked
   
   <LI>avoid all salads and leafy vegetables
   
   <LI>avoid all food and beverages from street vendors
</UL>

<P><I>Sources: MMWR, Vol 44 No 20, May 26, 1995. Inf Dis News, July
1995, pg 15; WHO Weekly Epidemiologica lRecord, Vol 70: 201-208, 14
July 1995 </I></P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor24920"></A>Genetic engineering technology being
applied to Cholera Vaccine</H2>

<P>On most people's "wish lists might be a boat, a new car, or an
exotic vacation. But for physicians involved with travel medicine, an
effective cholera vaccine is near the top of their list. As reported
in a recent article in Infectious Disease News The
<A HREF="09_aboutberna.html">Swiss Serum &amp; Vaccine Institute
Berne, the parent company of BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP</A>., is working to
fill this wish.</P>

<P><B>An Unwelcome Hitchhiker into the Country</B></P>

<P>Since January 1991, a cholera epidemic has spread throughout the
Western Hemisphere. According to a report in the medical journal
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR 1993; 42 :89-93), in 2
short years, 3/4 million cases of cholera had been reported, with
over 6000 deaths. Unexpectedly, the United States is one of the 21
countries seeing cases of cholera.</P>

<P>During 1992, 12 states reported cases of cholera to the CDC, with
no apparent regional pattern.</P>

<P><B>Cholera in the U.S.</B><BR>

Arizona<BR>

Maryland<BR>

California<BR>

Nevada<BR>

Connecticut<BR>

New Jersey<BR>

Florida<BR>

New York<BR>

Hawaii<BR>

Texas<BR>

Louisiana<BR>

Washington</P>

<P>In total, 102 cases were reported, more than in any other year
since the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta began
surveillance 30 years ago in 1961. Interestingly, <I>Vibrio
cholerae</I>, the bacteria that causes cholera, has taken several
different routes into the country.</P>

<P>While airline food is never considered to be very good, in the
case of one international flight it turned out to be the cause of the
largest single outbreak in 1992. On an Aerolineas Argentinas flight
between Buenos Aires and Los Angeles, food contaminated with the
bacteria was catered on-board during a stopover resulting in 75 of
the reported cases.</P>

<P>A most interesting type of "souvenir" was identified as another
carrier for <I>Vibrio cholerae</I> bacteria. In 1991, almost half of
the cases reported that year were traced to souvenir crabs found in
the suitcases of travelers to Latin America. (MMWR 1991;40:287-9)
</P>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>But according to CDC reports,</B></P>

<P>traveling is not the only way Americans can get cholera. Since
1973, 91 cases of cholera <B>not related to international travel</B>
have been reported. Most of these U.S.-acquired cases were eventually
traced to raw or undercooked seafood. And not necessarily
<B>imported</B> seafood either. (Infectious Disease News, April 1993)
</P>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P>In 1992, routine sampling isolated <I>V. cholerae</I> bacteria
from oyster beds in Gulf Coast waters. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) investigation uncovered the dangerous "stowaway" aboard cargo
ships from Latin America. Prior to docking in Gulf Coast ports, these
ships had been in countries where Cholera was rampant, resulting in
contamination of ballast and holding tanks. As a result, the FDA,
Coast Guard and coastal Public Health Departments have been
monitoring even more closely the "cargo" these ships bring into U.S.
ports. (Infectious Disease News, September 1992)</P>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>One Step Closer to an Effective Vaccine.</B></P>

<P>With the CDC predicting that the spread of cholera outside of
Latin America into the Caribbean region is "probable", the importance
of an effective vaccine continues to grow. An article in the April
1993 issue of Infectious Disease News focused attention on the new
cholera vaccine, CVD 103-HgR, being developed by The Swiss Serum
&amp; Vaccine Institute Berne and the Center for Vaccine Development
of the University of Maryland School of Medicine. CVD 103-HgR is the
first genetically engineered "weakened" vaccine. The fact that it is
<B>orally </B>administered is considered particularly good by experts
since they consider this the best way to stimulate the body to
produce immunity against disease that affect the gastrointestinal
tract.</P>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>Approval Standards Change as a Result of SS &amp; VIB Vaccine
</B></P>

<P>In fact, the results demonstrated by CVD 103-HgR have actually
changed the policy used toevaluate cholera vaccines. Reviewing the
data for CVD 103 HgR, the FDA's Vaccine and Related Biological
Products Advisory Committee concluded that challenge studies ( ie,
when volunteers are vaccinated and then exposed to the bacteria to
see if they develop the disease) rather than field trials (ie. When
volunteers in a country where the disease is occuring are vaccinated
and then checked to see if they are protected from the disease) could
be used to show a cholera vaccine works for travelers.</P>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P>As reported in the "Pink Sheet", the FDA's official reporting
publication, "The committee's conclusion that challenge studies would
be sufficient was contingent upon the efficacy data from challenge
studies for a hypothetical cholera vaccine being at least as good as
the data presented to the committee on the Swiss Serum and Vaccine
Institute's CVD 103-HgR vaccine." (FDC Reports, Feb. 1, 1993)</P>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P>Sources: MMWR 1993: 42: 89 93, MMWR 1992 40:562-S, Infectious
Disease News, Sept 1992. Infectious Disease News, April 1993,FDC
Reports, Feb 1, 1993)</P>

<P>&nbsp;</P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor42428"></A>Epidemic moving up and down the U.S.
East Coast:<BR>

Clinical trials on new rabies vaccine</H2>

<P>Clinical trials to judge efficacy were conducted for a new rabies
vaccine developed by the <A HREF="09_aboutberna.html">Swiss Serum
&amp; Vaccine Institute Berne</A>. Trials of the vaccine, known as
LYSSAVAC BERNA HDC, were done at the Veterinary Schools at Kansas
State University, University of Oklahoma and University of Georgia
under Investigational New Drug status. Early trials confirming the
vaccine's safety and efficacy for prevention (pre-exposure) as well
as treatment (post exposure treatment of individuals bitten by rabid
animals) were conducted in Europe and the Far East.</P>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>Not So Healthy Neighbors</B></P>

<P>Once approved, the vaccine will be welcomed by Primary Care
physicians and Infectious Disease specialists alike. Since 1990, an
epidemic of animal rabies has been spreading up and down the east
coast of the U.S. "<B>Rabies is becoming a greater public health
concern because rabid raccoons are moving into more densely populated
areas</B>," explained Iyorlumun Uhaa, DVM, PhD, epidemiologist with
the viral and rickettsial zoonoses branch, Centers for Disease
Control (CDC).</P>

<P>Yes, he did say, "<B>raccoons</B>." While most people associate
transmission of rabies with bats, in fact, raccoons have recently
surpassed bats as the prime carrier of the disease. And that's the
problem: Unlike bats, raccoons frequently roam through residential
neighborhoods, getting in fights with pet dogs. Exposure to rabies in
the general population is most often the result of people trying to
break up these fights. While not necessarily bitten, saliva from the
rabid animal gets on hands or arms at the same time as cuts
resulting, in a risk of infection.</P>

<P>The significance of this problem is demonstrated by statistics
from the state of New York. According to the Infectious Disease News
report, prior to the increase in rabid raccoons in the state, less
than 100 people per year sought treatment as compared to <B>over
800</B> the next year.</P>

<P><B>The Treatment Dilemma</B></P>

<P>Contrary to the common perception, exposure to the rabies virus,
even with a puncture wound from a rabid animal, does not necessarily
result in infection. Thus, the decision to start the multiple shot
treatment is a difficult one. Delaying treatment until symptoms
appear is not an alternative--because once symptoms appear, it's too
late. The death rate is 100%, even with treatment.</P>

<P>Further complicating the decision of whether or not to start the
treatment shots is the fact that when symptoms might appear is
unpredictable. Because the rabies virus spreads through nerve roots
rather than the bloodstream, symptoms can appear as quickly as 2
weeks after exposure or not for many months afterwards.</P>

<P><B>Who is at Risk?</B></P>

<P>Certain groups, such as veterinarians, wildlife and animal
control, and zookeepers are the most obvious risk groups. Spelunkers
(people who explore caves as a hobby) are included as well due to the
risk of contact with bats or wild animals. The CDC recommends
preventive vaccination for these at-risk individuals.</P>

<P>However, somewhat less commonly recognized is the <B>risk to the
international traveler. </B>While vaccination against rabies is not a
requirement for entry into any country of the world, travelers should
be aware of those areas where they might be at <B>increased risk for
exposure to rabies.</B></P>

<P>The 1992 edition of the CDC's HEALTH INFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONAL
TRAVEL states "...the risk of rabies is highest in areas of the world
where dog rabies remain highly endemic, including (but not limited
to) parts of <B>Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, Colombia,
Ecuador, India, Nepal, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam.
</B>The disease is also found in dogs in most of the other countries
of <B>Africa, Asia, Central and South America" </B>with minor
exceptions.</P>

<P><B>It recommends that a bite from any animal, not just a dog,
needs evaluation. Prompt local cleansing of the wound with safe water
and generous amounts of soap can help reduce risk. Local health
authorities should be notified, as well as a personal physician or
State Department officials.</B></P>

<P>Sources: Infectious Disease News April 1992; CDC HEALTH
INFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL 1992</P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P><HR></P>

<H2><A NAME="anchor792269"></A>What do travelers, women and older
patients have in common?</H2>

<P>The answer: Individuals in these groups have been identified as
being at "higher risk" for contracting tetanus since they are more
likely to lack protective antibodies.</P>

<P>At risk for tetanus? As surprising as it may seem since the
preventative vaccine,
<A HREF="09_aboutberna.html#anchor836484">tetanus toxoid</A>, has
been available since the mid 1940's, cases of tetanus continue to
appear. 117 cases from 34 states were reported during the period from
1989-1990. However, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta
believes this does not reflect the true extent of the problem. Their
report* concludes "Because tetanus surveillance findings are based
only on reported cases, these results are likely to underestimate the
'true' tetanus incidence in the United States. Completeness of
reporting for tetanus mortality has been estimated at 40% while
completeness of reporting for tetanus morbidity may be even lower."
</P>

<P><B>1 out of 4 Patients Die.</B></P>

<P>Tetanus is not a disease to be taken lightly. While it is both
preventable and treatable, still 24% of the patients reported to the
CDC with tetanus died. Furthermore, the death rate clearly increased
with age. No deaths were reported in patients under the age of 40 as
compared with 17% of patients 40-49 years old and 50% of those 80
years or older.</P>

<P>The CDC report also underscored the significant economic impact
this disease can have. Length of hospitalization required ranged from
2 131 days. In addition, specialized care in the form of assisted
ventilation was necessary for almost half of the patients</P>

<P><B>An Ounce of Prevention</B></P>

<P>Or in this case 1 /60th of an ounce of vaccine booster every 10
years provides effective protection. However, a sizable portion of
the U.S. Adult population are not up to-date with booster
vaccinations, particularly older adults. In fact, blood test surveys
have shown that between 31-71 % of older adults lack protective
levels of tetanus antibodies. A 1989 National Health Interview Survey
found that only 13% of persons over 65 years reported receiving a
tetanus booster vaccination in the previous 5 years. This compares to
50% that would be expected to have received a booster during that
time period for a vaccine that is routinely recommended every 10
years.</P>

<P>However, routine booster vaccinations for tetanus are frequently
dismissed under the assumption that if and when a patient is injured,
the protective vaccines (tetanus toxoid and tetanus immune globulin)
will be given.</P>

<P>The problem is that tetanus infection often result from wounds,
frequently wood splinters, that aren't considered sufficiently severe
by the patient to warrant seeking medical attention. As confirmation
of this, the CDC points out that 2 out of 3 patients included in the
Surveillance Report didn't bother to seek medical attention at the
time of the injury that resulted in tetanus. And this scenario
occurred in the U.S. where medical attention is easily and readily
available. If a patient is injured while traveling overseas,
particularly in developing countries, adequate medical attention
might not even be available.</P>

<P><B>A Mid-Decade Reminder</B></P>

<P>Unlike during childhood where vaccinations are a key medical
priority, the vaccination status of adults is often overlooked. The
CDC report reminds that vaccination status needs to be a routine part
of the adult medical profile, particularly for elderly patients.
Using mid-decade ages (e.g., 35, 45, 55, 65, etc.) may be an easy
bench mark to ensure that adult patients are protected.</P>

<P>* MMWR Surveillance Report, 41/SS-8. December 11, 1992</P>

<P><A HREF="#prod">Back to Berna Product List</A></P>

<P ALIGN=CENTER><A HREF="02_conshmpg.html"><IMG SRC="image33.gif"
WIDTH=50 HEIGHT=50 BORDER=0 ALIGN=middle>Return to Berna Home
Page</A></P>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>