
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B02-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B045-281</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021900 text/html 61219
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:18:52 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:03 GMT
Content-length: 61001
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse - Federal Expenditures on
Drug-Abuse Control</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<p align="center">STAFF PAPER 5 </p>

<p align="center"><font size="5">Federal Expenditures on
Drug-Abuse Control <br>
</font><font size="4"><i>by Peter B. Goldberg and James V. DeLong
<br>
</i></font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="2">Availability of Information * Total Federal
Expenditures * Federal Activities<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2"><i>AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION <br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Comprehensive, reliable information on federal
expenditures on drug-abuse programs is difficult to obtain. No
detailed program budget describing the allocation of federal
resources in this area has ever been made public or possibly even
compiled. Although both the Office of Management and Budget and
the Council on Executive Reorganization have made efforts to put
together information, the results have been closely held. The
figures used in this paper are based on budget requests and
amendments, accounts of congressional hearings and other
documents issued by the government, and interviews with
government officials.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The accuracy of this information is sometimes
suspect. Government cost accounting has never been known for its
rigor, and, since drug abuse is now receiving high-priority
attention at the highest levels of government, there is an
incentive for agencies to find a drug-abuse rationale for
programs that may have only a peripheral relationship to the
field.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">There are also technical problems. The Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration, the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, and the Social and Rehabilitation Service
of HEW all award block grants to states and cities. (Block grants
are funds that can be used for any specific projects chosen by
the recipients within a given area of activity.) It is only after
the close of the fiscal year that the portion of these funds
spent for drug abuse can be determined. For these programs there
is no information on fiscal 1972 at the present time.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">On June 17, 1971, President Nixon announced a
new drug abuse program, including a supplemental budget request
of $155,655,000 for fiscal 1972. Shortly thereafter, the
President stipulated that there was to be a 5 per cent.
across-the-board -reduction in government personnel as part of
the anti-inflation effort. Some federal agencies are still unsure
which of these directives will take precedence.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">There are obvious differences among budget
requests, congressional authorizations, appropriations, and
actual expenditures; however, these distinctions are not made
consistently in this report. Generally, appropriations are used
for fiscal 1970 and 1971 and budget requests are used for fiscal
1972, but some amounts are agency allocations within larger
appropriations. Usually, the figures are fairly close to the
actual amounts that were or will be spent for the activities in
each year. However, in some areas, such as research, expenditures
may lag somewhat behind appropriations.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Some agencies, such as the Department of
Defense and the Internal Revenue Service, have specific funding
allocations for drug abuse activities in fiscal 1972, but did not
have such allocations in fiscal 1971.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Because of these problems, some of the figures
given here represent judgment and estimate rather than certain
fact. <br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>TOTAL FEDERAL EXPENDITURES <br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Table 5-1 shows federal expenditures for fiscal
years 1970, 1971, and 1972 broken down by agencies. Table 5-2
shows the same expenditures broken down by functional categories.
Table </font><font size="1">5-3 shows </font><font size="2">the
requested budget for fiscal </font><font size="1">1972 </font><font
size="2">before and after the President's supplement request.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">As the tables indicate, the government will
spend about $417,601,000 on drug-abuse activities in fiscal 1972,
almost double the amount spent in fiscal 1971. Several agencies
that could not provide a breakdown of funds spent in fiscal </font><font
size="1">1971 </font><font size="2">could do so for fiscal 1972.
To avoid undue exaggeration of the increase, we have made rough
estimates of the fiscal 1971 totals.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Table 5-4 compares the project estimate of the
fiscal 1972 </font><font size="1">budget with the latest
available official government estimates.' The Project's figures
are higher. The difference can be attributed to a number of
factors, but probably the most influential is that the data for
our estimate were compiled in September and October, 1971, rather
than in June, and thus the agencies had </font><font size="2">more
time in which to survey their activities. This seems especially
important for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration.<br>
<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><img src="img00018.gif" align="bottom"
width="1244" height="1514"><font size="1"> <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><img src="img00019.gif" align="bottom"
width="1268" height="1991"> </p>

<p align="center"><img src="img00020.gif" align="bottom"
width="1265" height="2003"><br>
</p>

<p><img src="img00021.gif" align="bottom" width="1263"
height="1724"> </p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>FEDERAL ACTIVITIES <br>
</i></font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2">LAw </font><font size="1">ENFORCEMENT
<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Four federal agencies have law-enforcement
responsibilities: the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
(BNDD) and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA)
in the Department of justice; and the Bureau of Customs and the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the Treasury Department. In
fiscal 1972, these agencies will spend $115,822,000 enforcing
laws against the illegal importation, manufacture, distribution,
and possession of narcotics and dangerous drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As the product of a 1968 merger between the
Treasury Department's Federal Bureau of Narcotics and the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare's Bureau of Drug
Abuse Control, BNDD has the widest mandate. It is primarily
responsible for most of the federal government's national and
international police operations. BNDD also works with state and
local officials on cases of major importance to the total
illegal-distribution system.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">During fiscal 1972, BNDD will receive
$66,689,000.' This will represent a doubling of its
appropriations in two years. Personnel has increased almost as
rapidly-from 1,465 in fiscal 1970 to 2,319 in fiscal 1971 to
2,718 in fiscal 1972. The number of actual agents has also
increased from 884 in 1970 to 1,437 in 1971.' (Data for fiscal
1972 are not available.) Over 90 per cent of BNDD's money, or
$61,971,000, will be spent on law-enforcement activities in 1972 </font><font
size="1">.4</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">BNDD's principal predecessor, the Federal
Bureau of Narcotics, was often accused of over concentrating its
efforts against users and street dealers of narcotics and not
being seriously concerned with the higher levels of distribution.
In 1970, BNDD claimed that it had reversed this policy and was
concentrating its efforts on the higher levels of the marketing
structure. Appearing before a House Appropriations subcommittee
in March, 1970, Director John Ingersoll stated:</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">The new operational plan is a systematic
approach to developing prosecutable cases and obtaining
convictions on specifically identifiable individuals and groups
who are responsible for most of the illicit drug traffic in this
country.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">The shift in emphasis of federal narcotic and
dangerous drug law enforcement from the addict, abuser, and small
time street peddler to the important illicit traffickers and
illegal supply sources will undoubtedly result in fewer total
arrests. But those made should have a greater impact on the
supply of narcotics and drugs available for distribution to the
consumers in this country than a larger number of less
significant arrests.,5 </font></p>

<p><font size="1">Statistics on BNDD's output confirm this shift
in policy to some extent. One would expect that such a change
would result in fewer arrests per agent because of the increased
investigatory work required. Table 5-5 shows that this appears to
be the case.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Consistent with this shift in priorities, BNDD
has begun analyzing the distribution systems for the various
drugs and identifying organizations and individuals involved. The
agency claims that so far it has identified nine principal and
129 secondary international drug-distribution systems and has
immobilized 870 of the 2,150 individuals identified as having
major importance in them.' For several years, there has been a
conflict between BNDD and the Bureau of Customs over operations
in foreign countries. In February, 1970, President Nixon declared
that BNDD would be the accredited agency &quot;in dealing with
foreign law-enforcement officials on narcotics questions. This
announcement apparently resolved the dispute.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">During the last two years, there has been a
major expansion of BNDD's foreign operations. The Bureau had 13
foreign offices in fiscal 1969, 16 in 1970, and 28 in 1971.
During these three years, the number of agents assigned to
foreign posts rose from 26 to 27 to 6111 Of the 50 new agents
requested in the original 1972 budget, 15 will be assigned to
foreign offices, and new offices will be opened in South America
and the Far East.' From President Nixon's supplemental budget
request, $1 million will be allocated to BNDD for international
training and technicalassistance activities.&quot; <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><b>TABLE 5-5</b></font> </p>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><b>BNDD </b>OUTPUT MEASURES <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>Fiscal 1969 Fiscal 1970</i> <i>Fiscal 1971<br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>Drugs removed from the domestic market</i></font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">Heroin (lbs.) 140 427 226</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Cocaine Obs.) 73 197 427</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Marijuana (lbs.) 8,825 17,401 12,723</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Hashish (lbs.) N.A. N.A. 1,054</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Hallucinogens (dosage units) N.A. 7,127,742
3,697,737</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Depressants (dosage units) N.A. 2,339,590
319,006</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Stimulants (dosage units) N.A. 7,196,481
10,319,923 <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>Arrests-BNDD-caused</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">BNDD, direct 2,265 1,600 2,212</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">BNDD, foreign, cooperative 214 207 281</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">BNDD, state and local, cooperative 1,713 900
2,247</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">TOTAL 4,192 2,707 4,740<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>Arrests per agent</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Number BNDD agents in the field 644 757 1,236</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">Average arrests per agent ' 6.5 3.6 3.8<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">SOURCE: BNDD Fact Sheet. <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">One of the chronic difficulties of law
enforcement in the drug field is corruption, and the old Federal
Bureau of Narcotics had a substantial problem. In the words of
Attorney-General John Mitchell: </font></p>

<p><font size="1">There was considerable lack of integrity on the
part of many of the agents of predecessor organizations. . . .
Some of them have been indicted. Others have had administrative
procedures instituted against them, and a lot of them have left.
I believe that it is being overcome.&quot; </font></p>

<p><font size="1">However, because there is so much money in the
drug trade, internal corruption will undoubtedly continue to be a
problem. Indeed, the pursuit of higher-level (and richer)
traffickers will increase the stakes and the temptations. So far,
BNDD has not been involved in any major scandals-a considerable
accomplishment. <br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00022.gif" align="bottom" width="1265"
height="948"> </p>

<p><font size="1">The Bureau of Customs is responsible for the
prevention of smuggling. In fiscal 1972, the Customs budget for
antidrug activities will be $40.5 million, $15 million of which
will come from the supplemental budget request.&quot; Customs
officials state that </font><font size="2">they will actually
spend about $52 million in this area during fiscal 1972. This
estimate is based on a performance-measurement system that uses
random time-sample analysis to determine the allocation of effort
of Customs personnel. Based on this same measurement system,
Customs estimates that $31,600,000 was actually spent on antidrug
activities during fiscal 1971.1' The results of Customs activity,
as measured by the quantity of material seized and the number of
arrests made, is shown in Table 5-6.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">For all categories except dangerous drugs, the
quantity of material seized in fiscal 1971 exceeded that of the
previous year, with heroin and cocaine showing the most dramatic
increases. Customs officials say that about 5 per cent of their
seizures are made as a result of tips and 95 per cent as a result
of &quot;cold searches'@--situations in which suspicions were
based on conduct at the time of entry rather than on advance
information.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration
(LEAA) was created in June, 1968, under Title I of the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act. Its stated purpose is to
offer &quot;large scale financial and technical aid to strengthen
criminal justice at every level throughout the
nation.&quot;&quot; LEAA is thus a major link between federal
funds and technical expertise and state and local narcoticslaw
enforcement. The major types of financial aid to states and
cities are as follows:<br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00023.gif" align="bottom" width="1263"
height="711"> </p>

<p><font size="2">1. Planning grants-allocated to states
according to population for the creation of statewide,
comprehensive law-enforcement improvement plans.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">2. Block-action grants-allocated to states
according to population to carry out specific improvement plans.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">3. Discretionary action grants-awarded at
LEAA's discretion for anticrime programs, with emphasis on
special aid to cities.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Some information on drug-abuse expenditures is
available for the block-grant and discretionary-grant programs.
Some of the planning funds are undoubtedly spent in this area as
well, but the amount is not obtainable.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Block-grant funds awarded to state governments
are normally spent in accordance with the comprehensive
law-enforcement improvement plans formulated by the recipient.
The amount allocated to drug-law enforcement in part reflects the
judgment of the states as to the severity of their drug-abuse
problems. The discretionary-grant program represents LEAA's own
allocation of resources to antidrug activities. The agency
emphasizes attempts to improve upon interjurisdictional
law-enforcement techniques, particularly in metropolitan areas
where city-suburban cooperation is important. To some extent, it
seems to try to fill a gap left by BNDD, as that agency now
focuses increasing attention on national drug-trafficking systems
rather than on smaller local groups.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In fiscal 1971, the states allocated $3,172,879
of block-grant funds to 26 programs designed to improve
law-enforcement techniques and efforts, and LEAA used $2,713,206
of its discretionary funds.&quot; Information on the funding
levels for LEAA-financed, drug-abuse programs during 1972 will
not be available until after the close of the fiscal year, since
the grantees of the block grants do not have to file detailed
reports until then. LEAA has not, apparently, analyzed the
comprehensive plans to provide any prediction. Nor has the agency
yet finalized its own plans for the discretionary-grant program.
(In the tables we have presented, it is assumed that
LEAA-financed, antidrug expenditures will remain constant in
1972.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Internal Revenue Service has long had a
more general law enforcement role, in that tax laws are
frequently used against organized crime and other special
offenders. Undoubtedly, the IRS has spent money on investigations
and prosecutions related to drug abuse in the past. However, the
$7,500,000 proposed for IRS in President Nixon's supplemental
budget represents the first funds clearly earmarked for this
purpose. The money is to be used to hire 541 new auditors and
investigators and to pay the incidental expenses of their
investigations.&quot; (The 5 per cent reduction in government
personnel has thrown this plan into uncertainty.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Other federal agencies are involved in law
enforcement to a limited extent, as described below.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The President's supplemental budget contained
the first specifically identifiable funds for drug-abuse-related
activities in the Department of Defense. It is not yet possible
to determine the proportion of these funds that will be used for
enforcement purposes, but it will probably be small. The
Department already has its own enforcement system for violators.
(The tables in this chapter do not include any estimate for
Department of Defense law enforcement.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">During fiscal 1971, the Department of
Agriculture conducted an experimental marijuana-eradication
program in eleven Midwest counties. The cost of this project
($55,000) was assumed by BNDD. It has not been determined whether
this program will be expanded or dropped in fiscal 1972, or, if
it is continued, which agency will fund the program.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The federal government is also placing
considerable emphasis on foreign crop eradication. In fiscal
1970, the Agency for International Development (AID) gave $1
million to Mexico to buy three light planes, five helicopters,
remote sensing equipment, and chemicals and other eradication
equipment. Similar grants totaling $627,000 were made in 1961 and
1965, without apparent effect.&quot; It is not clear whether
additional sums have been spent since, but it seems probable.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Similar emphasis is placed upon persuading
Turkish farmers to substitute other crops for opium. According to
government officials, both loans and grants tied to this purpose
have been made, and BNDD has stated that in 1970 AID had $3
million to spend on it.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In 1971, major U.S.-Turkey agreements were
made, whereby Turkey would phase out opium production over the
ensuing years.&quot; No monetary <i>quid pro quo </i>has been
publicly announced, but presumably it is substantial. More
recently, on September 28, 1971, the State Department signed a
U.S.-Thailand Memorandum of Understanding that will make U.S. aid
available to Thailand for the purpose of controlling drug traffic
in that country.&quot; Again, no funding level has been
announced.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The United Nations has established a Fund for
Drug Control, supported by voluntary contributions from
governments and individuals. Before the Fund came into being, the
United States pledged an initial contribution of $2
million.&quot; Presumably, this has been paid, but it is not
clear which agency paid it or whether it is an annual
contribution. In the tables, it is allocated to StateAID for
fiscal 1971 contributions to international organizations. It has
not been annualized.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is difficult to know how to handle these
assistance funds. To carry them at zero is clearly an error, but
any specific number is a guess. A recent newspaper report stated
that the total cost of the program in Turkey would be $35 million
over four years, and that the United States would pay $20 million
of it.&quot; Project staff believe it likely that the United
States will also absorb at least part of the other $15 million in
some form, and that cost overruns are always possible. Given all
the uncertainties, we have estimated State-AID expenditures at
$10 million per year, starting in fiscal 1972. This is probably a
little conservative. <br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="1">TREATMENT <b>AND </b>REHABILITATION
<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">The principal federal agency concerned with
treatment and rehabilitation is the National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH) within HEW, which operates four types of
drug-treatment programs.&quot; For three of these
programs-community Assistance, NARA inpatient, and NARA
aftercare-funding levels are known: they were $42,445,000 for
fiscal 1971 and will be $99,798,000 for fiscal 1972. Under the
fourth program, the Community Mental Health Centers Act, drug
users are only one of a number of categories of people treated,
and an accurate calculation of expenditures cannot be made.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">The Community Assistance Program has expanded
dramatically in recent years. From a budget of $3.1 million in
fiscal 1970 and $21.3 million in fiscal 1971, it has grown to
$76.8 million under the revised fiscal 1972 budget. In his
supplemental budget request, President Nixon asked for $67
million more for NIMH than was contained in the original budget;
of this, $49.8 million will be channeled into the Community
Assistance Program.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The increased emphasis on the Community
Assistance Program reflects NIMH's belief that it is most
effective and efficient to treat addicts in their home
communities rather than in a central isolated facility. Treatment
is not confined to any one method. Different centers use
different approaches or combinations of approaches. The modality
chosen for any particular center is the result of the community's
suggestion and NIMH's ratification.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">During fiscal 1971, 13,258 patients were
admitted to the 23 operational centers. NIMH estimates that about
10,000 remained enrolled. At the very end of fiscal 1971, 22
additional centers were funded; these did not accommodate any
patients during that year but will add substantially to the total
capacity in fiscal 1972. As funding more than triples in fiscal
1972, it is reasonable to expect even more increases in the
number of operational centers and enrolled patients.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Under the Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of
1966 (NARA), NIMH operates both inpatient and aftercare civil
commitment facilities. Originally, there were two central
inpatient facilities, one at Lexington, Kentucky, and the other
at Fort Worth, Texas. These facilities were generally underused,
and now, consistent with the emphasis on community treatment,
NIMH has dissociated from Fort Worth and is in the process of
opening a series of smaller, geographically dispersed incare
service facilities. The central facility at Lexington will remain
operational and will serve patients for whom no local facilities
are available. At present, about 700 people are in the inpatient
phase of civil commitment. The second phase of civil commitment
is community aftercare on an outpatient basis. NIMH has
contracted for these services with 144 different community
programs. These units are generally small. Together, they serve a
population of about 1,250. The treatment at each of these centers
is determined by NIMH personnel.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Under the Community Mental Health Centers Act,
NIMH is funding some 450 centers designed to treat people with
basic psychological problems. Many of these centers handle
drug-abuse treatment under this general mandate. Information is
not available on the number of drug users served by these centers
or the amount of money involved. (No estimate is made in the
tables.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Social and Rehabilitation Service (SRS) of
HEW, also funds rehabilitation programs through grants to state
vocationalrehabilitation agencies. In fiscal 1971, an estimated
$1,915,000 was spent for 1-000 &quot;rehabilitations,&quot; and,
in fiscal 1972, SRS expects to spend $3,093,000 for 1,600
&quot;rehabilitations.&quot; The criterion for rehabilitation is
the ability to secure and maintain employment.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Because of the increased focus on drug-use in
the military, the Veterans Administration is accelerating its
drug-rehabilitation program. In fiscal 1971, the VA inaugurated
its first five drugabuse treatment units. Originally, the VA had
planned to open 13 more centers in fiscal 1972 and another 14 in
fiscal 1973. However, the President's supplemental budget request
included $14.1 million to enable the VA to open all 27 new units
this year.&quot; Each of these units will be located in a VA
hospital and will accommodate approximately 15 inpatients. The
primary treatment modality will be methadone maintenance, with
patients inducted for four to six weeks in the hospital and then
continued on an outpatient basis. VA officials say that they
expect to treat about 6,000 patients under this program during
fiscal 1972.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As of July 1, 1971, the Office of Economic
Opportunity (OEO) had 20 active grants budgeted at $12.3
million.&quot; OEO concentrates its treatment and rehabilitation
activities on programs for young drug users and assistance to
community groups. OEO funded treatment modalities range from
therapeutic communities to methadone maintenance. Some of the
projects also include an education component, but it is not
possible to extract the amount of money spent by OEO for this
purpose. For fiscal 1972, OEO has requested $18 million for
drug-abuse-related expenditures. The neighborhood health-center
concept would receive increased attention under this plan,
according to OEO.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Some Model Cities funds from the Department of
Housing and Urban Development have been used to operate
drug-treatment and rehabilitation centers. Because the funding
mechanism is the block grant, the only information available from
HUD is on fiscal 1971 expenditures-no accurate estimate can be
made for fiscal 1972. The majority of these treatment and
rehabilitation programs are directed toward young users. Services
at the different centers range from outpatient counseling to
comprehensive inpatient care. In fiscal 1971, there were 21
treatment and rehabilitation programs run in 13 states, the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands at a
total cost to HUD of $9,343,000.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Job Corps, part of the Department of Labor,
will spend $200,000 in fiscal 1972 on three drug-demonstration
projects. &quot;The purpose of the . . . projects is to develop
effective program models for man-power training programs to
prevent and control drug misuse by disadvantaged
adolescents.&quot;&quot; </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Total LEAA expenditures for treatment and
rehabilitation in 1971 amounted to just over $16.6 million. LEAA
estimates that it allocated over $4.5 million of its own fiscal
1971 discretionary funds to treatment and rehabilitation
programs, and the states spent $12.1 million of the block-action
grants for similar purposes.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">LEAA officials say that the funding rationale
is the relationship between drugs and crime. The medical and
psychological needs of addicts must be treated to eliminate their
criminal acts. These treatment and rehabilitation programs
contain a strong crime-prevention component, most observable in
the treatment and rehabilitation centers run for predelinquent
addicts. Treatment varies from the use of antagonist drugs to
therapeutic communities, and many of the centers offer both
inpatient and outpatient clinical care.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Bureau of Prisons runs two similar
treatment and rehabilitation programs. First, under Title 11 of
the Narcotics Addict Rehabilitation Act (NARA), inpatient and
aftercare treatment are provided. The budget for fiscal 1972 is
$2,118,924. The program has the capacity to treat 600 inpatients
for an average of 18 months apiece. The actual population in
treatment, as of August, 1971, was about 375.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Bureau of Prisons does not dispense any
maintenance drugs. Rehabilitation programs center on educational
and vocational training, individual, group, and family
counseling, and &quot;milieu therapy.&quot; The Bureau also runs
a &quot;para-NARA&quot; program, which serves drug-dependent
persons who, for one reason or another, do not qualify under NARA
Title 11. This program, operationally similar to NARA, will be
budgeted at $655,955 in fiscal 1972, and the five centers will
eventually treat a total population of 250. Four of the centers
are now operational, and 104 people are enrolled. The fifth
center is about to inaugurate operations with an initial
population of 39. These figures are exclusive of the Fort Worth
facility, which the Bureau of Prisons has just recently taken
over from NIMH. It is expected that this facility will increase
NARA and para-NARA capacity by only 200. The additional budgetary
allotment required was not available.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The President's supplemental budget request
included the first large-scale identifiable funds for Department
of Defense drugabuse activities. The total request for the
department was $34,255,000, but a functional breakdown of this
budget is not available. The Army will receive $19,699,000, the
Navy $3,231,000, and the Air Force $11,295,000. Of the Army's
funds, $18.2 million will be channeled into a new program-the
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Program. The
objectives are defined as follows:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Prevention of alcohol and drug abuse</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Identificaton of drug abusers</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Detoxification of drug abusers</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Rehabilitation of drug abusers, either short
term in Army facilities or long term under the Veterans
Administration</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Suppression of illegal drug distribution</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Collection of statistics and dissemination of
information</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">How much money is to be allocated for each
objective is not known, but it is likely that the primary
emphasis will be on treatment and rehabilitation. The Navy and
the Air Force will establish similar programs, funded,
respectively, at $2.8 million and $11.1 million. The remainder of
the DOD funds will probably be used for research.&quot;<br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><b>RESEARCH<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2">The National institute of Mental Health is the
principal vehicle for government research on drug abuse. As
concern about the problem has mounted, so has the NIMH
drug-research budget. The growth curve is shown in Table 5-7,
prepared for the House Select Committee on Crime by the director
of NIMH. Probably the most important of the &quot;other
divisions&quot; mentioned in the table is psychopharmacology,
which is concerned primarily with the use of drugs in the
treatment of mental illness.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The supplemental budget presented by the
President in June, 1971, increased the total amount for
drug-abuse research in fiscal 1972 to $30.7 million. The
allocation of this amount is not known.</font> </p>

<p><img src="img00024.gif" align="bottom" width="1300"
height="1284"> </p>

<p><font size="2">NIMH research covers a variety of drugs,
including marijuana and the opiates, amphetamines, barbiturates,
and hallucinogens. In fiscal 1970, the only year for which we
have figures, the distribution was as follows:<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2"><i>Drugs</i> <i>$ in millions</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barbiturates 5.3</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Opiates 3.8</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Amphetamines 2.8</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Marijuana 2.3</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Hallucinogens 1.8</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Other .3<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">TOTAL </font><font size="2">16.3<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">This total is higher than the total shown in
Table 5-7, which notes only $15.6 million for 1970. Probably the
material presented to Congress is correct, and the information in
the breakdown by drugs represents preliminary estimates.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Drug research draws on the disciplines of
chemistry, pharmacology, sociology, psychology, psychiatry, and
epidemiology, alone or in combination. There are no breakdowns by
discipline, but NIMH does have a basic categorization of the
areas within which it makes grants and contracts:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">1. Systematic, controlled evaluation of
currently promising treatment-program techniques</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">2. Development of treatment agents/devices for
use in the treatment of drug dependence</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">3. Clinical studies of the effects of treatment
drugs and abuse drugs</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">4. Surveys and instrument development to
determine incidence, prevalence, and patterns of drug abuse:</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">a. among students</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">b. among other groups (hippies, psychiatric
patients, etc.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">c. New York City Narcotic Addict Register</font>
</p>

<ol>
    <li><font size="2">Psycho-sociological studies of drug abuse
        and the abuser to determine the motivation for use,
        environmental influences, effects on personality,
        characteristics of drug-using subculture, etc. </font></li>
    <li><font size="2">6. Legal aspects of controlled drugs to
        explore alternative types of legal control systems</font>
    </li>
</ol>

<p><font size="2">7. Genetic studies to determine effects of
drugs on chromosomes and offspring:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">a. marijuana</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">b. LSD</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">c. amphetamines and barbiturates <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">8. Use of animal models for studies of abuse
potential of drugs</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">9. Exploration of mechanisms of action of drugs
on the brain at the biochemical, neurophysiological, and
behavioral levels:<br>
a. opiates</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">b. marijuana</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">c. amphetamines and barbiturates</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">d. LSD</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">10. Improved chemical methods for systematic
and reliable detection of drug abuse</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">11. Chemical studies of plant alkaloids to
determine presence of hallucinogenic properties; to determine
geographic origin of opium</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">12. Development of methods/preparation of
natural and synthetic marijuana</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">13. Development of materials/methods for
campaign on prevention and education of drug abuse</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">14. Training</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">15. Fellowships and scientist development
awards. 31</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Many of these categories include only a small
number of projects.</font> </p>

<p><img src="img00025.gif" align="bottom" width="1296"
height="437"> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Addiction Research Center (ARC) in
Lexington, Kentucky, budgeted at about $0.8 million per year, is
NIMH's major facility for intramural drug research. It has two
major functions -the investigation of the addiction potential of
various drugs before they reach commercial channels, and the
development of antagonists to opiates. Basic research into the
nature of drug action, abuse, and dependence is not a primary
function, although ARC has some highly respected researchers who
have done distinguished work in these areas.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In the last two years, there has been a major
push to do research on marijuana. The total expenditure has gone
from $1.5 million in fiscal 1969 to $2.8 million in fiscal 1971.
Fiscal 1972 data are not available. Much of the past expenditure
($1.1 million in fiscal 1971) is done on contract, a procedure
&quot;utilized by the NIMH when it is important that the
government define precisely what needs to be done, how it shall
be done, and what the product will be.&quot; Between 1968 and
1972, NIMH did not use contracts for research in any area of drug
abuse except marijuana.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Social and Rehabilitation Service, also a
part of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, plans to
allocate approximately $400,000 for research in fiscal 1972. The
bulk of this money will be used to investigate techniques by
which the vocational and social services performed by this agency
may be better utilized to facilitate therapeutic programs
designed for young drug abusers </font><font size="1">.14</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The National Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse was officially established on March 22, 1971, for a
two-year period. It has a dual purpose: First, it is currently
analyzing the marijuana situation and will, in March, 1972,
recommend any desirable modifications of public policy. During
its second year, the Commission will explore some of the broader
aspects of drug usage under a mandate to investigate the causes
of drug abuse. The budget for fiscal 1972 is estimated to be
about $1 million, allocated entirely to general expenses and
research.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The President's supplemental budget allocated
$2.1 million to the Agricultural Research Service of the
Department of Agriculture. The money will be used to develop
techniques to detect and destroy illicitly grown
narcotic-producing plants without causing adverse ecological
effects.&quot; Two other federal agencies, LEAA and BNDD-both
within the Justice Department-conduct research programs,
primarily to improve law-enforcement techniques.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">LEAA research funds come from the block-action
grant and discretionary-grant programs discussed above and from
programs conducted by LEAA's National Institute of Law
Enforcement and Criminal justice (NILECI).&quot; During the past
two fiscal years, the funding levels for research and education
were as follows: <br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00026.gif" align="bottom" width="1284"
height="410"><br>
</p>

<p><font size="1">Figures for fiscal 1972 are not yet available.
The discretionary grants program has not been finalized, and most
states have not yet submitted their plans for the fiscal 1972
block-action grants. In the tables, we assume that the funding
will remain the same as in fiscal 1971.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">LEAA-funded research has emphasized two project
areas: investigation of possible relationships between drug use
and aggressive behavior and crime, and evaluations of
LEAA-funded, community-based treatment and rehabilitation
projects. It can be expected that LEAA research programs will
retain this thrust in fiscal 1972.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">BNDD research is limited to projects directly
related to law enforcement, such as the abuse potential of
particular drugs or the market characteristics of the
drug-distribution system. In fiscal 1971, BNDD had a research
staff of 20 and a total research budget of $1,383,000. For fiscal
1972, BNDD originally asked for a research budget of $1,467,000;
the increase, however, would have covered only the cost of
annualization of positions, and would not have resulted in any
additional activities.&quot; The President's supplemental budget
allocated an additional $2 million to BNDD &quot;for development
and implementation of new technology for detection, surveillance,
communications and automatic data processing as tools in the
enforcement of drug laws.&quot;&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Other federal agencies are conducting research
into nonlawenforcement aspects of drug abuse. For the most part,
however, the following programs are limited in scope and
peripheral to the central goals and purposes of the agency
involved.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">The Job Corps has budgeted $120,000 for a
national drug survey of 16 Job Corps centers in fiscal 1972, to
obtain information </font><font size="2">about knowledge,
attitudes, and patterns of drug use among different subcultural
groups of Job Corps enrollees.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Department of Transportation has been
conducting research on the effects of drugs on drivers and
driving. DOT says that in fiscal 1972 it will spend an estimated
$250,000 on the following studies:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Incidence of drugs in people admitted to a
university clinic after auto accidents</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Investigation of a sample of 1,000 fatally
injured drivers for drugs</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Incidence of drugs in drivers who are not
involved in accidents</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Simulation studies of drug effects</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A study of the driving record of heroin addicts
before and after addiction and while on methadone </font></p>

<p><font size="2">In fiscal 1972, the Veterans Administration
plans to spend $250,000 for a general research program concerned
primarily with the biological and behavioral aspects of drug
addiction and to be conducted in Veterans Administration
hospitals.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is
investing a limited amount of funds in drug-abuse-related
research. A budget breakdown is not available, but the agency
estimates that these projects will consume four and a half
man-years of time in fiscal 1972. Two of FDA's most important
activities in this area are reviewing methadone-treatment
programs for medical soundness and reviewing proposals to market
methadone as a proven rather than an experimental drug.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Finally, part of the Department of Defense's
supplemental budget will be used for research activities. The
Army will get $1.5 million for research, development, testing,
and evaluation in fiscal 1972; the Navy and Air Force will be
given lesser. amounts.&quot; Information on specific projects is
not yet available.<br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="1">EDUCATION, PREVENTION, AND TRAINING<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">It is not always possible to distinguish
sharply between this category and other categories. For example,
funds for BNDD programs to educate local law-enforcement officers
are included under law enforcement; treatment and rehabilitation
programs undoubtedly include some money for training the
agencies' own workers; and the line between prevention and
enforcement is not always clear. Programs in this section include
the following types of activity:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Efforts to alert the general public to the
drug-abuse problem and to explain its scope and significance</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Efforts to reach actual or potential drug
abusers and to explain the effects and dangers of drug abuse</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Programs to train education workers</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">NIMH programs to train rehabilitation workers
(because of the scope of NIMH rehabilitation programs, the
training activities are sufficiently large to warrant separation)</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Information services for persons interested in
the drug field</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In fiscal 1971, the Office of Education (CE)
budgeted approximately $6 million for drug-education programs. Of
this, $2 million was allocated to state departments of education
to train educational personnel. The other major OE endeavors in
fiscal 1971 were 26 community programs, 11 drug-education
projects initiated by local school districts, and 20
college-based pilot programs initiated and operated by students
primarily for fellow students but sometimes with a
community-outreach component.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">For fiscal 1972, the Office of Education
originally requested a budget of $6 million to continue existing
programs.&quot; As a result of a supplemental request, however,
OE will receive $13 million for drug-abuse-related programs. The
major new undertaking will be a training program called
&quot;Help Communities Help Themselves&quot;: Eight regional
centers will be inaugurated to train community people on how to
develop and maintain community education and information
programs; in the first year, OE hopes to train about 2,500
people. This project will cost about $6.5 million.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">For fiscal 1972, NIMH has budgeted $2,571,000
for public information services, a nominal increase over the
fiscal 1971 amount of $2,563,000. Part of this money will be used
by the National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, which
answers general inquiries for information by sending out NIMH
brochures and fact books. More specific requests are answered by
information specialists, who send out reprints of published
articles. The Clearinghouse has also developed a fairly
comprehensive standard bibliography as well as a computerized
information system that lists, indexes, and abstracts published
articles in the field and conducts searches in response to
individual requests.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The NIMH and the Department of Defense and
Justice are cosponsoring a special advertising campaign designed
to counteract peer pressure to use drugs. This campaign, in the
second of three years, has an annual cost of $150,000 equally
divided between the sponsors.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In fiscal 1972, NIMH will spend $6.9 million on
training, compared with $2.1 million budgeted in fiscal 1971.
Part of this increase will be absorbed by the expansion of a
program to develop educational materials and to train lawyers,
ministers, and others who spend part of their time working with
drug-dependent persons.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Office of Economic Opportunity has awarded
a $420,000 grant for fiscal 1972 for the inauguration of a
National Training Institute in Washington, D.C., to provide six
months of intensive training for former addicts working on local
projects, with follow-up training, if necessary.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In fiscal 1971, $3,066,000 of HUD's Model
Cities funds were used for 37 programs in the area of education,
prevention, or training. Within this broad category, the states
have programmed many diverse projects. Some have used their funds
to develop curricula for drug-education programs in the schools;
others have funded workshops for teachers and counselors; still
others have directed their efforts toward the general community.
At least one program has been run for law-enforcement officers.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">The job Corps, within the Department of Labor,
will spend $40,000 in fiscal 1972 to develop, collect, and
distribute educational material deemed appropriate and relevant
to the job Corps population.&quot; This project will also help
Job Corps staffs improve their understanding of the problems of
drugs and drug abusers.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">BNDD also operates a public-education campaign.
In fiscal 1971, this division was staffed by 26 people at a cost
of $1,215,000. The education division responds to requests from
the general public for information on the drug problem and
preventive programs. This division also provides materials and
films upon request and arranges for speakers for national, state,
and regional programs. In fiscal 1971, BNDD personnel made 1,500
speeches to an estimated audience of 150,000. They also made 191
radio and television appearances. These figures represent
significant declines from the preceding year, apparently the
result of a policy decision to place highest priority on
addressing groups of people capable of establishing ongoing
drug-prevention programs rather than the public at' large. In
fiscal 1972, this division will again consist of 26 people but at
a cost of $1,251,000. This budget increase, however, will cover
only annualization of positions.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">LEAA estimates that approximately $20.2 million
of its fiscal 1971 funds were spent on education, prevention, and
training, more than was spent in any other drug-abuse category.
The major objective of LEAA's program is &quot;to provide
students and adults with the knowledge necessary to make
intelligent decisions concerning the personal use of addicting or
habituating drugs and other harmful substances.&quot; LEAA has
developed the concept of a &quot;concerned community&quot; that
must be made aware of the nature and magnitude of the problem
before it can respond. The agency stresses four programs:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">1. Coordination of local and state public
education and information programs to attain maximum
participation and efficiency </font></p>

<p><font size="2">2. Implementation of health-information
programs in every school at the earliest feasible grade level</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">3. Development of educational programs,
seminars, and work-</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">shops designed to provide accurate information
for adults</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">4. Predelinquent counseling services through
the use of neighborhood information centers.&quot; <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">The funding level of these programs in fiscal
1972 is not yet known.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">In his special message to the Congress on June
17, 1971, the President proposed the temporary establishment of a
Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention accountable
directly to the President. Pending congressional approval, the
President, through an executive order, instituted the position of
Special Consultant for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to fulfill,
to the extent legally possible, the duties of the proposed
Special Action Office. Under this revised organizational plan, it
would become the responsibility of the Special Action Office to
coordinate and direct all the drug-abuse activities of the
various federal agencies, with the exception of those dealing
with the problems of law enforcement.&quot; The President has
requested $3 million in fiscal 1972 for the staff and
administrative costs of the Special Action Office.&quot;<br>
<br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>NOTES<br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="1">1. Latest White House estimate as reported in
the <i>National journal, </i>July 3, 197 1, p. 1417.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">2. House of Representatives Document No.
92-133, <i>Amendment to Budget Fiscal Year 1972, Drug Abuse
Problem, </i>June 21, 1971, p. 4 (hereafter H.R. 92-133).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">3. U.S. Congress, <i>Hearings on
Appropriations, </i>House of Representatives, 92d Cong., 1st
sess., 1971 (hereafter <i>App. Hrgs. 1971), </i>justice, Pt. 1,
p. 333; H.R. 92-133; U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, <i>Fact Sheets, </i>unpublished,
1971 (hereafter BNDD Fact Sheets). 4. This figure is arrived at
by subtracting BNDD appropriations for research and </font><font
size="2">for </font><font size="1">education, prevention, and
training from the total requested budget.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">5. U.S., Congress, <i>Hearings on
Appropriations, </i>House of Representatives, 91st Cong., 2d
sess., 1970 (hereafter <i>App. Hrgs. 1970), </i>Justice, Pt. 1,
pp. 987-88.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">6. <i>App. Hrgs. 1971, </i>Justice, Pt. 1, p.
868.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>7. National Journal, </i>July 3, 197 1, p.
1422.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">8. These figures come from the BNDD Fact
Sheets. At the House Appropriations Hearings in March, 1971,
however, the agency stated that total staff of foreign offices
had risen from 34 to 70 in 1970. BNDD Fact Sheets; <i>App. Hrgs.
1971, </i>Justice, Pt. 1, pp. 848, 868.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">9. <i>App. Hrgs. 1971, </i>Justice, Pt. 1, p.
848.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">10. H.R. 92-133, p. 4.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">11. <i>App. Hrgs. 1970, </i>Justice, Pt. 1, p.
220.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">12. Information supplied by the Bureau of
Customs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">13. <i>Ibid.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">14. <i>App. Hrgs. 1970, </i>Treasury, Pt. 2, p.
583.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">15. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration,</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>A Program for a Safer, More Just America, </i>p.
3.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">16. Information supplied by LEAA.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">17. H.R. 92-133, p. 5.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">18. <i>App. Hrgs. 1970, </i>Foreign Assistance
and Related Agencies, Pt. 2, p.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">11. Mexico's total legitimate exports are about
$1.1 billion, and the marijuana trade may be worth an additional
$100 million in foreign exchange. Some experts have estimated
that 500 kilograms of marijuana per day go from Mexico to the
United States. This comes to about 400,000 pounds per year. An
average price of $25 per pound F.O.B. Mexican border does not
seem unreasonable, based on many sources of information. The
exact figures depend, of course, on one's estimate of marijuana
use and average price. A case can be made for almost any figure
between $70 million and $120 million.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">19. <i>App. Hrgs. 1970, </i>Foreign Assistance
and Related Agencies, Pt. 2, <b>p. I 1; </b>John Ingersoll,
&quot;New Horizons of Narcotic and Dangerous Drug
Enforcement,&quot; Speech at the Law Enforcement Executive
Conference, Williamsburg, Virginia, July 22, 1970, p. 8.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">20. U.S., Congress, House of Representatives,
Select Committee on Crime, <i>Narcotics Research, Rehabilitation
and Treatment, </i>Hearings, 92d Cong., Ist sess., 1971, pp.
70-73.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">21. U.S., Department of State, <i>U.S.-Thai
Memorandum of Understanding, </i>September 28, 1971. </font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>22. App. Hrgs. 1971, </i>Justice, Pt. 1, p.
372.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>23. Washington Evening Star, </i>November 4,
197 1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">24. NIMH's Division of Administration
Management and Financial Management provided much of the
information in this section.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">25. Information supplied by SRS.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">26. Veterans Administration, Alcohol and Drug
Dependence Service, <i>Progress Report, </i>August 19, 1971, p.
1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">27. Office of Economic Opportunity, <i>Drug
Rehabilitation Projects Status Report, July </i>1, 1971. </font></p>

<p><font size="1">28. U.S., Department of Labor, <i>Job Corps
Drug Task Force Projects, </i>1971, p. 1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">29. Information supplied by the Bureau of
Prisons.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">30. H.R. 92-133, p. 3.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">31. National Institute of Mental Health, Center
for Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse, Memorandum, <i>Program
Development Goals with Grants and Contract Supported Active
During FY 1969, </i>August 13, 1969.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>32. App. Hrgs. 1970, </i>U.S., Department of
Health, Education and Welfare, Pt. 1, pp. 448-50.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">33. U.S. Congress, <i>op. cit., </i>note 20,
pp. 474, 476-77.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">34. Information supplied by SRS.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">35. H.R. 92-133.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">36. Information on LEAA supplied by LEAA.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">37. <i>App. Hrgs. 1971, </i>justice, Pt. 1, p.
845.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">38. H.R. 92-133, p. 4.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">39. U.S., Department of Labor, <i>job Corps
Drug Task Force Projects, </i>memorandum, August 31, 197 1, p. 1.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">40. Veterans Administration, Alcohol and Drug
Dependence Service, <i>Progress Report, </i>August 19, 1971, P.
3.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">4 1. H.R. 92-133, p. 3.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>42. Congressional Record, </i>July 26, 197
1, p. E8287.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">43. <i>App. Hrgs. 1971, </i>Office of Education
and Related Agencies, Pt. 1, pp. 975-76, and information supplied
by the Office of Education.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">44. Information supplied by NIMH.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">45. Office of Economic Opportunity, <i>Drug
Rehabilitation Projects Status</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>Report, July </i>1, 1971, P. 3.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">46. U.S., Department of Labor, <i>Job Corps
Drug Task Force Projects, p. </i>1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">47. <i>App. Hrgs. 1971, </i>justice, Pt. 1, p.
845; <i>App. Hrgs. 1970, </i>Justice, Pt. 1, pp. 924, 979, 998.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">48. Information supplied by LEAA.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">49. See <i>Message from the President to the
Congress of the United States </i>June 17, 1971.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">50. H.R. 92-133, p. 3.<br>
<br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>