
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B20-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA001-000011-B021-253</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/frstchap.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073707 text/html 17403
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Communications/1.1
Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:15 GMT
Last-modified: Tuesday, 16-Jul-96 20:03:00 GMT
Content-length: 17210
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>FRSTCHAP</TITLE>
</HEAD>

<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF" TEXT="#000000" LINK="#CC0033" VLINK="#006699"
ALINK=#CC6600">

<CENTER>
<A NAME="top"><IMG SRC="er-bar.gif" WIDTH=475 HEIGHT=74 
     BORDER=0 ALT="ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted
Education"></A>

<TABLE WIDTH=475 BORDER=0 CELLPADDING=0 CELLSPACING=0>
<TR>
<TD WIDTH=160></TD>
<TD ALIGN=LEFT WIDTH=315
     ><H2><i>READING: THE FIRST CHAPTER IN EDUCATION</i></H2>
</TD>
</TR>
</TABLE>

<TABLE WIDTH=475 BORDER=0 CELLPADDING=0 CELLSPACING=0>

<TR>
<TD WIDTH=475 ALIGN=LEFT>


<b> Reading: The First Chapter In Education </b><P>

No other skill taught in school and learned by school children is more
important than reading. It is the gateway to all other knowledge. If
children do not learn to read efficiently, the path is blocked to
every subject they encounter in their school years.<P>

The past five years have brought major breakthroughs in our knowledge
of how children learn to read and why so many fail. These new insights
have been translated into techniques for teaching reading to beginning
readers, including the many students who would otherwise encounter
difficulties in mastering this fundamental skill. Researchers have
come to appreciate that early identification and treatment of such
students can make all the difference. Researchers have also documented
the problems -personal, social, and educational  - that too often
result when early attention and intervention do not occur.<P>


<B>Reading to Learn </B><P>

Students who do not "learn to read" during the first three years of
school experience enormous difficulty when they are subsequently asked
to "read to learn." Teaching students to read by the end of third
grade is the single most important task assigned to elementary
schools. During the first three years of schooling, students "learn to
read." That is, they develop the capacity to interpret the written
symbols for the oral language that they have been hearing since birth.
Starting in fourth grade, schooling takes on a very different purpose,
one that in many ways is more complex and demanding of higher-order
thinking skills. If efficient reading skills are not developed by this
time, the English language, history, mathematics, current events, and
the rich tapestries of literature and science become inaccessible.<P>

In addition, a strong body of evidence shows that most students who
fall behind in reading skills never catch up with their peers become
fluent readers. They fall further and further behind in school, become
frustrated, and drop out at much higher rates than their classmates.
They find it difficult to obtain rewarding employment and are
effectively prevented from drawing on the power of education to
improve and enrich their lives. Researchers speak of this syndrome as
the "Matthew Effect" - the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. <P>

Most Americans know how central reading is to education. According to
a 1994 poll conducted by Peter D. Hart Research Associates for the
American Federation of Teachers and the Chrysler Corporation, nearly
70 percent of teachers believe that reading is the "most important"
skill for children to learn. Two years earlier, the same polling firm
reported that 62 percent of parents believed that reading was one of
the most important skills for their children to master. Both teachers
and parents ranked reading as more critical than mathematics and
computer skills. In other words, there is general agreement among
researchers and the public that all children must learn to read early
in their academic careers.<P>


<B>The Challenges of Illiteracy</B><P>

More students fail to learn to read by the end of the third grade than
many people imagine. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that all
schools encounter students who fall into this category and that all
schools should have plans for addressing the special needs of these
students. <P>

In its 1994 Reading Assessment, the National Assessment of Education
Progress (NAEP), a federally supported program that tracks the
performance of American students in core academic subjects, reported
that more than four out of 10 fourth-graders (42 percent) in American
schools were reading at a "below basic" level. This means that they
could not understand "uncomplicated narratives and high-interest
informative texts." NAEP also reported that such illiteracy persists
in the higher grades. The report found that nearly one-third (31
percent) of eighth-graders and nearly one-third (30 percent) of
twelfth-graders are also reading at a "below basic" level. The latter
figures probably understate the problem, because many poor readers
drop out of school before twelfth grade. <P>

Other researchers have come to similar conclusions regarding how
widespread students' reading problems really are.  National
longitudinal studies have measured the ability of children to
recognize individual words in text. Their data suggest that more than
one child in six (17.5 percent) will encounter a problem in learning
to read during the crucial first three years of school. Further
evidence comes from the sharp rise in the number of students who are
diagnosed as learning disabled or are referred to special education
because they cannot read at the proper grade level.<P>

In contrast to popular belief, reading failure is not concentrated
among particular types of schools or among specific groups of
students. To the contrary, students who have difficulty reading
represent a virtual cross-section of  American children. They include
rich and poor, male and female, rural and urban, and public and
private school children in all sections of the country. According to
the NAEP assessment, for example, nearly one-third (32 percent) of
fourth graders whose parents graduated from college are reading at the
"below basic" level. <P>

In short, the failure of a substantial number of students to learn to
read during the critical first three years of school is a national
problem - one that confronts every community and every school in the
country. <P>


<B>A Common Stumbling Block: Phonemic Awareness</B><P>

Whatever the reason children fail to read by the end of the third
grade, most non-readers share a common problem. They have not
developed the capacity to recognize what reading experts call
phonemes. Phonemes are the smallest units of speech  -  the basic
building blocks of speaking and writing. The word "cat," for example,
contains three phonemes - the /k/, /a/, and /t/ sounds. Phonemes are
often identical to individual letters, but not always. The word "ox,"
for example, has two letters but three phonemes  -  the /o/, /k/, and
/s/ sounds. <P>

Researchers have demonstrated that accomplished readers are adept at
recognizing phonemes and putting them together to construct words and
phrases. They do this quickly, accurately, and automatically. The
absence of this critical linguistic skill makes it difficult for
children to decode and read single words, much less sentences,
paragraphs, and whole stories. Teaching phonemic awareness and
discrimination among phonemes is imperative for all students.<P>

<B>Solutions in the Classroom</B><P>

Teaching beginners to read must be highly purposeful and strategic.
Effective techniques have been developed for helping students,
including those with learning disabilities, to develop phonological
awareness, word recognition, and other advanced skills required for
reading.<P>

Phonological awareness activities build on and enhance children's
experiences with written (e.g., print awareness) and spoken language
(e.g., playing with words).  A beginning reader with successful
phonological awareness and knowledge of letters ostensibly learns how
words are represented in print.<P>

Intervention for learners who have difficulty with phonological
awareness must be early, strategic, systematic, and carefully
designed. It must be based on a curriculum that recognizes and
balances the importance of both phonics instruction and the
appreciation of meaning. <P>

For children who have difficulty reading, effective reading
instruction strategies should be used to build phonological awareness
and alphabetic understanding.  These strategies should be explicit,
making phonemes prominent in children's attention and perception.  For
example, teachers can model specific sounds and in turn ask the
children to produce the sounds.  In addition, opportunities to engage
in phonological awareness activities should be plentiful, frequent,
and fun.<P>

Instructional strategies should consider the characteristics that make
a word easier or more difficult to read. These include: the number of
phonemes in the word; phoneme position in words (initial sounds are
easier); phonological properties of words (e.g., continuants, such as
/m/, are easier than stop sounds, such as /t/); and phonological
awareness dimensions, including blending sounds, segmenting words, and
rhyming.<P>

Many early readers will require greater teacher assistance and
support. Using a research-based strategy known as scaffolding,
teachers should provide students with lots of instructional support in
the beginning stages of reading instruction, and gradually reduce the
support as students learn more about reading skills.  The ultimate
goal is for students to read on their own without the help of a
teacher.<P>


<B>A Balanced Approach</B><P>

Unfortunately, it is not always easy for teachers to recognize
students with reading difficulties. When they do, teachers sometimes
find themselves caught between conflicting schools of thought about
how to treat reading disabilities. One school of thought gives
considerable attention to the teaching of phonics in the early stages
of reading. Another school of thought emphasizes the whole language
approach. Should teachers rely on phonics instruction, whole language
instruction, or a combination of the two? <P>

The U.S. Department of Education and the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (NICHD) have supported the review of
hundreds of studies done in recent years on reading instruction and
disabilities. This body of research suggests that the relatively
recent swing away from phonics instruction to a singular whole
language approach is making it more difficult to lift children with
learning disabilities out of the downward learning spiral and, in
fact, may impede the progress of many students in learning to read
with ease.<P>

Few dispute the value of giving children opportunities to write,
surrounding children with good literature, and generally creating a
rich literate environment for students. But for many children this is
not enough. Such children will have continued difficulty with reading
unless they master the decoding skills associated with phonics
instruction.  <P>

Research makes clear that children do not learn to read the way they
learn to talk. Speech is a natural human capacity, and learning to
talk requires little more than exposure and opportunity.  In contrast,
written language is an artifact, a human invention, and reading is not
a skill that can be acquired through immersion alone.  Beginning
readers benefit from instruction that helps them understand that the
words they speak and hear can be represented by written symbols - and
that letters and the sounds associated with them, when combined and
recombined, form words - just as they benefit from experiences that
make reading fun.<P>

California's experience with a chosen reading approach is instructive.
A decade ago, the state became a leader in the movement to embrace
whole language instruction. However, as a result of low reading
scores, a task force was formed and has recently adopted a more
balanced reading approach that includes building phonological
awareness along with the reading of meaningful and engaging texts. <P>

Research indicates that reading can be taught effectively with a
balanced approach that uses the best of both teaching approaches.
Such an approach incorporates phonics instruction with the rich
literacy environments advocated by whole language instruction.<P>

<B>The Learning to Read/Reading to Learn Initiative</B><P>

Throughout the Learning to Read/Reading to Learn: Helping Children
with Learning Disabilities to Succeed initative, three leading
researchers in the field of reading instruction, Marilyn Jager Adams,
author of Beginning to Read: Thinking and Learning about Print, a book
supported by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement
(OERI); Ed Kameenui of the University of Oregon, a researcher
supported by the Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP); and Reid
Lyon of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) have identified what they believe are the most important
strategies for improving early reading instruction.  These strategies
are effective for virtually every child but are absolutely critical
for children with learning disabilities. By evaluating the ways in
which students learn to read, researchers have identified nine skills
essential to the learning process. Identification of these skills will
alert teachers and parents to ways in which they can help children
learn to read more efficiently.<P>


<B>Reading: The Key to Success</B><P>

As already discussed, reading is the gateway to learning. Facility to
understand and use written language has always been a prerequisite to
the efficient acquisition of knowledge, and it is becoming
increasingly important in today's information society. In the past, it
may have been possible for persons who were illiterate to obtain a
good job, support a family, and live a comfortable life, but those
days are gone. Children who do not learn to read today can expect to
live on the margins of society in every way. Universal literacy is the
ultimate "access" issue in American education. <P>

American schools thus face a new and monumental challenge.  For the
first time, educators are being asked to bring all students to a level
of performance that was demanded of only a relatively few students in
the past. Educational and political leaders understand this challenge,
and a major effort is underway to raise the standard of teaching and
learning in American schools. Improved reading instruction is crucial
to this process. Attainment of the National Education Goals by the
year 2000 will require enhanced reading skills in American students.
Developments such as  national standards in core subjects, new forms
of accountability, or decentralization of school management will have
few positive effects in the absence of  well-conceived reading
instruction. <P>

Attaining such goals also means that ways must be found to address the
learning needs of those students who, for whatever reasons, face
difficulties in learning to read. Doing so is not only a matter of
equity; it is also a practical necessity if the overall objectives of
improving American education as a whole are to be met. <P>

Not only are American schools facing new demands, they also are being
asked to deliver more education without the addition of substantial
new resources. Thus they must become more efficient. Incorporating the
new knowledge we now possess about reading and how to teach it is
imperative if schools are to use their resources effectively and
efficiently.  All students must start reading as soon as they are
developmentally ready to do so, and they must build on basic reading
skills as they move into higher grades. In the absence of such orderly
progression, schools are put in a position of having too many children
in remedial or special education programs.<P>


<B>Toward a Nation of Readers </B><P>

We are living at a pivotal time in the history of American education.
More than ever before, schools are being asked to deliver a higher
level of education and to do so for all students. Meeting this
challenge requires that the process of "learning to read" be securely
underway for virtually all students by the end of the third grade.<P>

No American school would knowingly withhold a vaccine from students
that would prevent a childhood disease like measles. Yet this is, in
effect, what is happening when it comes to the teaching of reading.
Recent gains in our knowledge of the reading process have given us the
tools to help the majority of students, including those with learning
disabilities, to learn to read at the level required to function as
effective individuals, workers, parents, and citizens in today's
world. The challenge is to put this new knowledge in the hands of
teachers, parents, and school administrators so that millions of
American students who otherwise would fail to learn to read will gain
access to this important skill.<P>



</TD>
</TR>
</TABLE><P>

<PRE>

</PRE>

<A HREF="#top">Top of Page</A>
<IMG SRC="/gif/space.gif" HEIGHT=1 WIDTH=18 BORDER=0>
<A HREF="readlist.htm">Back to Menu</A>
<IMG SRC="/gif/space.gif" HEIGHT=1 WIDTH=18 BORDER=0>
<A HREF="/home.htm">Back to CEC Home Page</A>
</CENTER>

<P>
<hr>
<center><i>copyright &#169; 1996 <br>
ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education <br>
URL:  http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm</i></center><P>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>