
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B03-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B042-69</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/organic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020248 text/html 18172
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:42 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:05 GMT
Content-length: 17954
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report -Organic and Systemic Functions</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>ORGANIC AND SYSTEMIC FUNCTIONS </h1>

<p><b>Samuel Allentuck, MD</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The functions of the body organs and systems were studied in
the manner common to hospital practice according to the methods
and with the equipment in use at Welfare Hospital. The study was
designed to show not only the effects of varying doses of
marihuana but also whether subjects who had long been users of
the drug gave evidence of organic damage. The tests were made
before the drug was administered, during its action, and often in
the after period. </p>

<p>The heart and circulation, blood composition, kidney, liver
and gastro-intestinal function, and basal metabolism received
special consideration. </p>

<hr>

<h2>SUMMARY </h2>

<p>The most consistent effect of marihuana observed in this
division of the study was an increase in pulse rate which began
shortly after the taking of the drug, reached a peak in about two
hours, and gradually disappeared. In-a few instances a temporary
sinus tachycardia or sinus bradycardia was noted, but except for
these there were no abnormalities in rhythm. The increase in
pulse rate was usually accompanied by a rise in blood pressure. </p>

<p>There was in general an increase in the blood sugar level and
in the basal metabolic rate, quite marked in some subjects, but
in the majority the levels reached did not exceed the high normal
limits. </p>

<p>An increase in the frequency of urination was often observed. </p>

<p>There was, however, no appreciable increase in the total
amount of urine passed during the drug action. </p>

<p>Hunger and an increase in appetite, particularly for sweets,
was noted in the majority of the subjects, and the taking of
candy or sweetened drinks brought down a &quot;too high&quot;
effect of the drug. </p>

<p>Nausea and vomiting occurred in a number of instances,
diarrhea only during psychotic episodes. </p>

<p>On the other hand, the blood showed no changes in cell count,
hemoglobin per cent, or the urea nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus
figures. The figures for the circulation rate and vital capacity
and the results of the phenolsulfonphthalein test for kidney
infection and the bromsulfalein test for liver function were not
different from those of the control period. The
electrocardiograms showed no abnormalties which could be
attributed to a direct action on the heart. In the few
observations on gastric motility and secretion no evidence of
marihuana action on these functions was obtained. </p>

<p>The positive results observed, increase in pulse rate and
blood pressure, increase in blood sugar and metabolic rate, urge
to urinate, increased appetite, nausea and vomiting, and
diarrhea, were not intensified by an increase in dosage, for they
could occur in an equal degree after the administration of any of
the effective doses within the range used. All the effects
described are known to be expressions of forms of cerebral
excitation, the impulses from this being transmitted through the
autonomic system. The alterations in the functions of the organs
studied come from the effects of the drug on the central nervous
system and are proportional to these effects. A direct action on
the organs themselves was not seen. </p>

<hr>

<h2>Psychological Aspects</h2>

<h3>PSYCHOPHYSICAL AND OTHER FUNCTIONS </h3>

<p>Robert S. Morrow, PH.D. </p>

<p>In this phase of the study an effort was made to determine the
effect of marihuana on various psychomotor and some special
mental abilities. Appraisal of these effects was made wherever
possible through the use of standardized tests. A number of
different tests were originally tried under varying experimental
conditions on the group of 5 volunteer subjects who had never
before taken marihuana. Only those tests were retained which, in
the course of this preliminary investigation demonstrated the
greatest potentialities. With the tests finally selected it was
hoped to measure the effect of marihuana on the following
functions. </p>

<p><b>FUNCTIONS AND CAPACITIES TESTED</b> </p>

<p>Static Equilibrium This was measured by means of the Miles
Ataxiameter, which is an instrument for recording body sway. The
subject remains stationary in the ataxiameter with his hands at
his sides and his feet together while a system of pulleys
attached to a helmet on his head records the direction and degree
of movement. The subject's score is the cumulative sway in all
directions measured in millimeters. This test was applied to each
subject for two minutes with his eyes open and two minutes with
his eyes closed. Each trial was followed by a rest period of five
minutes. </p>

<p>Hand Steadiness Hand steadiness was measured by means of the
Whipple Steadiness Tester which consists of a metal disk with a
hole 3/16 of an inch in diameter, connected in series with dry
cells, an electric counter, and a stylus. The subject was
instructed to hold the stylus in the hole for two minutes without
touching the metal sides. Each contact with the side of the hole
was recorded and the total number of contacts gave an index of
unsteadiness of hand.<br>
</p>

<p>Speed of Tapping Speed of tapping was measured in somewhat the
same manner as was hand steadiness. The Whipple Apparatus was
used, the tapping board replacing the steadiness disk and a
thicker and heavier stylus replacing the steadiness stylus. The
subject tapped repeatedly on the metal plate for two minutes and
the total number of taps was recorded on the counter, thereby
giving a measure of motor speed. <br>
</p>

<p>Strength of Grip The Collins Dynamometer was used to measure
the subject's strength of grip. Three trials were made for each
hand and the scores averaged. </p>

<p>Simple and Complex Hand and Foot Reaction Time Special
apparatus was constructed to measure simple and complex hand and
foot reaction time. To measure simple hand reaction time, the
subject was instructed to press down on a telegraph key and
remove his hand as quickly as possible when a red light appeared
on the board which stood directly before him. A Cenco counter
recorded the reaction time, that is, the time which elapsed
between the presentation of the stimulus and the response. </p>

<p>For the measurement of simple foot reaction time, the subject
pressed down on a pedal with his foot, removing it as quickly as
possible when the red light appeared. </p>

<p>For the measurement of complex (choice or discrimination) hand
and foot reaction time either a red or a blue light served as a
stimulus. The subject had no advance knowledge as to which color
light would appear. For measuring the response with the hand, the
subject pressed down on the telegraph key with the right hand
and, at the sight of the red light, moved the peg from the red
compartment into the center (neutral) compartment with the left
hand, then removed the right hand from the key; at the appearance
of the blue light, he moved the peg from the blue to the neutral
compartment. For measuring complex foot reaction time, the
procedure was similar to that for estimating the hand reaction
time except that the right foot and the pedal were substituted
for the right hand and the telegraph key. </p>

<p>Each subject made fifteen trials for each of the four
variations. </p>

<p>Musical Aptitude Musical aptitude was determined by means of
the Kwalwasser- Dykema Music Tests. The eight tests administered
were the tonal memory test, the quality discrimination test, the
intensity discrimination test, the tonal movement test, the time
discrimination test, the rhythm discrimination test, the pitch
discrimination test, and the melodic taste test. The sum of the
scores for these separate tests was used to give a total score
for musical aptitude. </p>

<p>Auditory Acuity By means of the Galton Whistle, the subjects'
limits of auditory acuity were gauged for both ascending and
descending frequencies. </p>

<p>The final score was the average of the results of three trials
in each direction. </p>

<p>Perception of Time An attempt was made to appraise the
subject's facility in estimating time by asking him to state
when, after a given signal, he thought the following intervals
had elapsed - fifteen seconds, one minute, and five minutes.
Several trials were given for each time interval and the average
of the results of the trials was taken as the final score. </p>

<p>Perception of Length Subjects were asked to estimate the
length of lines which were 3 inches, 5 inches, and 8 inches in
length and to draw lines of 3 inches and 7 inches. </p>

<p>The Subjects Fifty-four subjects were used in this part of the
experiment, 36 marihuana users and 18 non-users. The two groups
were equated approximately for the following factors: age,
height, weight, years of formal education, and number of arrests.
The age range for the user group was from 21 to 45 years with
27.9 years as an average, the age range for the non-user group
was from 22 to 43 years with 29.8 years as an average. The range
in height for the users was from 54 to 75 inches with a mean of
67.5 inches- for the non-users the range was from 60 to 71 inches
with a mean of 66.8 inches. Range in weight for the users was
from 123 to 178 pounds with 151.3 pounds as the mean, for the
non-users from 115 to 180 pounds with 149.5 pounds as the mean.
The schooling of the user group ranged from no education at all
to 10 years with a mean of 7.1 years, that of the non- users
varied from 6 to 12 years with a mean of 8.3 years. As regards
the number of arrests, the range for users was from 1 to 20 with
a mean of 5.1 and for the non-users from 1 to 15 with a mean of
5.3. </p>

<p>The two groups differed radically with respect to race. Of the
36 marihuana users, 11 (31 per cent) were white, 18 (50 per cent)
were Negroes, and 7 (19 percent) were Puerto Ricans. Of the 18
non- users, 12 (67 per cent) were white, 6 (33 per cent) were
Negroes, and none were Puerto Rican. </p>

<p>In addition, the user group was analyzed with respect to the
age when the marihuana habit was begun, the duration of the
habit, the number of marihuana cigarettes generally smoked per
day, and the period of deprivation. The variation of the habit as
already described for the entire group of users applies to the 36
subjects studied here. </p>

<p>Procedure The tests were first administered to the subjects
before they had taken marihuana, then about a week later when
they were under the influence of 2 cc. of marihuana, and finally
another week later after 5 cc.(1) of marihuana had been
administered. On each occasion the psychomotor tests for static
equilibrium, hand steadiness, tapping, strength of grip, and
reaction time were repeated at hourly intervals for eight
successive hours in order that the time-effects of marihuana
might be determined.(2) The other tests, that is, those measuring
musical ability, auditory acuity, visual ) memory, and perception
of time and length were given to the subjects while in the
undrugged condition and from three to four hours after the drug
had been administered. The music tests were given under normal
conditions and after 5 cc. of marihuana had been administered,
but not under 2 cc. dosage. </p>

<p>In almost all instances the marihuana was given in the morning
shortly after breakfast and generally after a day when no drug
had been taken in order that &quot;hangover&quot; effects might
be avoided. For the most part the subjects rested and did little
or nothing except the prescribed tests on days when marihuana was
taken. </p>

<p>The equilibrium, steadiness, tapping and strength of grip
tests were given together on one day and the different forms of
the reaction- time test on another day. Ordinarily four or five
days elapsed between retests. </p>

<p>In addition to being tested after standard doses of the
marihuana concentrate had been ingested, 11 users and 9 non-users
were tested after smoking marihuana cigarettes.(3) The cigarettes
weighed from 4 to 8 grains each. Most of the subjects smoked five
cigarettes, two non-users smoked only three, and one nonuser
smoked four. The tests with cigarettes were given at
quarter-hour, half-hour and hour intervals. </p>

<p>(1) A dose of 5 cc. of marihuana proved &quot;too much&quot;
for many non-user subjects in the sense that ingestion of this
amount was often followed by nausea and general symptoms of
malaise which interfered with further testing. </p>

<p>For this reason the higher dose for non-users was sometimes
reduced to 3 cc. or 4 cc. In all, only 6 of the non-user subjects
took the S cc. dose. Accordingly, although the higher dosage is
referred to as S cc. it should be noted that the actual amount
used varied from 3 cc. to 5 cc. </p>

<p>(2) The scores for the first 25 users and 6 non-users were
obtained every half hour, but since there was little difference
between the half-hourly and hourly results it was decided to
record hourly scores only, except for the first half hour. </p>

<p>(3) A short experiment in which placebos were employed was
also tried on these subjects. An attempt was made to have the
placebos simulate the marihuana as much as possible but
unfortunately the placebo pills had a distinctive taste which
rendered them easily identifiable. The subjects referred to them
as the &quot;licorice&quot; pills or the &quot;blanks.&quot;
While the experiment was completed and resulted in some
interesting findings, the factors which might have invalidated
the results were so serious that these experiments are not
reported at this time.<br>
</p>

<p>Summary and Conclusions </p>

<p>1. The effect of marihuana on the psychomotor functions
depends primarily on the complexity of the function tested.
Simpler functions like speed of tapping and simple reaction time
are affected only slightly by large doses (5 cc.) and negligibly,
if at all, by smaller doses (2 cc.). On the other hand, the more
complex functions like static equilibrium, hand steadiness, and
complex reaction time may be affected adversely to a considerable
degree by the administration of both large and small doses of
marihuana. </p>

<p>2. The function most severely affected is body steadiness and
hand steadiness. The ataxia is general in all directions rather
than predominant in any particular axis. </p>

<p>3. The effects produced by larger doses (5 cc.) are
systematically, though not necessarily proportionately, greater
than those brought about by small doses. </p>

<p>4. The time required by the drug to exert its maximum effect
varies somewhat with the function and size of dose, but, on the
whole, time curves for both functions and dosages have similarity
of form The effect of the drug begins from one to two hours after
ingestion and reaches its peak at the fourth hour, after which it
declines so that by the eighth hour most of it is dissipated. </p>

<p>5. When marihuana is taken in cigarette form the psychomotor
effects are similar in character and trend to those observed
after the ingestion of the drug but they occur much sooner and
taper off more quickly. </p>

<p>6. The effects seem to be essentially the same for women as
for men, except that women are sometimes affected maximally at
the second or third hour after the drug is administered. In women
the return to the normal condition is in some instances quicker
and more abrupt than it is in the men. </p>

<p>7. Non-users generally seem to be more affected by the drug
when it is ingested than are users. 8. Auditory acuity is not
affected by marihuana. </p>

<p>9. There is no evidence that musical ability, of non-musicians
at least, is improved by marihuana. </p>

<ol>
    <li>The ability to estimate short periods of time and short
        linear distances is not measurably affected by the
        ingestion of marihuana. </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>