
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B07-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B046-87</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la32.html 205.156.212.5 19970122032914 text/html 47099
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:27:14 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:55 GMT
Content-length: 46912
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la32.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>**FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT**</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>LOMAR/ILFM Survey Offers Latest Data on Staff Pay</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Could This Be It: A Partner Compensation Plan That Really&nbsp;Works? </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1265 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Nine More Ways to Reduce Firm Costs in the New Year</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(582 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>**LAW FIRM ADMINISTRATION**</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>What Can Law Firms Learn From Others About Marketing?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(639 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Records and Files: The 'Status Quo' Can Be Expensive</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(421 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Mastering Powerful Leadership Without Uttering a Word (Or &nbsp;Becoming a Dictator)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LOMAR Law Office Cost Index**</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>LOMAR Law Office Cost Index</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(281 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>**LOMAR NEWS BRIEFS**</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>LOMAR News Briefs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(889 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

LOMAR/ILFM Survey Offers Latest Data on Staff Pay

     Last month law firm staff probably received a welcome
surprise after their year-end salary reviews. With firms
seeing the first real economic gains since the start of the
decade at least according to most of the key industry
benchmarks it stands to reason that administrators and
managing partners were less apprehensive about approving
larger pay hikes for support staff in 1996.

     As LOMAR previously reported, salary increases for 1996
were generally expected to stand in the range of 4%, with
firms of fewer than 500 employees likely to award 4.24%, and
those with 500 to 1,499 granting raises of about 4.04%. But as
all law firm administrators and managing partners know, staff
salary increases don't always follow predictions. 

     Sharing the wealth. In 1995, for the most part,
compensation increases for law firm support staff exceeded,
and in many cases handsomely exceeded, cost-of-living hikes,
according to the just-released 1995 Law Office Management &
Administration Report (LOMAR)/Institute on Law Firm Management
(ILFM) Compensation and Hourly Billing Survey. Across the
board, support staff, secretaries, and word processors fared
better in the smaller firms than they did in the larger ones.
In fact, secretaries and word processors fared least well in
the largest (75-plus attorney) firms (see partial Table 1
below--complete version in printed newsletter only).

     LOMAR's analysis of the data relating to a number of key
law firm positions, including secretaries, word processors,
and other support staff, reveals some interesting trends which
are described below:

     Secretaries. In this category 1995 pay ranged from a low
of $19,000 to a high of $33,000, depending on firm size, years
of experience, and reporting duties.

     o Legal secretaries with less than three years'
experience were hit the hardest in all size firms, with three
sizes cutting their total compensation by as much as 17.4% and
others holding steady at 1994 pay levels.

     o Those with more than three years of experience fared
better, with three sizes of firms reporting increases (one by
as much as 20%) and the other two holding steady.

     o Across the board, secretaries who work for two
associates earned less than those shared by a partner and an
associate, but the dual-associate secretaries reported a
higher percentage pay increase than did any other category of
secretary.

     o Secretaries who report to partners were paid the most
in large firms ($33,000), but were ompensated at nearly the
same level ($32,000) by firms with only two to eight
attorneys.

     Word processors. Pay for this position ranged from a low
of $22,000 at firms with two to eight attorneys to a high of
$31,000 at firms with 75-plus lawyers. Firms that gave this
position the largest hikes in 1995 were those with nine to 20
lawyers (a 9.1% increase) and those with 41 to 74 attorneys
(6.1%).

     o Average salaries for word processors in the smallest
size firms, however, dropped substantially in 1995.

     Other support staff. LOMAR's analysis of a few of the
many positions reveals that accounting managers/controllers,
for the most part, failed even to keep up with cost-of-living
increases in 1995. The largest salary hike, given at firms
with 41 to 74 attorneys, was 6.3%. But other than that,
increases hovered around 1% to 2%. In the case of firms with
two to eight attorneys, the average salary dropped
substantially.

     o Pay hikes for switchboard operators/receptionists
ranged from 0% to 25% (the latter, once again, in firms with
41 to 74 attorneys). Pay levels for 1995 ranged from $18,000
in firms with two to eight attorneys to $25,000 in firms with
41 to 74 lawyers.


     o Personnel director pay scales hovered in the
$37,000-to-$40,000 area for smaller firms. However, those with
41 or more attorneys earned $48,000 to $60,000. The LOMAR/ILFM
survey did no year-to-year comparisons on this title, computer
positions, and several others because the sample size was not
large enough (see Table 2 for positions with counts of less
than 75--table available in print version only). Therefore, no
percentage differences are listed on Table 1. 

     Nonetheless, the size of the salary paid to those in the
personnel administrator position does reveal that more law
firms are recognizing the importance of this position for both
controlling costs and keeping the firm in compliance with this
increasingly complex area of administration.

     o As for automation personnel, in firms large enough to
support a local area network (LAN) coordinator, pay ranged
from $39,000 to $47,000.

     In-house computer trainers were paid less than
receptionists at the smaller firms, reflecting the fact that
many of these posts now work part-time. Firms reported MIS
director pay scales from $30,000 to $65,000, with levels
largely tied to firm size.

     Regional variations. The Pacific and South Atlantic
regions generally paid their secretaries the most. Pacific
firms took top honors except for secretaries who are shared by
two associates and those who serve a partner/associate/legal
assistant team. In those instances, firms in the South
Atlantic states paid the most.

     Billing coordinators fared best in the Middle Atlantic
states, where firms paid$34,000. This contrasts sharply with
the Central and Plains states where they were more commonly
paid $22,000.

     For more information on the 1995 Law Office Management &
Administration Report/Institute on Law Firm Management
Compensation and Hourly Billing Survey contact the ILFM at
313-971-1860; Fax: 313-971-2116.
[-Table 1. Median Total Annual Compensation Levels (in $000s)
for Law Office Personnel by Size of Firm, 1994 & 1995-] 

                          2 to 8               9 to 20
Position            1994  1995 % Diff.     1994  1995 % Diff.

Secretaries and 
Word Processors
Legal typist/
secretary, <3 
years' experience 
with similar job     $23   $19 -17.4%       $21   $21   0.0%
Legal typist/
secretary, 3+ 
years' experience 
with similar job      27    27      0         25    27   8.0
Secretary shared by 
two associates        24    27   13.0         24    27  12.5
Secretary shared by 
associate & partner   28    34   21.4         26    28   7.7
Secretary shared by 
partner & legal 
assistant             26    21  -19.2         26    28   7.7
Secretary to partner  27    32   18.5         27    30  11.1
Secretary to 3 or 
more timekeepers      28    31   10.7         28    26  -7.1
Secretary to partner/
associate/LA team     26    33   26.9         26    24  -7.6
Word processor 
supervisor             _     _      _         33    36   9.1
Word processor operator,
<3 years' experience  27    22  -18.5         22    29  31.8

Support Staff
Head librarian         _     _      _         19    21  10.5
Law clerk             24    19  -20.8         24    25   4.2
Accounting manager/
controller/
administrator         39    32  -17.9         40    41   2.5
Support services 
supervisor            28    37   32.1         23    28  21.7
Bookkeeper            23    27   17.4         26    26   0.0
Billing coordinator   27    31   14.8         23    22  -4.3
Accounting clerk, 
assistant bookeeper   20    17  -15.0         20    20   0.0
Switchboard operator/
receptionist          18    18    0.0         18    20  11.1
Receptionist          14     _      _         14     _     _
File/mail/messenger/
duplicator            31    17  -45.2         34    16 -52.9
Adm. assistant/office 
manager/branch 
manager               34    32   -5.9         38    38   0.0
Personnel director/
administrator          _    40      _         24    37  54.2
Computer operator     19     _      _         33    32  -3.0
LAN coordinator       39     _      _          _    32     _
Computer systems 
analyst                _     _      _          _    30     _
Information systems 
manager/MIS director  29    42   44.8         39    30  -23.1
Computer support/
trainer/help desk     10    14   40.0          _    14      _

(Source: LOMAR/ILFM Compensation and Hourly Billing Survey)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

Could This Be It: A Partner Compensation Plan That Really
Works? 

     Few issues in today's law firm can spark as much raw 
emotion or portend real damage to the spirit of the
organization as partner compensation. While a few firms may
have managed to devise systems that equitably reward all
partners, most are still struggling to strike that delicate
balance.

     The Cyber Chapter members who took part in a recent
Association of Legal Administrators' online forum via
CompuServe seemed all too aware of the many subtle pitfalls
associated with partner compensation. "Rewarding fee
generation alone tends to be divisive, works contrary to
collegiality, and doesn't properly reflect the contributions
that are essential to the continuation and growth of the
firm," one participant asserted.

     True, indeed. Just ask anyone who's followed the accounts
leading up to the demise of Mudge Rose, which just months ago
voted to dissolve after 126 years of existence. Surely most
observers were surprised--to say the least--when The Wall
Street Journal reported that the firm's demise was
precipitated, in part, by an inability to reach consensus on
whether to retain "unproductive" partners and how best to
compensate "productive" members of the firm. 

     If Mudge Rose--which up until last year had earned enough
in gross revenues to regularly assume a spot on The American
Lawyer's annual ranking of the nation's richest firms--
couldn't hold it together, what does it mean to others coping
with similar issues relating to partner compensation?  

     "Giving and awarding credit for attorney origination is
not as easy as you would think," another administrator noted
online. "It is clear that when you bring in a client you
should get some credit for the origination, but how about the
additional tasks from that client that are created by the good
work of another attorney?" 

     The same administrator continued: "Also, when you bring
in a transactional client who has lots of small files, how
long does the originating attorney receive credit for the
ongoing shipment of small files, how do you factor credits....
Does an attorney whose major role is origination [need] a
different compensation plan? If you have advice, I'd love to
see it." 

     Exploring alternatives. Administrators and managing
partners are fully cognizant that no generic compensation
system is perfect for every law firm. Partners will always
perceive inequities and partner compensation schemes are, for
the most part, driven by intangibles, like firm culture and
personality. But, since some system is obviously necessary,
examining the so-called model plans is a logical first step. 

     Outlined below is part of a compensation plan devised by
John Iezzi, consultant and president of Richmond, Va.'s Iezzi
Management Group and a LOMAR contributor. While the sampling
embodies the basics of Iezzi's plan, readers can receive a
free copy of the complete Compensation Plan for Owners of
Professional Service Firms and all applicable exhibits by
contacting the IOMA Fax Retrieval System at 212-244-0360 #250.
Request Document #2 and it will be faxed to you immediately.
Questions and comments on the specifics of the plan should be
directed to John Iezzi at P.O. Box 1711, Richmond, VA 23214-
1711; 804-342-1206; Fax: 804-342-1209.

     Iezzi's compensation plan is based on both objective and
subjective criteria. In addition to rewarding individual
achievements based on attorney productivity and business
development, the plan also takes into account the activities
and contributions that a partner makes to the good of the firm
which may not be so easily quantifiable.

     Since firm data can change regularly, it is suggested
that once the plan is in effect, the information used in the
formula should be based on a three-year moving average. Thus,
until the three-year period can be determined, certain
adjustments may have to be made to account for significant
events which occur during the year being reviewed. Adjustments
will also need to be made for those owners who do not have a
three-year history of activity on which to draw. 

     At the end of a 12-month period, (not necessarily
corresponding to the firm's accounting year), information
would be generated on the total amount of working attorney and
originating attorney credits assignable to each partner. 

     Iezzi's plan is based on three major criteria:

     1. Working attorney credits. These are receipts (not
billable hours or billings) from work performed by the
individual partner. Working attorney points would be created
by determining the percentage that each partner's working
attorney credits bore to the working attorney credits of all
the other partners. Using an example of a firm with $2 million
in revenues, $933,500 came from the five partners. Partner A
had $210,000 of the total, so received 22.5 compensation
points.

     2. Originating attorney credits. These are receipts
(again not billable hours or billings) from work performed on
all files that can be identified as having been originated by
a particular partner. Figuring originating attorney points,
again using the example of the $2 million firm: $1.9 million
could be identified as having been originated by the current
group of five partners. In this case, Partner A was credited
for $496,000 of the total, or 26.1 compensation points.

     ln the above two situations, the points can be "weighted"
based on the value that the firm perceives is attributable to
these factors. In this case, both the working credits and the
originating credits have been given a factor of 1.0. There is
no magic to this; they can be whatever the firm's partners
decide. Thus, under this scenario, Partner A received 26.1
originating attorney points.

     3. Subjective criteria. This last group of factors is
developed to reward a partner's contributions to the firm
outside of the objective data. Elements to be considered
include firm management, associate training/mentoring,
cooperativeness with staff and firm procedures, bar
activities, community/civic activities, speaking and
publishing, financial management effectiveness (i.e., billings
management), and technical skills. 

     Each partner submits a self-evaluation report which is
reviewed by all the other partners or the compensation
committee. The partners or the committee then grade their
other partners on these criteria, based on a 100-point total.

     The criteria are individually weighted. The averages of
the ratings are then used to determine the points attributable
to this category. In the event the firm finds it difficult to
allocate the 100 points to each partner for the subjective
criteria, it could instead assign a value which could then be
easily translated into a percentage.

     These values would then be weighted, totaled, and a
percentage developed to establish the subjective element of
the compensation plan, along with the working-attorney and
originating-attorney components. The total points, after
application of the weighting factors, are then determined.
     Special considerations. There are certain problems that
occur with this type of system (all of which are also
described in the full report). While none is insurmountable,
each does need to be considered. 

     For instance, at some point, particularly for the larger,
general practice firms, this type of plan may be inapplicable-
-specifically as it relates to the issue of origination
credits. Larger firms owe many of their new clients not to any
person but to the firm as an institution which has built a
reputation that attracts clients. In addition, marketing
programs have changed to the point where teams rather than
individuals are often responsible for obtaining new clients. 

     But no compensation plan is perfect nor can any respond
to the totality of the compensation requirements in a firm.
Iezzi's plan has been designed to recognize as many of the
issues as possible, with the understanding that certain
modifications will need to be made before the final
percentages can be developed.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

Nine More Ways to Reduce Firm Costs in the New Year

     Law firm administrators and managing partners are
constantly looking for new cost-control ideas, or at least
ways to continue improving existing programs in the coming
year. Here are nine cost-control areas in which firms tell
LOMAR they've had success:

     1. Temporary staff. To get temps up and running as
quickly as possible, one firm has developed a brief "Temporary
Employee's Procedure Manual." It includes a simple office
layout, showing whose office is where; a brief style manual
for letters and other simple documents; details about how the
firm wants the phone answered; where supplies are located; the
firm's break policy; and several things that the firm does not
want the temp to do.

     2. Health care costs. All firms have taken steps to
control these expenses in recent years. But it's interesting
to note that a survey of human resource executives by Ernst &
Young ranked the popularity of cost-cutting options as
follows: First, increasing employee contributions (26%);
second, introducing a PPO (preferred provider organization)
arrangement (17%); three options tied for third--adding a
flexible benefits program, changing the insurance
carrier/administrator, and introducing POS (point-of-service)
arrangements (9% each); sixth, adding an HMO (7%); and
seventh, reducing benefits coverage (6%).

     3. Faxes. Pitney Bowes suggests curbing high fax-related
phone costs by buying a faster modem. About 70% of fax
machines are equipped with a 9.5 Kbp modem. A switch to a
14.4-units (or faster, though reception times may interfere
with the improvements) model would reduce the average
transmission time of a five-page document by 64%. This could
cut phone costs by up to $1,450 per year per fax machine.

     4. Firm brochures. Beware of too-low bids when looking
for a typesetter and printer. Some typesetters will quote a
break-even price, and then charge for each correction, knowing
full well that they will profit enormously on the many changes
that law firms typically make. Printers may give you an
extremely low quote, and then pull a "switcheroo" on the paper
you've selected, replacing it with a lower-quality stock
that's less expensive. 

     5. Cellular phones. Keith Fetridge of Aronson Fetridge &
Weigle (Bethesda, Md.) suggests negotiating the cost of your
monthly fee and the add-on services. Some providers will
eliminate these fees for large users. It also pays to audit
your monthly phone bills. Research concludes that up to 30%
contain at least one error.

     6. Online services. To control costs, limit the number of
staff and attorneys who are given online access. And write and
distribute a policy that specifies that online services must
be used only for purposes that benefit the firm or its
clients. 

     7. Staff management. Surprisingly, a quick staff meeting
may be less expensive than writing a memo. Studies show that
routine memos are written once and then rewritten 4.2 times.
And it typically takes 54 minutes to plan, compose, and edit
the first draft alone.

     8. Copiers. Saving money by purchasing less-expensive
paper can backfire by causing chronic paper jams. Most copiers
are designed to handle 20-lb. bond paper that is uniform. The
cheaper the paper, the greater the variation (in stiffness,
density, size, and so on) from sheet to sheet. And
inconsistencies lead to paper jams.

     9. Lawyers' offices. Today's standard offices are smaller
than ever. According to architects, the optimum office for
senior partners is now 150 to 225 sq. ft. For partners, it's
150 to 180 sq. ft. And for associates, it's just 100 to 150
sq. ft.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

What Can Law Firms Learn From Others About Marketing?

     Chances are your firm's marketing staff is fully aware of
the benefits of benchmarking and is already informally engaged
in the process. Many are members of the National Law Firm
Marketing Association or the Association of Legal
Administrators and have ample opportunity to share tactics at
national and local meetings.

     Those firms that want to enhance their "casual"
benchmarking efforts, however, must begin the ever-expanding
quest to identify "best-in-class" organizations that have
achieved excellence in areas in which the firm too would like
to excel. And these don't have to be law firms. Other
professional service firms, corporations, even clients may be
helpful in helping your firm's marketers and attorneys to
develop so-called external benchmarks.

     Why are external benchmarks important? For starters,
consider that without them, your firm's internally focused
marketing team has access to few new ideas that can lead to
creative solutions. Without knowing what is outside, the focus
of the team is limited and the results can be average at best.

     Recognizing that external benchmarks can be useful to law
firms trying to educate themselves about alternatives, a
recent study, Benchmarking the Best Practices in Client
Development, set out to compare the most effective initiatives
used by law, accounting/management consulting, and other
professional services firms. The study's legal component--
spearheaded by Julie Savarino, attorney and director of
Detroit's Business Development, Inc., was based on
questionnaires completed by 1,200 leading firms of all sizes
in the U.S., Canada, England, and Australia. Follow-up phone
calls and focus groups were then conducted to identify some of
the best practices used.

     Key findings. The information is outlined below:

     o Best practices. Participants reported that 10 types of
marketing efforts yield positive results. They are:
newsletters/bulletins; individual marketing plans; seminars;
one-to-one communications; consulting services;
industry/target/niche efforts; referrals; community
involvement; responding to proposals; and brochures. Most of
the law firms queried, however, still rely on what Savarino
terms "first-generation" marketing efforts which include the
use of tools such as seminars, newsletters, and publicity.

     Although accounting/management consulting and other
professional services firms gave industry/target/niche
marketing high marks, law firm respondents remained
unconvinced. According to the report, however, many law firms
plan to add industry-defined practice areas or groups to their
firms' organizational structure (see Figures 1 and 2 on page
3--bar charts available in printed version only).

     o Marketing departments. Only half of the law firms that
responded had dedicated marketing staff or an in-house
marketing department. By comparison, 70% of
accounting/management consulting firms and more than 80% of
other professional services firms had in-house marketers.

     And those law firms that do have marketers use them to
support a larger number of professionals than do
accounting/management consulting and other professional
services firms. Overall, the average marketing staff to
professional ratio is 45 to 1; in law firms the average ratio
is 65 to 1, the highest (see Figure 3 on page 3--printed
version only).

     But half of all responding firms plan to increase the
size of their marketing departments in coming years, with most
adding coordinator/support staff-level professionals. Almost
one-third of responding law firms plan to add sales/client
development professionals to their departments. About 45% of
responding firms plan to maintain the size of their marketing
departments.

     Impediments to effective marketing. In law firms, the
lack of commitment by attorneys was cited as an obstacle twice
as often as the corresponding professionals' level of
commitment in accounting/management consulting and other
professional service firms. Asked what it would take to
overcome marketing barriers, the respondents listed: greater
involvement of firm leadership; marketing training and
education; monetary incentives; time management; use of
marketing plans; creating marketing department efficiencies;
and using marketing budgeting tools. 

     For information: Contact Julie Savarino at Business
Development, Inc., 436 Main Centre Building, Northville, MI
48167-1562. 810-348-1562; Fax: 810-348-9966; e-mail:
102532,130@compuserve.com. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

Records and Files: The 'Status Quo' Can Be Expensive

     Law firm administrators and managing partners putting the
finishing touches on their organizations' agendas for the New
Year will probably overlook one issue that's generally taken
for granted: records retention. But the hidden costs
associated with time wasted by staff searching for hard to
find files (not to mention the obvious legal implications and
their potential costs) should prompt those firms that have
been gathering client records and files for storage, moving
records from partners' desks to the file cabinets, or keeping
documents off-site indefinitely to make more frequent reviews
of their record-retention policies.

     Where to begin? Statutes of limitations and state and
governmental agency requirements vary from state to state, of
course, and firms must determine what requirements hold for
the states in which they practice--for client as well as firm
records. In addition, the Association of Legal Administrators'
minimum document retention guidelines provided in the sidebar
on page 4 should prove useful as a starting point for firms
assessing their current policy.  

     Other considerations. While few firms employ full-time
records-management personnel, most find it efficient to assign
one person this additional responsibility, often within
practice areas. 

     Although new records-management technology, e.g., optical
disk imaging, may seem expensive, firms that have used it
report lower labor costs. 

     When it's time to move records off-site, firm
administrators can contact the Association of Commercial
Record Centers (ACRC), a nonprofit trade association for off
site information management companies. For a list of members
in your area, call 800-336-9793.

[-Minimum Document Retention Guides-]

30 Days
     o Correspondence and interoffice memos requiring no
further action

One Year
     o Expense, credit documents related to collections
     o Company policy and offers to contract which are not
accepted
     o Documents pertaining to patents, copyrights, licenses,
agreements, permits, and potential liability--one year after
matter to which they pertain is concluded 
     o Retail sales promotion materials

Two Years
     o Consumer credit reports
     o Assignments, attachments, and garnishments
     o Employee deductions, authorizations
     o Air pollutant emissions
     o Shipping of hazardous substances
     o Terms of employment and earnings
     o Records sufficient to audit

Three Years
     o Payroll records
     o Securities transactions
     o Government contracts
     o Copyrights
     o Collective bargaining agreements and employment
contracts
     o Promotions, discharges

Four Years
     o Payments and reports to government (including tax,
withholding, and FICA)
     o Sales and price agreements records

Six Years
     o Cancelled stock certificates
     o Patents
     o Tax returns and schedules

Permanently
     o Reorganization records
     o Liquidation of subsidiaries

(Source: ALA News)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

Mastering Powerful Leadership Without Uttering a Word (Or 
Becoming a Dictator)

     For managing partners and administrators, failing to
strike a balance between wielding power and providing
effective leadership can prove disastrous. As most will
readily attest, few in the law firm environment respect
authority simply because one demands it. On the contrary, many
of the "difficult" lawyers LOMAR knows respect those leaders
who consider their input before taking action.

     Although there are no management courses entitled "Law
Firm Listening 101," perhaps there should be. A recent study
by the American Management Association confirms that listening
is number one among the top 10 management activities. And
eight of the 10 activities involve attending to what others
say. Providing a vision, giving direction, training others,
conducting meetings, and communicating decisions, for example,
all require a keen ear. Another management study found that
listening takes up 53% of a typical executive's day, followed
by reading (17%), speaking (26%), and writing (14%).

     What issues have an adverse impact on communication in
law firms? Managing partners and administrators queried by
LOMAR indicate some common obstacles:

     o "As a lawyer, my tendency is to do the same thing [in
managing the firm] that I do when I'm trying a case, which is
to reinforce a position," the managing partner of a midsize
firm confided. "We're all trained to do a kind of active
listening with witnesses which makes it difficult to
communicate effectively at other times."

     o A managing partner with a New York City-based firm, who
admits that he is determined to build his listening skills,
offered this observation: "When you're feeling stretched in
all directions, taking the time to stop and listen can be
extremely difficult. I do everything possible to put aside my
practice problems and talk, but still it's hard to do. I work
at it, quite frankly, because that's my role as managing
partner."

     Listening is an active art that involves two functions:
Finding out what people know and finding out what they don't
know. Although the latter is the more important skill, it is
difficult to cultivate. The key, say a majority of the
administrators and managing partners LOMAR interviewed, lies
in listening between the lines--and above the cacophony of
other demands and practice-related stresses. (See the sidebar
below for tips on enhancing others' perceptions of these firm
leaders' power and authority.)

     The consensus of those interviewed is that the strong,
silent types who can lead their firms "through burning
buildings--and worse" tend to share the following
characteristics:

     1. They find areas of common interest. This is not the
same as being a consensus-builder. As one lawyer in a
Southeast firm says, "Our managing partner asks a lot of
questions, but he can process responses with incredible speed.
He sifts through it all and assists us in identifying the
chaff and the wheat."

     2. They judge the content and overlook style. They don't
tune out the dull, laconic, or loquacious messengers or the
dry, seemingly tedious topics of discussion. Instead, they
seek out whatever is of value to the group or the firm as a
whole, no matter where it may originate.

     "Our managing partner is quick to defend others who are
summarily shot down or ignored because of lack of presence,"
one practitioner remarks. "He restates the good ideas from
their comments and enables us to focus on them in a way the
original speaker couldn't."

     3. They hold their fire--even under attack. They don't
argue or respond until they fully understand the objections
that have been made. And they never answer a question until it
is fully asked. Confrontations are met with calm and reason
and followed up with rational points. 

     4. They look for and address breakdowns in communication.
"In my firm, probably like most, we had an unwritten policy
that the administrator would handle staff problems and I would
look after the lawyers," the New York-based managing partner
explains. "I know now that [the policy] actually worsened our
communications problem. You don't turn people away that
readily. Now I ask, 'Why did you come to me instead of our
administrator or your practice group leader, and what can I do
to facilitate matters?'" 

     5. They don't fake attention. "We had one managing
partner who wanted to be 'powerful' but just came off as phony
and insincere with his overly solicitous manner," one
practitioner told LOMAR. "People know from your tone, body
language, and so forth whether your interest is genuine."

     6. They are open-minded and inquisitive. People tend to
construct reality, so paying careful attention to the
perceptions of others takes on added importance. The New York
partner recounts the case, which he admits he could have
handled better, of a partner taken aback when a move to a
branch office left him temporarily in an office without a
window.

     "When you're dealing with lawyers, you know that if
you're not careful an argument is always possible," he quips.
"I explained the mistake, but what I was saying was completely
misinterpreted, and I lost my temper." What could he have done
to defuse the problem? In the managing partner's mind, the
issue was frivolous and he dismissed it summarily when active
listening, asking questions, and being more sensitive to the
situation  might have averted the confrontation.

     In the end, if there's a benefit to being a "strong,
silent type," it's that sooner or later, people start to pay
attention. Or, as many of the administrators and managing
partners that LOMAR interviewed concluded about their most
influential peers: When they speak, others listen.

[-Five Communication Enhancers for Managing Partners and
Administrators-]

     1. Identify your communications style. Some managing
partners and administrators communicate more effectively
through conversation and others through written communication.
And some respond better to one form than the other. It all
depends on the individual. It's important to identify and
understand how you are most effective.

     2. Recognize varying styles. Everyone has a different way
of communicating. In addition to understanding your style,
make an attempt to identify the recipients' without making
snap judgments based on intangibles such as personality and
appearance. Remember that law firms have a myriad of
personality types--from the silent ones and belligerent
tyrants to the apple polishers and sensitive soldiers. You
can't effectively communicate with each in the same manner.

      3. Be consistent. Once you identify your style of
communicating, it will confuse your messages if you stray from
it. If you routinely go to others to discuss issues in person,
don't start calling meetings in your office when minor matters
are involved. Use "unusual" communications techniques only
when all else fails.

     4. Limit technological exchanges. With the proliferation
of voice mail, e-mail, and telecommunications, many managing
partners and administrators have little incentive to
communicate face-to-face. Try to strike a balance between
personal contact and "impersonal" electronic conversations
that may limit your ability to get information across
effectively. Routine communications--along the line of 'I
thought you might like to know'--might be made via phone or e
mail, but crucial discussions should be conducted face-to-face
and in the listeners' environment. 

     5. Say it in person. It may be easier to give someone bad
news or to criticize in writing, but such serious
communications must be issued in person. Follow up with
written confirmation of what was said to avoid
misunderstandings. Written communication is most useful when
the same message must be given to more than one person.
(Source: Institute on Law Firm Management)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

LOMAR Law Office Cost Index

     Each month LOMAR updates its Law Office Cost Index for
major cities nationwide. This exclusive LOMAR monthly feature
is aimed at helping accounting firm managing partners and
administrators monitor relevant office cost changes within
their area and compare them with other regions.

     This index excludes lawyers' salaries, benefits, and
profit shares.

     The index covers all other major cost factors in the
accounting office including: rent and other space expenses,
equipment, support personnel, stationery, insurance, phone,
etc.

     The index is derived from data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, the American Chamber of Commerce, and Statistics
Canada. The base of 100 is for the national average in the
first quarter of 1992. Current figures follow actuals by 90
days.

                                          Two       % Change
                                Last      Years    Over Last
City              Current       Year      Ago      Two Years

Atlanta             95.8        92.1      91.0         5.3%    
Baltimore          110.5       107.9     104.1         6.1     
Boston             108.5       106.2     104.5         3.8     
Buffalo            108.5       105.1     102.7         5.7     
Chicago            108.1       104.7     103.2         4.8     
Cincinnati          96.4        94.3      91.0         5.9     
Cleveland           97.7        95.7      92.8         5.3     
Dallas-Fort Worth  101.3        98.5      96.3         5.2     
Denver             100.4        94.9      92.6         8.5     
Detroit            102.7        99.9      94.2         8.9     
Houston             97.1        95.6      93.7         3.7     
Kansas City         96.4        93.4      91.5         5.4     
Los Angeles        113.5       112.2     110.4         2.8     
Miami              100.6        97.4      93.9         7.1
Milwaukee          100.5        97.8      95.2         5.6    
Minneapolis-
St. Paul           100.8        98.5      95.4         5.7     
New York           116.9       114.0     111.2         5.2     
Philadelphia       105.4       103.1     100.0         5.4     
Phoenix             95.4        92.8      90.4         5.6     
Pittsburgh          98.9        96.2      92.4         7.0     
Portland, Ore.     100.9        98.1      95.5         5.7
St. Louis           97.8        95.1      91.6         6.7    
San Diego          116.6       113.6     111.2         4.9     
San Francisco      117.3       114.8     113.0         3.8     
Seattle            102.3        99.4      96.1         6.4     
Toronto             97.5        94.3      96.4         1.1     
Washington         105.1       103.1     100.8         4.3



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION via NewsNet
January 1996

LOMAR News Briefs

       o Three suggestions for law firm administrators
awaiting long overdue performance evaluations.
Managing partners who overlooked such appraisals
should also take note of the comments gleaned from
the Association of Legal Administrators' (ALA; 708-
816-1212) online forum via CompuServe and, if
necessary, start the ball rolling as soon as
possible. 
  
       1. Pursue the matter. "Only once in my five
  years with this firm have I received a review
  [though] every year I prepare the form and send it
  out. Last year the managing member walked into my
  office, handed back the review, [and] said 'You want
  a review, you're here aren't you? That's your
  review,'" one administrator lamented. "I gave up.
  After five years they finally got to me."
  
       2. Apply gentle pressure. "At the same time as
  everyone else's review and salary decisions, I would
  provide partners with a document that detailed all
  the things they said they wanted to accomplish over
  the year and what was the result. The list was
  primarily from the prior year's review and included
  items that came up at partner meetings," explained
  one administrator. "Also added to the list were
  things that were by my own initiation.... I felt the
  document worked for both the partners and myself
  because they also had a list of things that I had
  accomplished."
  
       3. Put the process in motion_quickly. "I passed
  out an evaluation form from the ALA and had all the
  partners fill it out. It took me 90 days to get it
  done," offered another law firm administrator who
  had gone almost two years without an official
  evaluation. "We did the basic accomplishments and
  goals...they even interviewed staff to get their
  opinion and gave me a great raise. The only thing
  [the firm] didn't do was make the raise retroactive
  back to my anniversary date like everyone else. What
  I learned was to start 90 days in advance."
  
       o Time to honor exceptional effort. The ABA's
  Standing Committee on Lawyers' Public Service
  Responsibilities is seeking nominations for its 1996
  Pro Bono Publico Awards. Five awards will be
  presented at the ABA's annual meeting in Orlando,
  July 31-Aug. 4. For details on the nominating
  process, contact Dorothy Jackson at 312-988-5766.
  West Publishing (Eagan, Minn.) is also accepting
  nominations for its Excellence in Private Law
  Librarianship Award. Librarians who have
  distinguished themselves in managing and providing
  effective access to information are eligible for
  consideration. For more information contact Todd
  Daubenberger at 612-687-5638.
  
       o Kudos to LOMAR's publisher. The Institute on
  Management and Administration's (IOMA) Web site was
  recently described by Inc. magazine as "by far the
  best business-resource site we've ever seen," and
  was cited by PC Week for its "comprehensive listing
  of business information." For access, point to
  http//www.ioma/com/ioma or e-mail Kathy Fitzgerald
  at Kathie@ ingress.com for help. 
  
       o Remember client confidentiality when
  outsourcing. Firms must make a reasonable effort to
  ensure that the outside companies they retain know
  when confidential material is involved, cautions a
  recent opinion by the ABA's Standing Committee on
  Ethics and Professional Responsibility. Formal
  Opinion 95-398, issued in response to a request to
  consider the implications of a firm's arrangement
  with a maintenance company which had been given
  access to client files on its local area network,
  recommends setting up written agreements to prohibit
  outside service providers from disclosing client
  information they might see. 
  
       o Free help with new ERISA guidelines. The 1995
  Guide to ERISA Reporting and Disclosure is being
  offered by the Human Resource Advisory Group of
  Coopers & Lybrand LLP to help those in search of the
  latest information on ERISA's new reporting and
  disclosure requirements. Copies are available free
  of charge by contacting Coopers & Lybrand
  Publications at 212-536-3257.
  
       o Partners specializing in administrative law
  command top dollar. And with their average annual
  compensation of $237,714, these practitioners
  outpaced their peers in other practice areas,
  according to Altman Weil Pensa's 1995 Survey of Law
  Firm Economics (Newtown Square, Pa.; 610-359-9900).
  
       o New alternatives for NALFMA membership. In
  response to recommendations that it review its
  membership qualifications, benefits, and costs, the
  National Law Firm Marketing Association (NALFMA;
  Chicago, 312-245-1592) has added new "firm" and
  "individual" membership categories. Firm membership
  has its advantages. With this latest option, if a
  marketer leaves a firm, his or her rights of NALFMA
  membership are transferrable to the new
  firm_assuming it continues to pay annual dues and
  provides the association with written notice. In
  addition, members of the same firm, regardless of
  geographic location, may also join at a reduced
  rate. Cost: $275 per year for the firm's member
  representative and $150 for additional members. A
  $50 initiation fee is assessed for each new member.  
  
       o LOMAR online. Subscribers in need of, say,
  that LOMAR article on partner billing rates that ran
  back in December can now access it on their
  computers. Two months of back issues are currently
  available through NEWSNET and new issues will be
  added soon after they are published. For information
  on this online service, which also offers a number
  of other legal publications, contact: NEWSNET, 945
  Haverford Rd., Bryn Mawr, PA 19010; 800-334-0329.
  Coming soon: A LOMAR archive on WESTLAW. Users will
  also be able to access back issues of LOMAR's sister
  publications: Compensation and Benefits for Law
  Offices and Partner's Report for Law Firm Owners.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>