
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B39-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B026-371</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi112.html 205.156.212.5 19970115012136 text/html 122843
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:18:59 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:54 GMT
Content-length: 122653
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi112.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TAX LEGISLATION:  The Budget Bill Battle Puts Tax Planning On Hold</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1552 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Practitioner's Update</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2726 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Depreciation:  Courts Turn Thumbs Down On Irs's "Collectible" Stance</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2615 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>BUSINESS CONSULTING:  Protecting Business Clients With The Right Insurance</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3055 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>INSIDE THE IRS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2007 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>PROFIT STATEMENT:  The Writing Accountant</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>TAX ALERT:  ESTATE AND GIFT TAXES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(696 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>TAX BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(728 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>TECHNEWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(864 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ESTATE AND GIFT TAXATION:  DISPUTES OVER MINORITY DISCOUNTS CONTINUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4222 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

TAX LEGISLATION:  The Budget Bill Battle Puts Tax Planning On Hold


The tax provisions being considered run the gamut and will substantially
impact every one of your clients, if enacted.

The one thing I've learned from dealing with tax legislation for over 20 years
is that you never know the path it will take.  This year's budget bill proves
the point once again.  As we went to press, the budget bill (HR 2491) had been
vetoed by President Clinton.  There are talks going on between Congress and
the White House aimed at reaching a compromise budget bill acceptable by all
sides.

Without a crystal ball, it is impossible to predict what will happen-if
anything.  However, to alert you to the possibilities, here is a summary of
the major proposed tax changes that were contained in the vetoed budget bill.

Family tax relief.  The budget bill contains a nonrefundable tax credit of
$500 that would be allowed to a taxpayer for each qualifying child under 18.
The credit (subject to a phaseout) would be effective Oct.  1, 1995.  There
would also be a nonrefundable tax credit of up to $5,000 in qualified adoption
expenses.  An above-the-line deduction would also be provided for interest on
qualified education loans and expenses for the custodial care of certain
elderly family members.

To combat the marriage penalty for couples filing joint returns, the ratio of
the standard deduction for joint returns relative to single returns would be
increased annually from 1.68 in 1996 to 2.00 in 2005.

Retirement provisions.  The budget bill also provides that an individual would
no longer be considered an active participant in an employer-sponsored
retirement plan merely because his or her spouse is an active participant.
The $2,000 IRA contribution limit would be indexed for inflation (for taxable
years beginning after 1996) and the phaseout income limits would be increased.

Also, the budget bill would create an "American Dream IRA" with no income
phaseouts for contributions.  Withdrawals would not be includable in gross
income if the withdrawal is made after at least five years and the withdrawal
is for a special purpose (i.e., first-time homebuyer (up to $10,000); higher
education; catastrophic medical expenses and distributions to unemployed
individuals), or made after the individual reaches age 59 1/2 or becomes
disabled.

A new simplified retirement plan would be available for small businesses-the
savings incentive match plan for employees (SIMPLE) retirement plan.  SIMPLE
plans would mean an end to new simplified employee pension plans after Dec.
31, 1995.  There are also provisions aimed at tax simplification of the
pension rules.

Capital gains.  Practitioners will recognize the individual's capital gains
change-a return to a capital gains deduction.  Under the budget bill,
individuals would be allowed a deduction of 50% of net capital gain.  The
maximum 28% rate would no longer apply.  For a taxpayer with a marginal rate
of 39.6, the effective rate would be 19.8%.  Special rules would apply for
collectibles.  The budget bill provides that two dollars of long-term loss
would offset only one dollar of ordinary income.  The changes would generally
apply to taxable years ending after Dec.  31, 1994; however, the capital loss
rules would apply to losses arising in taxable years beginning after Dec.  31,
1995.

Indexing of capital gains is coming under the budget bill as it would allow
taxpayers, other than a C corporation, to index the basis of certain assets
for determining gain on the disposition of any property for the holding period
which begins after Dec.  31, 2000.  There is a provision that would allow
other assets to be treated as being required on Jan.  1, 2001 (with gain
recognized).  Another provision helping individuals is a modification and
liberalization of the existing 50% exclusion for the sale of certain small
business stock (would be subject to maximum rate rather than an exclusion).

A particularly helpful provision would allow individuals to deduct the loss on
the sale or exchange of a principal residence after Dec.  31, 1994.  Also,
gain could be rolled over more than once within a two-year period and a safe
harbor is added in the case of rollovers in the case of divorce or separation
for purposes of Section 1034.  The budget bill would also liberalize the
Section 121 exclusion rules.

Corporations.  The budget bill would add an alternative rate of 28% on the net
capital gain of a corporation if that rate is less than the corporation's
regular tax rate.  It also would add a special alternative rate of 21% on the
gain from the sale or exchange of qualified small business stock.  Both
changes would generally apply to taxable years ending after Dec.  31, 1994.

Alternative minimum tax.  The depreciation adjustment for purposes of
computing the alternative minimum tax for individuals and corporations would
be repealed effective for property placed in service after Dec.  31, 1995.
Also, corporations will be able to use the AMT credit to offset a portion of
the corporation's minimum tax in excess of its regular tax in limited
circumstances.

Cost recovery.  The maximum amount that may be expensed would increase from
$17,500 to 19,000 for taxable years beginning in 1996 and $1,000 annually
through 2002 (to $25,000 for taxable years beginning in 2002 and thereafter).
The budget bill would clarify that a lessor can adjust the basis of certain
improvements upon termination of the lease.

Partnerships.  A simplified flow-through method for computing the taxes of
partners of electing large partnerships would be available.  The budget bill
also provides that the taxable year of a partnership would close for a partner
whose entire interest in a partnership terminates, whether by death,
liquidation or otherwise.

S corporations.  Generally effective for taxable years beginning after Dec.
31, 1995, a number of changes would be made that directly benefit those
choosing S corporations as way of doing business.  Among the many changes
would be an increase in the maximum number of shareholders to 75.

Health-related provisions.  The budget bill would make significant changes to
the tax treatment of long-term care expenses and insurance.  Also, to help
alleviate the high costs of medical expenses, the budget bill also would
introduce a tax-advantaged Medical Savings Account.  And the deduction for
health insurance expenses for the self-employed would increase gradually to
50% for taxable years beginning in 2002.

Estate and gift taxes.  The budget bill would increase the estate and gift tax
unified credit by an exemption equivalent amount of $25,000 annually from 1996
through 2001 to a maximum equivalent of $750,000.  It also would index for
inflation after the year 2000, the unified credit, annual gift tax exclusion,
the $750,000 reduction limit on special use valuation property, the $1 million
generation-skipping transfer tax exemption and the $1 million ceiling on the
value of a closely held business eligible for the special 4% interest rate
under Section 6166.  There also would be a new estate tax exclusion for
qualified family owned business interests for estates of decedents dying after
Dec.  31, 1995.  There are a number of other estate and gift taxes changes.

Extension of expiring provisions.  As with most major tax legislation, there
are a number of tax provisions that are given added or limited life or are
even reinstated.  They include:  (1) a work opportunity tax credit (similar to
the prior law targeted job credit), (2) an income exclusion for
employer-provided education assistance, (3) a research and experimentation
credit, (4) the special rule for contributions of qualified appreciated stock
to private foundations, and (5) the sunsetting of the low-income housing
credit.

Tax-exempt organizations.  The budget bill would add for intermediate
sanctions that the IRS may invoke against certain tax-exempt organizations.

Miscellaneous provisions.  There are a number of miscellaneous provisions
aimed at tax reform.  Some of the provisions would:

* Generally repeal the Section 936 credit for taxable years beginning after
Dec.  31, 1995.

* Clarify the exclusion for damages received on account of personal injury or
sickness.

* Provide that there will be no rollover (Section 1034) or exclusion of gain
(Section 121) for depreciation deductions attributable to principal
residences.

* Generally deny Section 1034 rollover treatment to non-U.S.  citizens for
non-U.S.  principal residences.

* Substantially modify the rules for foreign trust tax compliance and
treatment as well as the income estate and gift tax treatment of individuals
that lose U.S.  citizenship.

The budget bill, effective for contracts completed in taxable years ending
after the date of enactment, also would modify the look-back method for
long-term contracts.  It also would extend the luxury excise tax on
automobiles through Dec 31, 2002, correct the inflation adjustment and
decrease the rate of tax by 1% per year beginning after 1996.  The budget bill
also would increase the tax return preparer penalties, add a new set of
taxpayer bill of rights provisions and reform the earned income credit.

Jury Still Out

The only certainties are death and taxes.  But will there be a new tax law?
If there is one, what will it contain?  The answers to both questions must
wait for the smoke to clear from the budget battle that still rages on in the
nation's capital as we go to press.

HOWARD W.  WOLOSKY, J.D., LL.M., is executive editor of The Practical
Accountant.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Practitioner's Update


Can Your Work Papers Come Back and Haunt You?

Work papers, traditionally the dry stuff of an accountant's audit work, have
become a target for clients out to grab any evidence they can to back a
malpractice claim against their accountant.

Accounting firms, therefore, are closely reviewing work papers and often
making changes to more clearly show they followed the proper procedures in the
audit.  In most cases, work papers are altered routinely and without incident.
Accounting firms usually follow their own internal policies for recording,
signing and dating any changes.  There are no official guidelines on
maintaining work papers.

"There are no auditing standards that prescribe a methodology and maintenance
of work papers, only the fact that they need to exist," said Edmund (Randy)
Noonan, chairman of the AICPA's Auditing Standards Board and a partner with
KPMG Peat Marwick.

Slipping from firm policy

But when firms slip away from their own policies, they can find themselves in
a bind trying to explain why papers were altered in a way that might appear to
mitigate a charge of malpractice.  That's what happened to Coopers & Lybrand
in a recent case brought by Mitsubishi Motors Corp.  of Japan, which is
accusing C&L of altering the work papers for the 1989 audit of Value
Rent-A-Car Inc., which Mitsubishi acquired in 1990.

As reported in the lead story of the Nov.  2 Wall Street Journal, Mitsubishi
said it learned after the acquisition that Value had a $10 million negative
net worth, which was $4 million further into red ink than indicated in the
1989 financial statement audited by C&L.  It contended that C&L erased words
and figures and inserted new information in its work papers in an attempt to
protect itself from charges of negligence.  Mitsubishi said the changes, which
were not dated or signed, included a note saying that C&L had received
assurances from Value that certain liabilities didn't exist, such as
distributed customer coupons Mitsubishi now claims are worth $4 million.

Mitsubishi, which obtained C&L's final work papers as part of the discovery
process in its lawsuit against the accounting firm, had the unusual
opportunity to compare them with the original work papers, which had been
photocopied by the accounting firm it hired to replace C&L shortly after it
had acquired Value.  But C&L insists that the changes to the audit work papers
were "totally immaterial" to a bad investment decision by Mitsubishi, which
C&L claims ignored the numbers in the financial statements that showed a 1989
loss of $14 million as well as a negative worth of $6 million.  "Changes to
the work papers were made to reflect decisions made later in the audit
process, which was reflected in the financial statements," said Patrick J.
McDonnell, vice chairman of C&L's business assurances practice.

Still, the fact that C&L's auditors made the changes without following firm
policy fuels the skepticism over its intentions.  Indeed, McDonnell admitted
that any deviation from work paper policy was rare.  "Our policy is to leave a
trail," he said.  "Erasing is not something we normally would do, and it's
rare when work papers are not dated or signed."

Precautions

To help prevent future incidents, C&L is rolling out a new Notes-based
paperless audit system.  Called "CLASS," for C&L Automated Support System, it
enables auditors to prepare all work papers in a Windows-based computer
notebook.  The system, which is expected to be in use for all C&L clients by
the end of next year, is designed to make it easier for auditors to follow the
firm's policy for preparing and changing work papers.  The dating of changes,
for example, will be done automatically.

Such precautions, whether automatic or otherwise, will likely become more
common in all firms.  The controls firms use in preparing or altering work
papers should be made with the assumption that the work papers might later be
examined for proof of malpractice.-Paul Demery


Illinois Restricts Punitive Damages Award

Plaintiffs seeking financial recourse from accountants under Illinois law will
have a tougher time proving their case.  Under a new state law that restricts
punitive damages awarded against accountants, plaintiffs are saddled with a
stiff requirement to prove that their accountant acted far outside of standard
ethical procedures.

Tougher standards

"Perhaps the most important part of the new law is the standard set to justify
an award of punitive damages," Tom Wetzler, director of Government Relations
for the Illinois CPA Society, said in a recent Society newsletter.  "The
statute requires a plaintiff to prove the CPA acted with evil motive or
reckless and outrageous indifference to a highly unreasonable risk of harm,
and with a conscious indifference to the rights and safety of others."

Wetzler added that by requiring plaintiffs to prove the justification for
punitive damages with clear and convincing evidence, the law, which became
effective last year, demands a greater degree of proof than the ordinary
preponderance of evidence required in most civil lawsuits.

Other elements of the new law limit punitive damages to three times the value
of economic economic damages and allow punitive damages to be awarded only in
cases where compensatory damages are awarded.

Proportionate liability

Illinois also passed and made effective last year a law that abolished the
principle of joint and several liability and replaced it with proportionate
liability, under which accountants cannot be held liable for wrongful acts
committed by other partners of their firm.  -P.D.


Expect More State Tax Audits

Businesses may have a growing need to call on their accountants:  to minimize
the onslaught of efforts to collect state taxes.

Rather than impose politically unpopular tax increases to balance their
budgets, state revenue departments are increasing their numbers of auditors,
according to a survey of states by the Atlanta-based State Taxation Institute.
The survey found that individual state auditors assess on average more than $1
million each year.

Targeting out-of-state businesses

"Companies doing business in multiple states are particularly vulnerable
because auditors specializing in out-of-state companies post higher
assessments than their counterparts based in the home office," the Institute
said.  It noted that businesses based out-of-state are likely audit targets
because they have less political clout, are less familiar with rules on how to
comply with state tax laws and because many businesses don't realize they
should file returns under a state's nexus law.

The Institute also noted that some states have unusually large staffs of
auditors, such as mostly rural Alabama, whose 342-auditor department is the
nation's sixth largest.  Other states are extremely aggressive in out-of-state
operations.  The Institute said Florida, for example, keeps more auditors in
Atlanta (43) than the total number of auditors employed by Rhode Island (40).
-P.D.


CPA Exam to Become Non-Disclosed Because of Computerization

As of May of this year, question booklets and answers to the Uniform CPA Exam
will no longer be available after the exam is given.  The change, breaking a
tradition followed since the exam's inception in 1917, is one of the first
major steps toward a planned computerization of the exam by 2000.

The computer-based exam will enable CPA candidates to take the exam at any
time at hundreds of testing sites and provide for faster processing of test
results.  According to the AICPA and the National Association of State Boards
of Accountancy, which co-administer the exam, computerization will also make
it possible to create more complex questions, though essays will likely be
left out.

To prepare a large enough bank of questions to be used in computer-based
tests, which could be differentiated for each candidate, exams given as of May
will include questions that will not be included in the test taker's score but
stored for later use.  This will also enable the AICPA to judge the difficulty
of the questions before using them in exams.  The future use of these test
questions necessitates the non-disclosure of the exam materials.

In addition, non-disclosure will enable the AICPA to re-use questions
statistically proved to be a good measure of candidates' knowledge and skills.
And it is expected to increase grading fairness by providing for statistical
comparisons between different exams.

The AICPA said it will continue, however, to issue to candidates exam
preparation materials, including the unofficial answers to questions that will
no longer be used in exams.  -P.D.


CCH Acquired by Dutch Publisher

With three years of costly rebuilding finally behind it, legal and tax
publisher CCH Inc.  was expecting to begin showing some hefty profits in the
third and fourth quarters of this year.  "We'll see some dramatic earnings
growth in the last quarter," said spokeswoman Mary Dale Walters.

The projection of dramatic earnings growth is pale by comparison to Riverwood,
Ill.-based CCH's announcement that it had agreed to be taken over by Dutch
publishing giant Wolters Kluwer NV for $1.9 billion - more than three times
CCH's expected 1990 revenue of $600 million.  Wolters' offer of $55.50 per
share caused CCH's Class A shares of stock to nearly double in value to
$54.62.

The two companies said the acquisition would not cause any major changes in
CCH's operating philosophy or management structure, which will continue to be
headed by CEO Oakleigh Thorne.  The Thorne family, which owns 57% of CCH, has
indicated it will tender its shares to Amsterdam-based Wolters, a major
business-to-business publisher of legal, tax, medical and scientific
information with operations throughout the U.S.  and Europe.

Positioned for growth

CCH said it will be in an even better position to continue investing in new
technologies, building on its successful efforts in recent years to develop
CD-ROM-based research materials and its ProSystem fx tax software.  Indeed,
CCH said its technology was a big factor in making it attractive to Wolters,
which is just beginning to develop electronic publishing products in Europe.
Wolters also expects CCH to boost its efforts to expand its U.S.  operations.

One area the two companies expect to further explore is how they will deliver
products, particularly electronic ones.  CCH has already taken its initial
steps along this course by working with AT&T and MSN, the new on-line network
of the Microsoft Corp.  Traditionally, CCH has distributed its products using
its own Access technology platform.  Now, it is interested in seeing how it
can meet customer needs by catering to their preferred distribution channels.

"Wolters Kluwer shares [our] philosophy," said Thorne, adding that CCH's new
parent is "committed to expanding technology leadership and dedicated to
delivering products via the most desired proprietary and non-proprietary
media."  CCH's product line includes The Standard Federal Tax Reporter, The
U.S.  Master Tax Guide, CCH Federal Tax Guide, and various guides on human
resources and health care.-P.D.


Course Work Waiver for ACAT Tax Credentials

The Accreditation Council for Accountancy and Taxation (ACAT) is waiving the
required course work until July 31, 1996, for receiving the credentials of
Accredited Tax Advisor and Accredited Tax Preparer.

The waiver is being offered to CPAs, licensed accountants, enrolled agents,
holders of Master of Taxation or Master of Laws in Taxation degrees, attorneys
with specialist credentials in taxation, and Accredited Tax Advisors who wish
to also become an Accredited Tax Preparer.

Applicants seeking to become an Accredited Tax Advisor must have five years of
experience in tax planning and consulting; Accredited Tax Preparer credentials
require one year of experience in tax preparation and compliance.  All
applicants must have taken 48 hours of continuing professional education in
the past two years.  For a Waiver Interest Form, call (703) 549-2228.  -P.D.


California Passes LLP Law

California has joined the ranks of states with laws allowing accountants to
establish their firms as limited liability partnerships.

The California law, which created a new form of legal entity for the state
called a registered limited liability partnership, passed both houses of the
state legislature with few negative votes, largely due to strong support from
the state's accounting and legal professions.  The law also covers attorneys.
It became effective immediately when signed by Governor Pete Wilson in
October.

Like other states' LLP laws, California's offers LLP partners limited
liability protection while continuing the tax advantages granted to
partnerships.  It limits the professional liability of individual partners to
their own actions, protecting them from any tort or malpractice liability of
other partners.

Gale Case, president of the California Society of CPAs, said he expects many
small as well as large accounting firms to form as LLPs, since small firms
usually can't afford as much insurance.  He added that small firms that do
form as LLPs will probably begin to re-enter practice areas such as auditing
that they had considered too risky due to exposure to liability.

The law stipulates that partners of an accounting firm LLP must be either a
CPA, a public accountant or an accountancy corporation.  It precludes enrolled
agents because they are not licensed by the state.

Minimum insurance requirement.  To form as an LLP, an accounting practice must
satisfy one of three insurance requirements:  malpractice insurance coverage
not less than $100,000 per licensed person, whether or not the person is a
partner; at least $100,000 in trust or escrow cash, bank certificates of
deposit, U.S.  Treasury obligations, bank letters of credit or insurance
bonds; or a net worth of at least $10 million confirmed annually in a filing
with the California Secretary of State.  -P.D.


New Privity Law In New Jersey

Among the many bills on tort reform making their way through the halls of
legislative bodies, those up against the toughest obstacles usually include
measures on privity, which set the bounds in which accountants or other
targets can be sued by third parties.  Third parties, such as investor groups,
are often the biggest source of claims against accountants resulting from the
actions of the accountants' clients.

But privity laws have been making some headway.  Although bills in such states
as Texas, which has passed other tort reform measures, were derailed by the
aggressive lobbying of trial attorneys, efforts in New Jersey have been
successful in establishing strict privity standards.

In New Jersey, the privity statute enacted and made effective in 1995 states
that accountants can be liable for negligence to only two classes of potential
plaintiffs:  clients and non-clients who meet certain criteria.  The criteria
for non-clients requires the following situations:

* They must have been "specifically identified to the accountant in connection
with a specified transaction," and the accountant must have agreed that the
accountant's report would be provided to the non-client;

* The accountant must have known that the non-client "intended to rely upon
the professional accounting service in connection with that specified
transaction";

* The accountant must have "directly expressed" to the non-client, by words or
conduct, an understanding of the non-client's intended reliance.  -P.D.


Insurance For The Accountant

The Singer Insurance Group began in 1958 and more than 90% of its business
comes from CPAs who refer their clients to them.  They set up a Complete
Accountants Program whereby they give seminars to accounting firms on what
they should know about insurance for their clients.  They also do CPE seminars
where they discuss the respective roles and responsibilities of CPAs and
insurance agents.  According to David Singer, vice president of the firm, CPAs
are in a rather awkward position today.  Although they have professional
liability coverage which covers errors and omissions and although as
accountants they should be involved in the insurance process, he feels that
they should not, however, be involved as insurance experts.  Singer believes
the accountant's primary role is to be a catalyst and to bring up ideas to
think about and then they should shift the E&O exposure to the insurance
agent.

By the same token, Singer warned that accountants have to consider their own
involvement with business interruption insurance.  He pointed out that if an
accounting firm has a fire, there is a reasonably good chance that they
wouldn't need such coverage because their business isn't really being
interrupted.  Instead, they would incur additional expenses to get back into
business right away.  That's known as extra expense insurance.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Depreciation:  Courts Turn Thumbs Down On Irs's "Collectible" Stance


It's hard to believe.  Fourteen years after Congress adopted the ACRS and then
MACRS statutory cost recovery systems, the IRS is still fighting taxpayers in
court over what can and cannot be depreciated.  In three recent cases, the IRS
has been told, enough is enough.

The victorious included two professional musicians who used valuable, antique
instruments in their work.  These cases, decided under pre-'87 law, received
much attention in the media, presumably because of the inherent human interest
factor.  But an even more recent Tax Court case, involving "exotic" cars, has
apparently expanded the result of the musician cases by making it applicable
under current law.  These cases, taken together, clarify the basic law of
depreciation and seem to show that it is still evolving.  These cases may also
justify practitioners reconsidering their understanding of this area to be
sure they are not overlooking potential deductions-either for themselves or
for clients.

Musicians Redux

Brian Liddle, a professional musician, purchased a 17th century Ruggeri bass
violin (or viol) in 1984 for $28,000.  He insured it for its then-appraised
value of $38,000.  He used it to practice at home, at rehearsals and for
performances.  The bass suffered physical deterioration from this use and
eventually lost its value for performance purposes.

On his 1987 tax return, Liddle claimed a deduction for $3,170 under Section
168's accelerated cost recovery system (ACRS) then in effect.  The IRS
disallowed the deduction initially claiming that the viol would appreciate in
value.  Later abandoning that theory (see cases such as Noyce1), the IRS
argued before the Third Circuit that Liddle could claim the ACRS deduction
only if he could first establish that the viol had a determinable useful
life.2 The IRS said this could not be done in light of the fact that the viol
was over 300 years old and still appreciating in value.

It also argued that the viol, as a work of art, did not have a determinable
useful life.  Generally, works of art that hang on a wall or works that are
considered to be museum pieces are not depreciable because the Service has
ruled that such items do not have a determinable useful life.3

The Court reviewed the basics of depreciation both before and after 1981.
Before 1981, Section 167 governed the allowance of depreciation and required
that the property have a determinable useful life.  See Regs.  1.167(a)-1(a)
and (b).  This life was related to the asset's usefulness to the taxpayer's
trade or business and could reflect economic as well as possibly physical
considerations.  In 1981, the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA) replaced this
approach with ACRS as part of a plan to stimulate the economy.  ACRS allowed a
deduction for "recovery property" under Section 168.  Recovery property was
tangible property "of a character subject to the allowance for
depreciation"-used in a trade or business or held for the production of
income.  Recovery property was assigned five categories for determining the
actual amount of the deduction.

The IRS argued that ACRS, then in effect, did not eliminate the pre-'81
requirement that tangible personal property used in a trade or business must
also have a determinable useful life to qualify as property of a character
subject to the allowance for depreciation.

The Third Circuit disagreed with the Service and held that only the following
two pre-'81 requirements had to be met:  (1) the asset must be subject to wear
and tear or obsolescence and (2) the asset is used in a trade or business or
held for the production of income.

The Court allowed Liddle the depreciation deduction because the viol was used
in his trade and did suffer wear and tear in that use.  The Court also
rejected IRS's attempt to classify the viol as a nondepreciable work of art
because in Liddle's hands, the "bass viol was a tool of his trade."

Richard Simon and his wife, professional violinists, purchased two 19th
century Tourte bows which they used in their work.  The bows suffered wear and
tear as a result of such use.  Although purchased in 1985, the tax year in
controversy was 1989 when the Simons claimed ACRS deductions of almost
$11,000.  The same issues were raised here as in Liddle and the Second Circuit
also disagreed with the IRS, holding that IRS's argument (i.e., having to
first show a determinable useful life) contradicted Congress's intent when it
enacted ERTA.4

The Court distinguished Browning5, a case involving a musician who sought to
depreciate three antique violins, in which the Ninth Circuit upheld a denial
of depreciation.  In Browning, the Ninth Circuit held that the musician failed
to establish a useful life for the violins but Browning was a pre-ERTA case
and there was no evidence indicating that he used the instruments in his
professional work.

Both Liddle and Simon were decided under the ACRS system that applied to
property placed in service between Jan.  1, 1981 and Jan.  1, 1987.  After
1986, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 replaced ACRS with a modified ACRS system
called MACRS which eliminated the concept of recovery property.

Exotic Cars

Bruce Selig purchased in 1987 and 1988 "exotic" automobiles to exhibit at car
shows for a fee.  Exotic cars are state-of-the-art, high technology vehicles
with unique design features or equipment.

The cars were not set up for use on the street; they were not driven and were
used exclusively for shows or promotional photography.  Between 1987 and 1990,
Selig claimed various deductions for depreciation on the cars.  The IRS
challenged whether cars maintained in pristine condition and shown for a fee
could be depreciated.  The Tax Court held for Selig because the cars were
subject to obsolescence (due to the unique high-tech features), and the fact
that he failed to show the useful lives of the cars was irrelevant.6

The Court reviewed the history of depreciation in the tax law and the Liddle
and Simon cases which had been decided under prior law.  The Court concluded
that in enacting the current version of Section 168, applicable to property
placed in service after 1986, Congress did not intend to reimpose the pre-ERTA
requirement that a taxpayer must show a determinable useful life of the
property.  The Court said it is following Liddle and Simon in interpreting
Section 168 as restated.

Richard J.  Sapinski, partner in Sills Cummis Zuckerman Radin Tischman Epstein
& Gross in Newark, NJ, was Bruce Selig's attorney.  He agreed that Selig seems
to be carrying forward the result of the musician cases (Liddle and Simon)
under the post-'86 law.  In fact, Sapinski was surprised that the Selig
decision was a Tax Court Memo decision rather than a reported decision.  I
expected that the results of Liddle and Simon would apply under MACRS, said
David L.  Segal, sole practitioner in Philadelphia and the attorney who
represented Brian Liddle, the bass violinist.

The Selig Court listened to testimony indicating that new and improved
features for the cars would come along within a few years and held that the
cars had a limited useful life as show cars because of obsolescence.  It noted
that a precise useful life did not have to be determined to establish that the
cars were depreciable.  It also said that the cars were not museum pieces of
indeterminable useful life.  In doing so, it distinguished Harrah's Club7, in
which the Court of Claims did not allow a depreciation deduction for the cost
of restoring antique automobiles to a casino that maintained a car museum to
attract business.

The Selig Tax Court clearly stated that the fact that the show cars might
become museum pieces did not matter since it was satisfied that the exotic
cars were show pieces and not museum pieces.  Sapinski explained that it was
irrelevant whether the exotic cars might become museum pieces or appreciate in
value.  "Our argument was that is irrelevant; that it's the asset's usefulness
in the taxpayer's trade or business [that is relevant]," said Sapinski.

Sapinski also doesn't believe IRS will appeal Selig because it is appealable
to the Third Circuit which already decided Liddle.  But he added that he
thinks the IRS will still argue the basic issue.  "I would think this is a
case-specific thing and I think they'll keep that option open.  If I were on
their side, I would be looking for a lawyer with Louis 14th furniture to make
an egregious case," said Sapinski.  Dr.  William Raby, CPA and editor of The
Raby Report, said, "I'm sure it's going to be appealed."  He thinks Selig
might be vulnerable as to applying Liddle and Simon to post-'86 law.

Implications and Irksome Questions

Selig should focus a new light on certain valuable assets that may be
nondepreciable collectibles or works of art in some circumstances but
depreciable business assets in other circumstances.  Some commentators believe
that assets such as these may now be depreciable if they are used in a
business in a manner that results in physical wear or tear or economic
obsolescence.  Passive use in a business such as hanging on a wall may not be
enough.  But what about assets such as antique furniture or carpeting that are
part of an office?

In 1996, can practitioners say they understand depreciation?  These cases
raise fundamental questions:  Is useful life necessary to depreciate an asset?
If an asset is depreciable, is it always clear how to calculate the amount of
the deduction?  "I think a lot of people were surprised that after 14 years,
there was still a fundamental concept that hadn't been resolved," said Ada
Rousso, senior manager at Price Waterhouse in Washington, DC.

Segal said, "Let me tell you what's at stake here, the depreciation deduction
has nothing to do with accounting...It is the primary tool for encouraging or
slowing down capital formation.  The IRS thought there's lots more law to it
than in fact it turned out to be."

Sapinski said the decision might mean depreciation has been overlooked for
certain assets such as classic furniture used in a trade or business.  He
pointed out that "Judge Halpern who decided this [Selig] case was a dissenting
judge in the Liddle and Simon cases.  He felt this would open the door to
depreciation of Louis 14th furniture in a lawyer's office or other property
that would otherwise not be depreciable because they are collector's items."

Raby said, "I guess you'd have to ask yourself what it is people have that
they are not now depreciating [which could be items being overlooked for
depreciation]."

Sapinski added that practitioners should evaluate whether the assets they have
are properly classified and perhaps take a second look at what they may have
considered nondepreciable in light of these cases.  Segal said, "if people are
genuinely using their products in business in a way that subjects them to
obsolescence, or wear and tear, then they should get a deduction because
Congress wanted them to employ that equipment."

Investment implications.  Segal, who is also president of the Philadelphia
Youth Orchestra, suggested that the musician cases might provide an
opportunity to refinance America's symphonies by placing musical instruments
into leasing partnerships.  Segal explained that orchestras have millions of
dollars' worth of great instruments which could be turned into cash for needy
orchestras through a sales-leaseback.  An investor can buy the instruments for
full value and then lease them back to the orchestra for say a 1% per year
rental stream.  The investor can get seven years' of depreciation out it.  The
orchestra takes the purchase money and can invest part of it in an annuity and
use the rest for operating expenses.  The orchestra has no use for the
depreciation so it can pass it to investors; Liddle says as long as a
professional musician is using it, the instrument is depreciable.

How Much to Deduct?

Under the current MACRS rules, among other provisions, depreciable assets
other than buildings can fall into one of six categories, i.e., three, five,
seven, 10, 15 or 20-year class life.  The rate of depreciation depends on the
method, recovery period and whether the half-year or mid-quarter convention
applies.  Tables are available to simplify the actual computation.  Congress
intended to "deemphasize" the application of useful life and salvage value
when it reformed depreciation in 1981.

While the decisions discussed in this article did not directly deal with
computing a specific useful life, the Selig case raises a potential
difficulty.  In Selig, the Tax Court held that the cars were depreciable
because they were subject to obsolescence.  Sapinski said, "We didn't have to
prove an exact period for useful life.  The accountant used the rates for
cars, five years."  In Selig, the Court said, citing Columbia Malting Co.8 and
Reg.  1.167(a)-9, that a taxpayer could recover the cost of business property
over a period shorter than the ordinary useful life of the property if the
taxpayer could show that the assets would become obsolete in the business
prior to the end of such ordinary useful life.  Selig had testified that
within three or four years, the cars' state-of-the-art technology could
change.  An associate of Selig testified that the cars had a life of one or
two years before something better came along.  Yet Selig's accountant used
five years, the normal MACRS category for a car.

Sapinski said, "It is my feeling that it would not be right [to write off the
cars over a shorter period] because I think the whole premise is that you
don't have to get into these determinations because Congress has already
chosen your slot."

Raby said the issue is whether these assets (collectibles) are eligible for
depreciation under Section 168.  "That's a yes or no question.  Once you've
decided the answer is yes, then the question is into what category do they
fall which then determines the useful life," said Raby.  He said MACRS
eliminates arguments about useful life.

One commentator, however, went so far as to say that in citing the Columbia
Malting decision, Selig suggests that a taxpayer in a situation that is
similar to Selig should be prepared to show the period over which property
similar to the property in question has become obsolete.  This approach,
however, seems inconsistent with the flow of logic indicated above.

Ultimate Lesson

"The main thing that you need to learn from [these cases] is that it pays to
challenge what are more or less 'received truths,'" said Raby.  He noted that
people had accepted that collectibles, whether they were antique cars, violins
or french desks, were not depreciable.  "I wonder how often, how many times in
our daily work things come to us and we know you can't do something, and so we
never try doing it.  So, maybe practitioners have to stand back occasionally
and say 'why can't we do it?'," added Raby.


MICHAEL G.  STEVENS, CPA, J.D., LL.M., is editor in chief of The Practical
Accountant.



1 Robert N.  Noyce, 97 TC 670.  2 Brian P.  Liddle, 95-2 USTC Par.  50,488; 76
AFTR 2d 95-6255 (CA-3, 1995).  3 Rev.  Rul.  68-232.  See also, Associated
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, P.C., 85-1 USTC Par.  9396, (CA-6, 1985); and
W.  Cordell Clinger, TC Memo 1990-459, 60 TCM 598.  4 Richard L.  Simon, 95-2
USTC Par.  50,552; 76 AFTR 2d 95-6911 (CA-2, 1995).  5 Louis A.  Browning,
89-2 USTC Par.  9666 (CA-9, 1989).  6 Bruce Selig, TC Memo 1995-519.  7
Harrah's Club, 661 F.  2d 203, 48, AFTR 2d 81-5903 (Ct.  Cl., 1981).  8
Columbia Malting Co., 1 BTA 999 (1925).





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

BUSINESS CONSULTING:  Protecting Business Clients With The Right Insurance


Woody Allen, in his classic film, "Take The Money And Run," put his lead
character in a prison's solitary confinement cell, which consisted of his
descent into a hole in the earth and then being locked in under a metal
grating.  Allen didn't think that was enough.  He had an insurance agent
accompany the prisoner.

Granted that didn't seem to play well with the insurance crowd but it strikes
a rather interesting chord today primarily because many accountants are taking
a proactive role as business consultants to their clients.  As a result,
accountants are paying increased attention to the insurance carried by their
business clients.

Why is this so?  Why is the accountant doing so much of the work and not the
insurance broker or company?  And what's actually happening?

Getting Involved

Businesses today want their accountants to get involved because to them most
insurance brokers and companies appear to be glorified salesmen, only trying
to sell them more and more insurance.

Alvin Goldberg, a furrier in New York City, pointed out that "most brokers
don't tell you that you're overinsured.  If anything, they tell you that you
may be underinsured."

So, what is going on today is that business clients are seeking out their
accountants to ride herd on exactly what insurance they need and what they
don't need.

Add to this the fact that many businesses have little appreciation for the
casualty and liability risks to which their companies are exposed.

Peter Berlant, partner in Anchin, Block & Anchin, an accounting firm based in
New York City, said that accountants today are more intimately involved with
the client's business than the broker, the insurance company or any other
adviser.  Why?  "Because we as accountants can very often identify risks that
other advisers can't.  For example, I have a client who is extremely dependent
on a particular supplier.  We have advised them to obtain contingent business
interruption insurance covering that supplier.  If the supplier has a problem
such as something going wrong in the warehouse and can't deliver, then our
client is protected against claims from his own customers."

Berlant also believes that typically the insurance broker may not ask the
questions to get a real understanding of what the business is all about.
That's where he feels the accountant can come into this.  "We don't replace
the broker but we are a resource for our clients in understanding the
business."

Berlant illustrated this by recounting the case of a client, a wholesale
glassware importer who questioned the extent of her liability coverage.  "We
felt that she had to have product liability insurance.  It's not an expensive
policy but all she needed was for one glass to go from the factory to the
customer with a chipped rim and all of a sudden even though she may not be
liable, she's going to get sued."

Berlant said that the accountant can also reduce costs by a simple review of
the policy and the client's business operation.  For example, he noted that in
the workers' compensation area, the client many times overspends for insurance
because of the classification of workers.  "It is vitally important that the
worker is classified properly because that classification impacts considerably
on the ratings and charges."

He pointed out that the accountant also has to know how the policy is written.
"The policy is subject to audit.  The auditors that the insurance companies
send in may not fully understand how the client's bookkeeping or business
works.  For example, in most policies, the risks in workers' comp depends on
the number of hours the particular employee worked at a certain function.  It
is not supposed to be based upon wages; yet the premiums many times are based
on wages.  Most policies also exclude bonuses and overtime payments from the
wage base in determining premiums.  Often, insurance auditors overlook these
things and take the gross payroll figure instead.  Those numbers, when
translated into premiums, can be rather significant."

Nature of the Review

Victor S.  Rich, senior partner in New York-based Edward Isaacs & Company,
CPAs and financial consultants, said that the job is to make sure the areas
are covered and that the insurance is adequate.  "How often we do it depends
on how large the client is and how large an internal staff the client has.
And, of course, what they are paying us to do or not to do."

Rich explained that too often accountants jump into reviews before they know
what they are being asked to do.  "Are we doing an audit, a compilation, or
what?"  he said.  "What's the nature of our engagement?"

He added, "If our engagement is simply a compilation, we should not be looking
at insurance because we may be liable for not picking up something.  We look
at it when the client specifically asks the question."  He cautioned that by
doing the reverse, an accountant is extending the engagement beyond what was
anticipated when the engagement letter was signed.  "Are we compiling figures?
Are we involved in a certification?  The levels of responsibility increase
depending on the nature of the engagement."

How often then should these reviews be conducted?

"Every time we go to a client," said Berlant.  "No matter how often or on what
basis, insurance is part of our program.  Sometimes we will simply look to see
that they are maintaining coverage but typically once a year we go through the
coverages with the chief financial officer or the other principals of the
company, looking not only for amounts of coverage but for the types of
coverage."

Theodore S.  Levy, partner and vice president in the accounting firm of
Kamenitz Uhlfelder in Baltimore noted that his firm reviews the insurance
needs of their clients when they do their year-end financial statements.
"It's part of our procedure to look at their insurance coverage.  We
scrutinize all the policies and we see if the coverage they have makes sense.
This includes their limits of liability and how much inventory they are
insuring.  Sometimes, the clients say, same as last year.  We don't accept
that because the client many times doesn't even look at their own inventory
levels."

Kamenitz Uhlfelder orchestrates an administrative retreat which is a
comprehensive, full-day planning session with the client's key personnel and
advisers.  Levy said, "we bring in their insurance people and we request that
they give us a complete analysis of all the client's coverage."

David Marcus, partner in the accounting firm of Paneth, Huber & Zimmerman in
New York City, said that his firm works closely with their clients' insurance
brokers and insurance companies.  "In effect, we act as the overseer in that
regard so that we are able to evaluate properly each proposal and compare one
against another."

Marcus noted that his firm volunteers insurance reviews at least on a two-year
basis, depending on the client.  He said that the reason for the two-year
spread is because of the proliferation today of multi-year (usually three)
insurance policies.

Marcus said that normally, unless something out of the ordinary happens such
as a major purchase, a change in the business, the addition of new principals
or something dramatic like an increase in premiums, they don't necessarily go
into a big review every year.

Erwin Petschauer, principal in the brokerage firm of John Petschauer, Inc.  in
Ridgewood, N.Y., corroborated what Marcus detailed with respect to multi-year
plans.  He said that in the area of property casualty insurance, many large
companies are writing three-year plans rather than on an annual basis.  "To
insurance companies, it serves as a method of retention while to the business
customer, its fixes the premiums at a set amount for a period of time without
any increase."  He cited General Accident Insurance Company as one company
that is using three-year plans.

However, insurance brokers tend to favor an annual review.  Gerald L.  Tobias,
principal in the Westchester, N.Y.-based Richwood Brokerage Company,
emphasized that his firm reviews insurance religiously.  "We look at changes
in exposures or limits and we review annually based on the expiration of a
client's insurance.  Most clients who are paying a lot in the way of premiums
may even want insurance reviews more frequently."

What to Look For

Having business insurance doesn't necessarily mean that the business is
protected but having the right insurance is what it's all about.

"Basically, we try to stay ahead of the times," said Levy.  "For example, one
policy that is becoming more and more popular these days because of the law
suits now proliferating is employment-related practices liability insurance."

He stressed that people don't realize how easy they can get sued for
harassment or wrongful dismissal, even if they haven't done anything.  "This
kind of insurance protects them in a number of ways:  it pays for legal fees
and gives them the necessary liability coverage."

Another area that companies overlook is employee benefit omissions.  "For
example," Levy said, "if you forget to cover somebody in your group plan,
you're liable if it's a benefit."  He added that "we can see the cost of
insurance generally coming down a lot recently so we encourage our clients to
protect themselves to take advantage of this."

Levy specifically noted that it is surprising how many businesses have
inadequate coverage.  For example, he pointed out an instance where employees
drive their own cars for a business purpose.  "If there is an accident," he
said, "they may not be covered because the car is being used for business and
is insured instead for personal use.  The policy to protect this is called
"Business Use of Owned Vehicle" and it is relatively an inexpensive
endorsement."

Levy said that the partners in his firm constantly talk with their brokers and
insurance companies so that we are always on the alert for new products and we
pass them on to our clients."

Rich added that the real value an accountant brings to the table is to
understand exactly what the insurance covers and whether it is adequate.
"Suppose you have a client with inventory covered at a public warehouse and
the client changes warehouses but doesn't amend the insurance to cover the new
location?  Then it's clear what will happen and it happens more frequently
than we would like."

Rich pointed out that business interruption is important today.  "You must
make sure that the loss coverage is sufficient.  You may have a growing
company and your original insurance is for half a million dollars in
inventory.  Now look at the company three years down the road where the
inventory is running at $3 million.  But, you only have a half million in
coverage.  You've got to expand the insurance with the expansion of the
business."

He said that what he looks for is a risk reward analysis where you have to
determine what you are willing to pay for what you are willing to accept.  "In
effect, it comes down to what's the deductible and what's the coverage?"

Tobias said that he works with accountants on ways to lower premiums by
raising deductibles.  "A client generally appreciates it when an accountant
says that they can save them money by raising the deductible.  If the loss can
be $4 million, is there a big difference in having a $1,000 or $5,000
deductible?  Clients like this and are appreciative of accountants looking at
this to save them money."

Picking the Right Coverage

According to David J.  Singer, vice president of the Singer Insurance Group in
Teaneck, N.J., there are some basic policies that accountants should review.

1.  Regular General Liability.  Accountants should be looking for businesses
having umbrella policies that cover a wide range of areas.  For example, many
insurance companies will advocate a general insurance but will fail to
recognize risk management.  "Insuring your computer is one thing," said
Singer, "but making backups and taking them offsite is even better.  It should
be coupled with a disaster plan.  Insurance then is just a part of risk
management."  2.  Fire & Theft Insurance.  Most clients have this but do they
have any disaster recovery plans?  Singer believes that accountants must
advise clients about this aspect.  "We know you have insurance but will it
really make you whole?  You still have to recover from the fire.  It's not
just a question of money here."  3.  Business Interruption.  This type of
policy will provide reimbursement for a major loss of income caused by an
insured catastrophe.  Singer notes that this is standard coverage.  "Almost
everybody writes it."  Two of the leaders offering this policy are the Wausau
Insurance Companies and the St.  Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company.  4.
Employment Practices Liability.  This is a relatively new area to explore and
it covers areas such as sexual harassment, discrimination, wrongful
termination and the like.  Many accountants working hand-in-hand with
employment practices attorneys will advocate the preparation of an employee
handbook or manual.  5.  The coverage here is not yet mainstream.  Only a
limited number of companies such as Chubb, American International and Pen Ex,
to name a few, are writing this policy.  Some insurance companies will only
look at it if the business has a minimum number of employees.  6.  Employee
Benefit Liability.  This is coverage that protects the employer from the
liability in the administration of the Employee Benefit Plan.  It is becoming
more and more popular today with the increase in such plans.  This policy
would include improperly counseling plan participants, improperly interpreting
coverages, handling records carelessly and failing to enroll or terminate plan
participants.  7.  Employee Dishonesty Coverage.  This is highly important
today, insisted Singer.  "As we know, when someone steals, the client sues the
accountant because the client thinks that the accountant should have been
Sherlock Holmes.  We advise accountants to encourage all their clients to have
this type of coverage."

Singer also recommended that accountants be aware of specialty-type coverages.
For example, if the client is in a particular business, such as the travel,
entertainment, advertising or computer industries, insurance coverage should
be provided for professional liability or errors and omissions.

There is also the multi-peril policy that is a combination policy including
property, liability, bonding, valuable papers, business interruption and other
coverages.  The advantage here is that there are often discounts available for
such a combination package policy.

In addition, products liability is important and is usually made part of the
general liability policy.

The so-called umbrella policy is another layer of liability coverage on top of
basic liability policies such as automobile and general liability.  This
policy offers broader coverage and picks up exposures such as excess coverage
under specific personal policies (e.g., personal liability and automobile)
that might not be covered in the basic policy.

Key-person life insurance coverage should also be considered.  Robert Rudolf,
managing partner of Richwood Brokerage, estimated that only about a quarter of
today's businesses have key-person insurance .  "Key-policy coverage pays cash
directly to the company as the policy beneficiary when the key person either
dies or becomes disabled.  For example, you can insure someone for $50,000 or
$50 million.  The idea is to peg it to that person's worth to the company,"
concluded Rudolf.

There are a wide range of other policies to consider such as deferred
compensation indemnification that applies to officers and directors of
companies, disability insurance and of course, group health insurance which is
becoming more and more involved.

Part of any accountant's job is reviewing the insurance schedule.

Traditionally, accountants review an insurance schedule, said Marcus.  "For
example, with plants and equipment, we want to be certain that the coverage is
adequate and to be sure it's the right type such as replacement cost versus
original cost.  We also check the inventory on hand to afford the client a
full review of what they require to cover their inventory properly."

However, when reviewing such a schedule, Singer mentioned some concrete
cautions.  "Take the business interruption policy.  There is generally a
worksheet involved and that worksheet is very often filled out by accountants.
It should not be!  What the client is doing is making a projection of what
their profits will be and if they have a fire and they are underinsured, they
will sue the accountant if the accountant filled out that worksheet.  The
accountant can help the client but the client is the one making the
projections.  In fact, the engagement letter the accountant has with the
client must have a disclaimer that those numbers are the client's and not the
accountant's."

Picking the Right Broker

When it comes to finding a broker, Singer believes that the accountant should
be looking at the following areas:

1.  Departmentalization within the insurance group because personal insurance,
commercial, life and group health should be handled by different people.  2.
Affiliation with at least a half dozen major insurance companies.  3.  A
specific claims department because claims people are a special breed and they
know how to deal with insurance companies.  4.  Ability to put together a risk
management program.  The broker shouldn't be just an order taker.

Verifying Adequate Insurance

In today's economic climate, many businesses look to the accountant to protect
their interests.  There are few conditions that can reverse the fortunes of a
successful company as quickly as the lack of adequate insurance coverage.

According to Robert L.  Gray, executive director of the New York State Society
of CPAs, one of the most important services accountants can provide to protect
themselves and their clients is to verify that adequate insurance is being
carried that will cover the most common and in some cases even remote
casualties.  Gray said that "This requires that the accountant have a
functional knowledge of the types of insurance available and the ability to
determine if the client is adequately covered."

Gray added that "the accountant need not be an insurance specialist but must
be able to work with and feel confident in the ability of a client's insurance
agent."

STUART KAHAN is staff editor of The Practical Accountant.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

INSIDE THE IRS


Providing Direct Deposit of Refunds to 1040 Paper Filers Instead of your
clients waiting for their refunds to come via the postal worker, they can now
see them directly deposited in their checking or savings accounts.

The IRS has released Form 8888, Direct Deposit of Refund, which can be
completed and attached to Form 1040, 1040A, 1040EZ, 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ.  The
Service will then send the refund directly to the client's financial
institution provided, of course, it is one that will accept direct deposits.

The Service said that the form cannot be used if the taxpayer is filing
electronically.  In that instance, there must be a specific request for direct
deposit by using Form 8453, 8453-OL or 8453-NR.

It also does not apply to Form 1040PC (since direct deposit election can be
made with that form) or if the taxpayer is filing a tax return for a prior
year; Form 8888 can only be used for the current year returns.  In addition,
it doesn't apply to a deceased taxpayer or where a joint return is being filed
as a surviving spouse.

The IRS said that it has not yet made any provision for notifying the taxpayer
when the direct deposit has actually been made.  For now, it will be up to the
taxpayers to check with their own financial institutions to determine if the
money has been received.  Finally, the Service said that it will only make
direct deposits to accounts in U.S.  financial institutions located in the
United States.


Surprisingly, IRS Unhappy With $13 Million Allocation

The IRS gets $13 million under an appropriation bill signed by the President
and is not terribly thrilled with it.  The problem is that the money is
earmarked for a program that would use legal firms and private collection
agencies to collect unpaid taxes.

In a letter sent to Sen.  David Pryor (D., Ark), Margaret Milner Richardson,
the IRS Commissioner, said that she had "concern" regarding the language in
the appropriations bill that would mandate the Service to spend $13 million
"to initiate a program to utilize private counsel law firms and debt
collection activities."

She added that she had "grave reservations" about using private contractors to
contact taxpayers on their delinquent tax debts without Congress having a
thorough understanding of the costs, benefits and risks of embarking on such a
course.

Questions abound

In her letter, Ms.  Richardson set forth a number of areas to be considered
such as the impact private debt collectors would have on the public's
perception of the fairness of tax administration and the security of the
financial information provided to the IRS.

She also expressed concern about how taxpayers' rights would be protected and
their privacy guaranteed as well as whether privatizing collection of tax debt
was really a good business decision for the federal government.  She cited the
fact that presently the IRS telephone collection efforts yield about $26 for
every dollar expended compared with more complex and difficult cases that
yield only $10 for every dollar spent.  Accordingly, she doubts whether
private collectors will be able to obtain the same successful return as the
IRS.

The matter is still up in the air because Sen.  Pryor (a key opponent of the
bill) isn't entirely clear on whether the IRS will be required to spend the
money.  Right now the Service is studying how best to proceed.


Updated Electronic Filing Procedures for 1996

The IRS has issued Rev.  Proc.  95-49 setting forth the various requirements
for electronic filing for the 1996 tax season for those who participate in the
program with respect to Form 1040, 1040A and 1040EZ.  It updates and
supersedes Rev.  Proc.  94-63.  The effective date was Nov.  22, 1995.

Under the new changes, the Service noted that Form 1040, 1040A and 1040EZ
cannot be electronically filed after Oct.  15, 1996, even if the taxpayer has
been granted an extension to file a return beyond that date.  It also pointed
out that an amended tax return cannot be electronically filed nor can returns
with foreign addresses or those for a decedent.

Furthermore, the new Rev.  Proc.  details the procedures that applicants must
follow to be accepted into the electronic filing program including their
responsibilities, the penalties that could be applied, advertising standards
and administrative reviews, to name a few.

With respect to such applicants, the procedure makes it easier for a certified
public accountant to be accepted into the program by dispensing with the
submission of a fingerprint card along with the application and requiring
instead evidence of the individual's professional status.


The Latest IRS Audit Techniques Guides

The IRS keeps pumping them out.  The Market Segment Specialization Program
(MSSP) audit techniques guides help IRS examiners focus on the significant
issues in a particular industry or class of taxpayers.  According to the
Service, they are designed to make audits more efficient and to ensure the
uniform application of tax laws.  Here is what's in the three latest guides:

Beauty and barber shops.  The IRS noted that the salon industry is cash
intensive, that the majority of the work force had a high school education and
were graduates of a cosmetology school.  The Service often found that the
books and records provided were rather limited and that the examiner would
have to conduct a very good initial review by utilizing various questions in
order to determine income.  The guide contains more than 50 potential
questions.

The IRS said that additional considerations were in reconciling the reported
tax return income to the taxpayer's financial status, evaluating the intensive
cash situation to determine the extent of the income probe and designing a
test to determine income from a reported or known reliable variable directly
related to that income.

The Service emphasized that an important examination step, of course, was to
compare the type of services and the number of appointments to the amount of
income reported.  It provided specific audit techniques to the industry that
can be used including how to calculate unreported tips.

Auto body and repair industry.  The almost 100-page guide explained that most
auto body shops were small to medium sized businesses operated as sole
proprietorships, small partnerships or closely held corporations and they
ranged in size from the corner shop to large franchises with many locations.
It pointed out that body shops were particularly interesting because they
combined a service-type business with retailing aspects.

The IRS noted that although they provide labor and skill, they must also
purchase and resell the needed parts.  Accordingly, this, they maintained,
often created conflicts in determining whether shops were required to maintain
inventories.

The guide stated that the industry was extremely competitive as a result of
the influence that insurance companies exerted and inasmuch as insurance paid
for many claims, they looked for the most cost-efficient businesses.  Thus, a
shop that was willing to use less expensive parts as opposed to factory
originals would be preferred.

The Service called attention to the fact that because inventory adjustments
had been consistently made in the auto body-repair industry, the examiner
would find it necessary to become acquainted with procedures for making a
change in the accounting method.  For example, for a taxpayer on the accrual
basis, the change will be limited to the inventory itself.  For a cash basis
taxpayer, the change will include the sales and purchases.

Also, the Service pointed out that with the advent of Rev.  Proc.  92-20, the
examiner needed to consider the possibility of allowing the taxpayer to spread
the adjustment over several years.

The guide contains 26 sample questions that may be used in the initial
interview, pointing out what would indicate an underreporting of income as
well as specific audit tips and special employment tax issues that might
easily arise.

Reforestation industry.  The comprehensive report was the work of a team from
Examination Collection and the State of Oregon Revenue Department.  Their
basic goals were to determine if compliance was a problem in this industry, if
the contractors were filing all required federal and state returns, if the
returns were substantially correct and then to make recommendations to the
proper governmental agencies in order to strengthen voluntary compliance
within the industry.

The IRS said a major concern was that many transactions between contractors
was done with cash, thereby creating little or no audit trail.  Those payments
also reduced the likelihood that a Form 1099 was filed or that the contractors
even deposited the cash into their business accounts.  The Service noted that
a possible indicator of unreported income could be illustrated by the
contractor who produced receipts for business expenses paid in cash but not
previously deducted on the return.

A detailed guideline for interviewing contractors along with suggested
questions is included.


Time for Action Regs Proposed

In proposed rulemaking IA-36-91, the IRS has issued a document that contains
proposed regs relating to the time for performance of acts by taxpayers and by
the Commissioner, a district director, or the director of a regional service
center, where the last day for performance falls on a Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday.  In particular, the proposed regs would remove the list of
legal holidays and other outdated material.

The list of holidays would be replaced by citations to the law (legal holidays
in the District of Columbia is found in D.C.  Code Ann.  28-2701) from which
the holidays would be discerned.  In this way, said the IRS, future changes in
the law regarding holidays would not require amendments to the regs.


Practicing Before the IRS Doesn't Get Any Easier

The Office of Director of Practices has outlined four specific scenarios that
illustrate the types of conduct that would warrant disciplinary action on
those who practice before the IRS.

Coming under Circular 230, the Service said that these represent composites of
matters coming to the director's office and do not constitute precedent in any
one matter.  They are as follows:

* Practitioner A makes estimated tax payments exceeding his personal tax
liability but doesn't file corresponding income tax returns.  He gives the
excuse that he had no time because of a busy schedule.  He could get suspended
or disbarred.

* Practitioner B represents a client whose return has been selected for audit.
The practitioner calls the revenue agent who will be conducting the audit but
he is unavailable.  They go back and forth, each missing the other's call.
Finally, Practitioner B telephones claiming it's a medical emergency,
whereupon the alarmed agent takes the call.  The practitioner's action
constitutes what is called "disreputable conduct."

* Practitioner C cancels conferences with an appeals officer on five different
occasions leaving messages on his answering machine that he had scheduling
problems.  Conduct constitutes "unreasonable delay" and could warrant
suspension or disbarrment.

* Practitioner D pleads guilty to making false statements in obtaining
federally insured mortgage and winds up with a felony conviction.  The
director can impose a suspension on the practitioner based on dishonesty.


IRS Briefs

* Mediation to resolve Tax Court cases.  In a memorandum to field
administrative officers, the IRS has outlined a procedure for the use of
mediation to resolve certain docketed Tax Court cases.  Any agreement reached
through mediation would then be submitted to the court as a stipulation of
settled issues.

* Appointments to international posts.  The IRS has appointed John Lyons to
assistant commissioner, Thomas Smith to deputy assistant commissioner and
Michael Danilack III to associate chief counsel, all in the international
area.

* Federal-State reference guide.  The IRS has issued a special guide book for
state and local government employers that contains information on Social
Security and Medicare coverage and employer-tax-withholding requirements as
they pertain to government employees.  A free copy may be obtained by calling
the IRS at (800) 829-3676.  Ask for Publication 0963.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

PROFIT STATEMENT:  The Writing Accountant


What do you do for an encore when you've spent six years at a Big Six
accounting firm and 21 years teaching graduate and undergraduate courses in
accounting, taxation and real estate at three major universities?  How about
opening a small consulting firm where your client base comes from what you
write?  Write?

The accountant with the proclivity for reducing thoughts to the printed page
is Jack P.  Friedman, a transplanted New Yorker now living in Dallas, who over
the years has written and published 21 books and more than 200 articles.
Along the way, he has also accumulated an extraordinary string of degrees and
designations including CPA, Ph.D., MBA, BBA, MAI, SREA, ASA and CRE, to name a
few.  In effect, what Friedman has done is build first a foundation based on
his unique experience and interest and then construct an accounting practice
from there.

He is primarily a consultant in matters concerning real estate but also in
some areas that have a more general business orientation.  Friedman noted that
much of his current work is in litigation support, for several reasons.
"First, attorneys prefer a published author as an expert witness.  Publication
of a book or professional article lends credibility.  Second, litigation
support offers a fairly high hourly compensation rate.  Also, the mix of
assignments that I receive in litigation support present challenges and
prevent boredom."

Writings=Client List

Friedman's books are extensive ranging from consumer guides to graduate school
textbooks and professional references.  They include The Dictionary of Tax
Terms (Barron's),The Encyclopedia of Investments (Warren, Gorham & Lamont),
Income Property Appraisal and Analysis (Prentice-Hall) and Keys to Investing
in Real Estate (Barron's).

His client list includes Champion International Corporation, the City of
Dallas, Simon Property Group, Exxon and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.

Where does he get his clients?  They generally come to him because of what he
has written.  For example, a law firm in Kentucky involved in the condemnation
of a public utility found themselves faced with three appraisals from the
condemnee relating to the market value of the property.  The firm sent for
educational materials of professional appraisal associations, found Friedman's
name and credits and called him to review the appraisals.  He did and said he
found them deficient.  "Based on my testimony at the hearings," he pointed
out, "the trial judge precluded any of the appraisal testimony from the other
side.  I have since assisted the firm in other matters."

Friedman also related the story of a prominent real estate broker in Dallas
who was interested in selling her own firm.  "It was a substantial business,"
he said, "with a unique market niche."  The broker visited his accountant to
gain an understanding of the ramifications of the sale and to enlist the
accountant as an ally in marketing the business.  The accountant researched
the business literature on the sale of a real estate brokerage firm, came
across Friedman's name as having prepared articles and monographs on the
subject and then brought him in to counsel the owner.

"All discussions," noted Friedman, "had to be absolutely confidential because
leaks of a possible sale could cause injury to the firm's value."  The firm
was sold in less than two months at a price and on terms suggested by
Friedman.

Project orientation.  Friedman believes that his course of practice is
something that can be done without the ongoing burden of a bigger professional
staff.  In fact, he keeps a lid on having a lot of people running around his
office.  He works primarily with one full-time administrative assistant and
three part-time people, all of whom have extensive experience in real estate
accounting, appraisal analysis and investment analysis.

The firm's personnel philosophy is to have relationships with others as staff
for potential assignments, but not to take on the obligations or overhead of
full-time staff.  "Therfore," he pointed out, "people with various specialties
may be brought in to work on a complex project, on an as-needed basis."  He
said that this modus operandi provides greater freedom and flexibility.

Getting Into Print

Friedman noted that his first five articles grew out of the work he was doing
as a CPA, which was in helping a real estate developer package FHA 236 housing
projects for sale to investors as a tax shelter.  Most of his subsequent
articles have been in response to a current business problem or have grown out
of research needed to shed light on a particular issue.

What does it take to get things written and published?  Friedman offered these
tips:

* Write what you are most interested in.  * Start with an article 10 to 40
double-spaced typewritten pages.  Don't begin by tackling a full-length book
project.  * Prepare an outline.  That will provide a path to follow and more
importantly will allow you to work on it over a period of time-in free moments
between what should be more pressing activities.  * Send it in even if the
editor declines interest in the topic.  The editor may like it when he or she
sees it.

Friedman also offered a tip on manuscript preparation.

He points out that almost all the publishers will edit the manuscript, some
more than others.  "Still, although editors can make a silk purse out of a
sow's ear, they're more likely to decline an obviously substandard piece (such
as one that is replete with typos), so seek out a typist who can prepare a
presentable manuscript."  In fact, Friedman goes a step further and insists
that you proofread your manuscript carefully before submission because "even
the best typist may have misunderstood you."

He said that even if you can't find a publisher, "a well-thought out,
beautifully typed and printed manuscript can be used in your own firm's
promotional material."

Friedman emphasized the fact that "manuscripts don't write themselves.  It
takes real work."  Also, you must be realistic.  "Don't expect immediate
results.  The payoff after publishing may take months or years."  To him, it's
paid off not only in accounting fees but in book royalties, as well.

He believes that there are many benefits to publishing.  "It brings prestige
to your employer or client and highlights you as an expert on a subject,
making your name valuable both inside and outside your firm."

Friedman's writings corroborate this and prove the point that putting the pen
to the paper can pay off handsomely.


Jack P.  Friedman & Associates

Year Founded:  1992

Sole Practitioner

Staff Size:  1 Full-time, 3 part-time

Offices:  1


STUART KAHAN is staff editor of The Practical Accountant.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

TAX ALERT:  ESTATE AND GIFT TAXES


Minority Discount Is Part of Special Use Valuation Reduction

Hoover died owning a 26% interest in a limited partnership that operated a
cattle ranch.  In determining its estate tax liability, the estate first
determined the fair market value of her interest and then subtracted a 30%
discount of $819,000 to reflect lack of marketability and control.  The estate
then determined the special use valuation of that interest.

The estate's pro-rata share of the special use valuation was more than
$750,000 less than the discounted fair market value.  As a result, the estate
then reported the discounted fair market value less an additional $750,000 for
the interest in the partnership under the special use valuation election.

The IRS argued, and the Tax Court agreed, that the fair market value of the
interest for this purpose should not have been reduced by the 30% discount
since the estate was also taking the $750,000 special use valuation reduction.

Law:  Under Section 2032A, an election can be made for estate tax purposes to
value property according to its qualified use rather than at its highest or
best use.  But the maximum reduction in valuation is $750,000.  By Section
2032A(g), the election applies to interests held in a partnership.  In Estate
of Maddox, the Tax Court did not permit a subtraction for a minority interest
discount against the special use valuation itself.

Held:  For the estate.  The Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit held that
the true fair market value for Section 2032A purposes is not modified in any
way and so it was proper to subtract the discount.  Neither the statute nor
the legislative history suggest that Section 2032A is designed to modify the
definition of fair market value.  An accurate determination of fair market
value must involve the use of the minority interest discount.The special use
valuation reduction of $750,000 can then be applied.  Estate of Hoover, 76
AFTR 2d 95-7305, (CA-10, 1995).


PROCEDURE

Transferee Bound by Transferor's Closing Agreement

Harvey Pert is married to Kathleen Pert who was previously married to Timothy
Riffe.  For four tax years, Kathleen, as representative of Riffe's estate and
in her own behalf signed closing agreements to settle tax liabilities asserted
against her and Riffe and penalties asserted against Riffe.  She also agreed
to a stipulated decision of the Tax Court to settle liability for another tax
year.

The IRS asserted transferee liability against Harvey Pert as both transferee
of Kathleen and successor transferee of Riffe.  Harvey claimed that he could
litigate the underlying tax deficiencies despite the signed closing
agreements.

Law:  Section 7121 authorizes written closing agreements which cannot be
reopened unless there is a showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation
of material fact.  It also says that a closing agreement may not be annulled,
modified, set aside or disregarded in any suit, action or proceeding.

Held:  For the IRS.  Pert could not relitigate any of the liabilities that
Kathleen settled in the closing agreements or the stipulated decision.  A
closing agreement binds a transferee of the party to the closing agreement in
a manner analagous to the way res judicata binds a transferee to a prior
judicial decision in which the transferor was the party.  Also, there is no
basis for distinguishing between a transferee and a successor transferee for
this purpose.

Res judicata, under which parties and their privies to a prior action that
concluded with a final decision on the merits, are bound as to all issues that
were or might have been decided in the prior action, also applies to persons
in privity with the taxpayer (e.g., as a transferee and transferor).

Thus, res judicata bars a transferee from relitigating the income tax
liabilities of a transferor once a final decision has been entered by the Tax
Court in the transferor's case if the decision was stipulated.

The Tax Court refused in this case to reconsider the principle that a Tax
Court decision entered pursuant to the stipulation of the parties is
considered to be judgment on the merits for purposes of res judicata.  Pert,
105 TC No.  24.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

TAX BRIEFS


Substitute tax forms procedure.  Rev.  Proc.  95-46 provides general
requirements and conditions for the development, printing and approval of
substitute Form 1040A and related forms and schedules to be input through the
Document Processing System.

Foreign tax credit.  Final regulations (TD 8627) deal with certain limitations
on the use of deconsolidation to avoid foreign tax credit limitations under
Section 904(i).  They will affect the sourcing and foreign tax credit separate
limitation character of income for purposes of the calculation of the foreign
tax credit by certain domestic related corporations.  The regs are generally
effective for taxable years of affiliates beginning after Dec.  31, 1993.

Nurses were independent contractors.  Corporation that operated nursing
registry established reasonable basis under Section 530 of the Revenue Act of
1978 for treating its nurses as independent contractors.  The facts satisfied
many of the common-law factors indicating that the corporation did not control
how the nurses performed their work.  It could get refund of employment taxes.
Hospital Resource Personnel Inc., 76 AFTR 2d 95-7148, 95-2 USTC  50, 594,
(CA-11, 1995).

Dollar-value LIFO didn't reflect income.  Dollar-value LIFO accounting did not
clearly reflect corporation's income when it treated bargain purchase
inventory the same as physically similar inventory acquired and manufactured
at normal costs under dollar-value LIFO.  Kohler Co.  and subsidiaries, 76
AFTR 2d 95-7194, 95-2 USTC  50, 600 (Ct.Fed.Cl., 1995).

Law firm taxed on client reimbursements.  Under tax benefit rule, law firm had
to include in income reimbursements in current year for service costs advanced
for clients and previously deducted in prior closed years.  This was so even
though firm agreed to treat service cost advances as nondeductible loans
starting in current year.  Hughes & Luce L.L.P., 95-2 USTC  50, 614, (CA-5,
1995).

Taxable insurance policy exchange.  Ltr.  Rul.  9542037 discusses various
spouse-to-spouse exchanges of life insurance policies that will trigger
recognizable gain under Section 1035.  The exchanges involve going from
coverage of individual lives to second-to-die policies.

Form 872-A not terminated by bankruptcy.  Form 872-A consent to extend the
time for assessment is a waiver of the limitations period and not an executory
contract.  Thus, it does not terminate automatically 60 days after a taxpayer
files a bankruptcy petition.  Bilski, (CA-5, 1995).

Bankruptcy and IRA distributions.  A debtor physician, age 62, who filed a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceeding does not have to withdraw funds from an IRA
prior to the tax-law mandated required beginning date to provide payments to
the trustee and creditors.  Chapter 13 protection is not contingent on being
funded from retirement assets.  In re Solomon, M.D.  (Solomon v.  Cosby), 76
AFTR 2d 95-7124, (CA-4, 1995).

Auction proceeds levy invalid.  IRS levy on the auction proceeds of taxpayer's
property was invalid.  Levy was served on the auction company before the sale
took place and the specific items to be sold were not identified until one or
two days prior to the auction.  Auction company's liability to taxpayer was
not fixed and determinable at the time of the levy.  Tull, 76 AFTR 2d 95-7312,
95-2 USTC  50, 602 (CA-9, 1995).

Timely notice of transferee liability.  Tax Court analyzes effect of
consensual extension of limitations for assessment of gift tax along with
issuance of notice of deficiency to donor on timeliness of notice of
transferee liability.  Value of taxable gift in hands of transferee was not
reduced by gift tax lien.  Ripley, 105 TC No.  23.

Interest payments to Netherlands sub.  American utility formed sub in
Netherlands Antilles to borrow money via Euronotes and lend proceeds to it.
Interest paid by utility was exempt from 30% tax withholding under treaty
since sub was in business activity and not just utility's agent.  Northern
Indiana Public Service Co., 105 TC No.  22.

S corp income not self-employment earnings for Keogh deduction.  S corporation
shareholders can't treat pass-through income as net earnings from
self-employment for Keogh plan deduction purposes, even though they performed
services for the corporation.  Under Sections 401 and 404, both partners and
sole proprietors may deduct contributions to qualified retirement plans but
not S corp shareholders.  Durando, 76 AFTR 2d  95-5644, (CA-9, 1995).

Publicly traded partnerships.  Final regulations (TD 8629) have been issued
dealing with the classification of certain publicly traded partnerships as
corporations.  They are generally effective for taxable years of a partnership
beginning after Dec.  31, 1995.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

TECHNEWS


The Art of Sharing Data

A feature in software programs much ballyhooed by vendors these days is
integration, the ability to share data among different software applications.
One way to accomplish this is through software suites that provide several
programs, sometimes from different vendors, on a CD-ROM.  Another way is to
use tax and accounting programs available from the same vendor, so that the
different programs all speak the same language.  A third way is to use a
third-party bridge product that provides data conversion between different
software programs.

For example, the Audisys Corp.  of Portland, Ore., said its TAXi tax import
bridge is capable of transferring data from virtually any accounting
application into several popular tax return software programs, including CCH
ProSystem fx, Lacerte, Pencil Pushers, CLR Fast/Tax and TenKey's Tax Shop
Entities.  It said TAXi is set up to automatically convert data from several
accounting and write-up packages, including ACCPAC Plus, ATB, Creative
Solutions ws-2, TAASC Easy ACCT and UniLink Write Up Plus.  And because it's
capable of reading DOS and ASCII formats, TAXi can convert data, though
probably at a slower pace, from other packages as well.  TAXi has other
advantages, too.  It can prepare reports in either a book or tax basis, it
maintains and updates tax code dictionaries in accounting software and it
enables users to switch from an accrual to a cash basis accounting method.

To be sure, Audisys has its work cut out for it.  "Data conversion has its own
set of problems ...  there's always something missing," said James Metzler, a
frequent lecturer in computer technology and a partner of the Buffalo,
N.Y.-based accounting firm Gaines Emhoff Metzler & Kriner.

Indeed, CCH and TAASC, two of the vendors whose tax software can receive data
via TAXi, say they are not directly cooperating with Audisys and recommend
their own bridges to users.

TAXi's ability to maneuver quickly also raises some questions.  Pencil Pushers
CEO Harvey Stein, who said he supports Audisys's efforts, said, however, that
the time and effort it takes to code each account being converted with TAXi
seems to negate the advantage of using it.

But others say TAXi is the only vehicle available that enables users to
integrate virtually any tax, accounting and writeup packages of their choice -
even from among competitors.  "It allows the user to make the choice of whom
they want to bridge with," said Greg King, vice president of marketing for
Lacerte Software, adding that TAXi "breaks down some walls set up by competing
vendors."

Even though Lacerte has its own bridges with certain accounting and writeup
vendors, King said it supports TAXi as a way to give users complete freedom in
designing their own connections.  He added that TAXi's critics overlook the
fact that, after its initial set-up of codes, it requires only typical
maintenance to update data.

TAXi's price is an initial $279 with a $129 renewal cost.-Paul Demery


New Electronic Accountant

The Winter 1995 issue of The Electronic Accountant, recently released,
features multi-media offerings developed by its new Editor in Chief, Laurence
K.  Zuckerman, a CPA and former Managing Editor of Accounting Technology.  In
the cover story, "Discomania:  The Best CD-ROMs for Accountants," Zuckerman
provides step-by-step in- structions in a unique, interactive video and audio
demonstration that teaches accountants how to use tax research products, forms
services, spreadsheets and CPE courses.

Other features include interviews with IRS officials who drafted key Revenue
Procedures in the pension voluntary compliance programs, a discussion by a
panel of experts on malpractice insurance, instructions on how to install a
tape drive, a shopper's guide to 1040 tax programs, and a profile of the New
York accounting firm of Goldstein Golub Kessler & Co.  For a free six-month
trial subscription, call (800) 535-8403.  The Electronic Accountant is
published by Faulkner & Gray, publisher of The Practical Accountant.  -P.D.

* Direct from the IRS.  Revenue procedures and rulings, press releases and
other information can be downloaded to a computer from a new bulletin board
service offered by the Philadelphia IRS Service Center.  The board's phone
number for ordering documents is (215) 516-7625; its customer service hotline
is (215) 516-3666.  The IRS also provides tax forms over the Internet through
FedWorld (http://FedWorld.  Gov).

* Help with Windows 95.1.  Totaltape is offering CPE training programs for
Windows 95.  They provide different levels of instruction for first-time
Windows users and for those upgrading from earlier Windows versions.  Each is
priced at $179.  Call 1-800-874-7877, or contact Totaltape's World Wide Web
site at http://www.bisk.com.

* AICPA teams up with RIA.  The AICPA selected Research Institute of America
as an affinity partner for providing print and electronic tax research
materials to AICPA members, who, in addition to RIA's normal promotions and
discounts, will receive 10% discounts on all new products.  RIA is a unit of
the Thomson Corp., which also owns Faulkner & Gray, the publisher of The
Practical Accountant.


The menu of services offered by Faulkner & Gray on the Microsoft Network
provides easy access to professionals' discussion groups, issues of F&G
publications and other services.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE PRACTICAL ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

ESTATE AND GIFT TAXATION:  DISPUTES OVER MINORITY DISCOUNTS CONTINUE


Value, like beauty, is in the eyes of the beholder.  Unfortunately, in the
case of transfers of closely held businesses, the owner of these businesses
and the IRS don't always see eye-to-eye.  Over the years, the IRS has been
enmeshed in many battles over the valuation of minority interests in closely
held businesses.  In 1993, the IRS appeared to have given up when it issued
Rev.  Rul.  93-12, which allowed minority discounts for a parent's gifts of a
20% interest in a closely held business to each of five children.  However, a
close examination of later Technical Advice Memorandums (TAMs) indicates that
the IRS is still fighting over minority discounts.  A review of the seeds of
this controversy makes it easier to understand the current battle lines.

It's Worth Much Less

Because of the lack of market transactions, the valuation of a closely held
business interest must involve a review of the corporation's intrinsic worth;
which includes its earning capacity, the book value of its stock, its dividend
paying capacity and goodwill.  The IRS provided an analysis of these factors
in Rev.  Rul.  59-60.  One factor mentioned is the size of the block of stock
transferred and the block's inherent degree of control.  Although the Service
administratively recognizes this concept, it has repeatedly challenged the
taking of minority discounts in valuing closely held businesses for both
estate and gift tax purposes.

A minority discount is based on the fact that the minority shareholder cannot
unilaterally control the corporate decision making process including the
payment of dividends, the election of directors and officers and the
liquidation of the corporation.  The range of the minority discount that is
claimed usually varies from about 20% to as much as 50%

Generally, ownership of less than 50% of the voting stock of a closely held
corporation will constitute a minority interest.  However, if the governing
state law requires greater than 50% of the voting stock in order to affect
corporate action, then the transferred block, if less than that greater
percentage, will be a minority interest for discount purposes.  For minority
discount purposes, it is only voting control which is relevant and not the
value of the transferred shares.

Breaking It Up

Owners of majority interests in closely held businesses often look to take
advantage of the minority discount by giving stock to a number of
beneficiaries so that each receives a minority interest.  In the case of
lifetime transfers, courts have generally allowed each block to be valued
separately.1 However, they also hold that if the transfer occurs at death,
aggregation is required.2 The fact that a block of closely held stock which is
included in the gross estate is divided among several beneficiaries is
irrelevant for valuation purposes.  The imposition of the estate tax, unlike
the gift tax, is based on what the decedent owned at death and not what was
given to each beneficiary.

On the flip side, courts have held that a transfer, either by gift or at
death, remains a transfer of a minority interest subject to a possible
discount even if the transferee already has control of the corporation or will
achieve corporate control as a result of the transfer.3

IRS Pulls Back

Until recently, it was the IRS's position that a minority discount would not
be allowed with respect to the transfer of stock among family members when
that family controlled the corporation at the time of the transfer.

In Rev.  Rul.  81-253, the Service concluded that where the family owned a
controlling interest, the stock would be valued as if all of it were held by
one person.  The result was that each share transferred would be considered
part of the controlling block.

Example:  Alpha Inc.  has 100 shares of voting common stock outstanding.  John
and Betty Smith each own 40 shares while Bob and Wendy, their two children,
own 10 shares apiece.  John and Betty transfer to Bob and Wendy one share each
of their stock, which clearly is a minority interest.  However, since the
family controlled the corporation at the time of the transfer, the IRS would
deny the minority discount.

Generally, the courts have rejected the IRS's application of family
attribution as being inconsistent with valuation principles clearly stated in
the regulations.4 According to these regs, the transferor should be viewed as
a hypothetical willing seller who is independent of the other shareholders.5

Rev.  Rul.  93-12 revoked Rev.  Rul.  81-253 using the example of a parent who
transferred all of the shares in a wholly owned corporation by making gifts of
20% of the shares to each of his five children.  The IRS ruled that the shares
should be valued in the hands of the donees without regard to the shares held
by other family members.

The IRS has recently issued two TAMs further defining its position with
respect to this type of minority discount.  In TAM 9432001, the decedent owned
48.59% of the stock with the remaining 51.41% of the stock owned by his son.
Decedent's will provided that all of his stock would pass to his son.  The IRS
concluded that the minority discount would not be lost merely because the son
owned the remaining shares in the corporation.

In TAM 9449001, the Service addressed the issue whether simultaneous gifts to
family members would be valued separately.  The donor, who owned 100% of the
stock in a closely held corporation, gave simultaneous gifts of the stock to
each of his 11 children.  The IRS ruled that each gift would be valued
separately.

Unfortunately, Rev.  Rul.  93-12 and the two TAMS might only be a short-term
concession.  It appears that the IRS still has an arsenal of weapons that it
is using against a claim of a minority discount.

Substance-Over- Form Salvo

The IRS will aggregate minority stock as components of a single control block
when it perceives a tax avoidance motive for the transaction.  In Estate of
Murphy,6 an individual, pursuant to a general power of appointment, controlled
a 51.41% block of stock in a closely held corporation.  Eighteen days prior to
her death, she transferred .88% of the stock to each of her two children,
leaving her with a 49.65% interest.  The estate claimed a minority discount
for (1) the two .88% stock gifts and (2) the 49.65% block of stock owned at
death.

The Tax Court ruled that the minority discount did not apply to either.  It
concluded that the attempt to reduce the ownership interest below 50% by
gifting 1.76% of stock prior to death constituted tax avoidance.  According to
the Court, the transfer "lacked substance and economic effect."  The court
aggregated both the gift and testamentary transfer for valuation purposes.

But it is clear that the IRS and the Court failed to recognize that a
substantial change did occur.  Implicit in the court's reasoning is that the
decedent retained control over the corporation until her death.  But, this
ignores the legal significance of the decedent's stock transfer which
effectively stripped her of control over the corporation.

The court's conclusion would be acceptable if there was some sort of an
agreement that the children were required to vote the gifted stock in
accordance with their mother's wishes.  However, no such agreement existed, so
the decedent's 49.65% stock interest should have been considered a minority
interest.7

Recently issued TAM 9504004 further shows the IRS's propensity to apply
substance over form.  In this TAM, the decedent, 19 days before he died from
terminal cancer, sold one-half of his 60% interest in the family corporation
to child A, who at the time owned 20% of the corporation prior to the sale.
This increased child A's interest to 50%.  The decedent's two other children
collectively owned 20%.  Simultaneously with the sale, the corporation
redeemed the decedent's remaining 30% interest.  The redemption increased
child A's stock ownership interest to 71.4%.  The estate stipulated that the
principal purpose of the simultaneous stock sale and redemption was to
transfer decedent's controlling interest in the corporation to child A.

For valuation purposes, the decedent's estate treated the sale and redemption
as involving two separate transfers.  However, the IRS concluded that for
valuation purposes the sale of decedent's 30% stock sale to Child A and the
simultaneous redemption of decedent's remaining 30% interest must be viewed as
a single integrated transfer of a controlling corporate interest to child A.

Swing Vote Attack

A portion or all of the minority discount may be lost if the transferred stock
is determined by the IRS to have a swing vote characteristic.  Minority stock
is considered as having such a characteristic if it may enable another
minority holder to achieve majority control.

Example:  Two shareholders own 49% of the stock and a third shareholder owns
2%.  The stock owned by the 2% shareholder is perceived as possessing a swing
vote potential; it arguably may be able to command a premium in excess of its
pro-rata value.

The adverse effect of the transferred stock with swing vote attributes is
illustrated in the following example based on TAM 9436005.

Example:  John owns all of the 100 outstanding common shares of Beta
corporation.  On Dec.  18, 1994, John gifted 30 shares to each of his three
children.  He also transferred five shares to his wife.  In valuing the
transfer, John discounted the value of the transferred shares by a minority
discount of 25%.  According to the IRS, John would not be entitled to a
minority discount for any of the three 30% blocks since each had a swing vote
characteristic.  Any of the three children could join with another and control
the corporation.

This is inconsistent with case law which recognizes that where a donor makes
simultaneous gifts of stock to different donees, each gift is valued
separately in determining the fair market value for gift tax purposes.8 The
IRS disputed donor's argument that if it had not been a simultaneous transfer,
the result would have been different.

Although the Service agreed that at the time of the transfer of the first
block it would not reflect a swing vote attribute, it contended the value of
the second 30% block transferred would reflect a swing vote characteristic.
According to the IRS, the transfer of the second 30% block would also result
in an increase in the value of the first block transferred since the first
block would belatedly acquire possible voting control in the form of swing
vote.  The IRS reasoned that this increase in the value of the first block
would constitute an indirect gift to the first block recipient at the time of
the second transfer.  The IRS concluded that even if the transfers were made
at different times, the total value of the gifts would ultimately be the same
as if they were made simultaneously.

The IRS's decision that the second transfer constituted an indirect gift seems
to stretch unduly the concept of an indirect gift.  Only the value of the
property which passes at the time of the gift should be subject to the gift
tax.  The second transfer carried out the donor's intent to transfer 30 shares
of stock to a particular donee.  It was not the donor's intent to transfer
value to another shareholder.  Furthermore, the IRS's position is built upon
the principle that any increase in the value of one family member's stock
constitutes a gift to that shareholder.  In essence, what the IRS
characterizes as an indirect gift is a phantom gift.  Consider the following:

Example:  Family Inc.  has 100 shares of voting common stock outstanding which
is owned by three sisters:  Linda (46 shares), Sally (30 shares) and Betty (24
shares).  Linda is bored with corporate life and decides to gift her shares to
her two sisters.  It is her intent to treat her sisters equally, so she gives
23 shares to each.  After the gift, Sally is in control of the corporation
with 53 shares while Betty owns 47 shares.

Under established case law, Linda would be entitled to a minority discount
with respect to both transfers.  The value of Linda's gift to Sally is limited
to the value of the shares actually transferred.  There is no basis for
finding an additional indirect gift to Sally.

Assume the same set of facts, except that Linda decides to have her shares
redeemed from the corporation in a transaction which does not have as its
intended purpose the objective of transferring control of the corporation to
Sally.  There is no question that the redemption would result in increasing
the value of Sally's shares.  However, it would be an unintended stretch of
the gift tax rules to suggest that Linda has made a gift to Sally as a result
of the redemption.  That would only be the result if one extends the IRS's
perception of an indirect gift.  It should be noted that the courts have
rejected similar attempts by the Service in the past to create phantom income
in the form of a constructive dividend to the remaining shareholders.9

In support of its swing vote position the IRS primarily relies upon Estate of
Winkler.10 In that case the IRS contested the amount of the minority discount
for a decedent's 10% ownership of a corporation with two different
families-the Winklers and the Simmons-each owning 45% of the stock.  The IRS
denied the minority discount for estate tax purposes claiming that the owner
of the 10% block could effect control over the corporation by joining with
either family.  According to the Tax Court in this case, a willing buyer would
pay a premium for this 10% stock interest.

The court's rationale here is inconsistent with the regulations' concept of a
hypothetical willing buyer and willing seller.  It invites an unintended
subjective and very speculative inquiry into the feelings, attitudes and
anticipated behaviors of the recipients of the stock, other shareholders and
potential purchasers.

The IRS's position would then result in the minority discount being either
eliminated or reduced whenever the minority block of stock being transferred
would provide control if coupled with any other minority blocks.  Except in
Estate of Winkler, the courts have generally not embraced this position.  In
fact, the Ninth Circuit in Propstra11 rejected such an approach and allowed a
minority discount for an estate.  It reasoned that inquiries into the
anticipated behavior of the surviving co-owners was logically inconsistent
with the regulations and would require subjective assessments that might prove
to be groundless.  In Estate of Bright12, the Fifth Circuit did not consider
the swing vote characteristics of a 27.5% stock interest.  At the time of the
transfer, the decedent's wife owned 27.5% of the corporate stock and an
unrelated party owned 30%.

Query?  Is swing vote potential limited to those situations where only one
minority block shareholder could achieve control?  In TAM 9436005, the
minority block which could achieve control by aligning with the transferred
shares was owned by one person.  However, in TAM 9449001, the IRS implied that
minority stock could possess swing characteristics even if the benefitting
minority block was owned by more than one shareholder.

Section 2704 Threat

Prior to the passage of Section 2704 in 1990, family business interests were
often structured so that voting and liquidation rights would lapse upon a
transfer resulting in a reduced estate or gift tax.  Use of lapsing rights
would then result in a closely held business being valued at its going-concern
value, which very often is less than its liquidation value.

In Estate of Harrison,13 a decedent was both a general and limited partner in
a family partnership in which his sons were also limited partners.  Pursuant
to state law, the decedent, as general partner, possessed the power lapsing at
death to liquidate the partnership and to receive the liquidation value
attributable to both his general and limited partnership interest.  The
limited partners did not possess such power.  The estate valued his limited
partnership interest at its going-concern value of $33 million instead of at
its higher liquidation value of $59 million that the IRS contended.  The value
of the general partnership interest was not in dispute.  The Tax Court
concluded that the value of the limited partnership interest was $33 million
since the liquidation right lapsed at death.

Congressional concern regarding perceived valuation abuses as a result of
using lapses to artificially reduce transfer tax value resulted in the passage
of Section 2704.  It overrules the result in Harrison by eliminating the
disappearance of value caused by a lapse in either the voting or liquidation
rights (defined in Reg.  25.2704-1(b)) of the transferred interest.  It treats
the lapse of either a voting or liquidation right as a taxable transfer if the
holder of the right and members of the family (as defined in Section
2704(a)(1)) control the partnership or corporation, both before and after the
lapse.  The drop in value triggered by the lapse is recaptured as an
additional transfer.  The value of the transfer is equal to the excess of (1)
the total interest value (including voting and liquidation rights) held before
the lapse, over (2) the value (without the lapsed right) immediately after the
lapse.

Example:  John owns 70% of the outstanding common stock of Alpha corporation
while his daughter Betty owns the remaining 30% interest.  John's voting stock
is automatically converted to nonvoting stock at his death.  The pre-lapse
value of the 70% interest, which possesses voting rights, is valued at $1
million.  The post-lapse value of John's 70% interest, without voting rights,
is reduced to $400,000.  The amount of the Section 2704 transfer is valued at
$600,000, the difference between the value of the stock as voting and
nonvoting stock.

Section 2704(b) addressed similar perceived valuation abuses regarding
intra-family transfers of corporation or partnership interests where the right
to liquidate is restricted.  It provides that applicable restrictions14 on the
ability of a corporation or partnership to liquidate are disregarded when
valuing an interest in such entity.  Section 2704(b) applies if there is a
transfer of a business interest to, or for the benefit of, the transferor's
family and members of the transferor's family control the entity immediately
before the transfer.

Example:  Sally owns all of the preferred stock in Profit Corporation.  The
stock carries a right to liquidate which cannot be exercised until 1999.
Sally's two children, Bob and Betty, own all of the common stock, which is the
only voting stock.  In 1994, Sally gifts the preferred stock to Bob and Betty.
Under Section 2704(b), the value of the gifted stock is determined without
regard to any restriction because it is not a restriction which by its terms
will never lapse.  Because the restriction lapses subsequent to the transfer,
it is disregarded.  Therefore, the Profit preferred stock is valued as though
the restriction on liquidation did not exist.

It has been suggested that strict application of Section 2704 may preclude the
application of the minority discount.15 Consider the following:

Example:  John owns all of the 100 outstanding common stock of Beta
corporation, which is the only outstanding class of stock.  On March 1, 1995,
John gives 30 shares to his son, Bob, and 30 shares to his daughter, Betty.
The voting rights attributed by the corporation's bylaws to such stock lapse
upon the transfer.  The value of the corporation on the date of the gift was
$1 million and the per-share value prior to the gift was $10,000.  The
post-lapse value of each share of gifted stock is $7,500.  Assume that the
recommended minority discount would be 25%.  Since the right to vote the
transferred shares lapses upon the stock transfer, there is a potential
Section 2704(a) transfer equal to $2,500 per share.  Thus, the per-share value
subject to gift taxation would be $10,000 per share.  Such a result would
eliminate the minority discount.  But for Section 2704(a), the per-share value
subject to gift taxation would be reduced to $7,500 as a result of the
minority discount.  However, Section 2704(a) creates a transfer equal to the
value of the lapsed voting rights.

Congress considered including in Section 2704 a provision that the minority
discount would not be allowed.  Despite the challenge, the committee reports
provide that Section 2704 currently is not intended to affect minority
discounts or other discounts.  Reg.  25.2704-1(d) appears to be consistent
with this point.  According to the reg, when valuing a gifted interest with a
lapse, the starting point for determining the amount of the 2704 transfer is
not the value of all interests owned by the holder immediately before the
transfer.  Instead, it is the value of all such interests determined
immediately after the lapse as if the lapsed right was nonlapsing.

Example:  At his death, D owned all of the preferred stock of Alpha
corporation and his child, Betty, owned all of the common stock.  The
preferred stock possessed 60% of the total voting power with the common stock
possessing the remaining 40%.  Pursuant to the corporate bylaws, the voting
rights of the preferred stock terminated on D's death.  The value of D's
interest immediately prior to his death was $100,000.  The value of that
interest immediately after death would have been $90,000 if the voting rights
had been nonlapsing.  The decrease in value reflects the end of D's
involvement in Alpha.

The regulations recognize the $10,000 discount attributable to the loss of a
key person.  Therefore, under Section 2704(a), the beginning value of the
transferred stock is the post-transfer value after application of the key-man
discount.  The same analysis should also apply with respect to the minority
discount.  If so, then the starting point for determining the amount of the
Section 2704 transfer should be the post-transfer value after application of
the minority discount.

Example:  John owns 80 shares of the total of Money Corporation's 100
outstanding shares of common stock.  He gifts 40 shares to each of his two
children.  Per the corporate bylaws, the voting rights of John's common stock
terminated upon the stock transfer.  The per-share value of the transferred
stock prior to the gift was $1,000 per share.  The value of that interest
immediately after the gift would have been $750 per share if the voting rights
had been nonlapsing.  The decrease in value reflects a 25% minority discount.
Assume that as a result of the lapse the per-share value of the transferred
stock drops to $600 per share.  If we assume that the beginning value for
Section 2704(a) purposes is $750 which incorporates a 25% minority discount,
the value of the 2704(a) transfer is $150 per share ($750 minority discount
value less $600) and not $400.

Final Legislative Offensive

We understand that the IRS is pursuing a legislative attempt to eliminate the
minority discount.  This would not be the first direct legislative threat to
the minority discount.  In 1987, the House version of Section 2036(c) provided
that absent clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, the deemed value of
stock in a corporation is its pro-rata share of all the stock in the class.
The Senate version of Section 2036(c) did not contain a similar provision.
The House provision on minority discounts was dropped from the final Section
2036(c) bill.

Historically, the minority discount has played a significant role in many
estate plans.  Although the IRS has reversed its position with respect to
family attribution in Rev.  Rul.  93-12, it has established significant
positions elsewhere to regain any perceived lost ground.  As the battles
continues, the concern is that the IRS might ultimately win the war.  n


CARL C.  RADOM, J.D., LL.M.  is a member of the Kansas City law firm of Lewis,
Rice & Fingersh, L.C.

MICHAEL A.  YUHAS, CPA, J.D., LL.M., is an Associate Professor at Grand Valley
State University in Grand Rapids, Michigan.


1 For example, see Knott, 55 T.C.M.  424 (1988).  2 For example, see Ahmanson
Foundation, 674 F.2d 761 (CA-9, 1981).  3 For example, see Lee Estate, 69 TC
860 (1978).  4 Estate of Bright, 658 F.2d 999 (CA-5, 1981); Whittemore v.
Fitzpatrick, 127 F.  Supp.  710 (DC Conn., 1954) 5 Regs 20.2031-1(b) and
25.2512-1.  6 60 T.C.M.  645 (1990).  7 Yuhas and Radom, "Valuation of Stock
In a Closely Held Corporation," The Review of Taxation of Individuals, August
1991.  See also "Minority Discounts in the Valuation of Closely Held Stock:
Estate of Murphy v.  Commissioner," The Tax Lawyer Vol.  45 No.  2, Winter
1992.  8 Whittemore v.  Fitzpatrick, 127 F.  Supp.  710 (DC.  Conn., 1954);
Avery, 3 TC 963 (1944); Reg.  25.2512-2(e).  9 For example, see Holsey, 258
F2d.  865 (CA, 1958); Edenfield, 19 TC 13 (1952).  10 TC Memo 1989-232.  11
680 F2d.  1248 (CA-9, 1982).  12 658 F2d 999 (CA-5, 1981).  13 52 T.C.M.  1306
(1986).  14 "Applicable restrictions" are limitations on the ability to
liquidate, which are more restrictive than those which apply under state law
and which will lapse at any time or can be removed after the transfer.  15
Blatt, "Did Chapter 14 Miss the Mark?  Minority Discounts Under Chapter 14,"
Florida Bar CLE Committee; Advanced Estate Planning Lectures and Workshops,
April 21-22, 1994.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>