
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B039-273</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te124.html 205.156.212.5 19970122051353 text/html 29330
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:12:01 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:32 GMT
Content-length: 29143
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te124.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>*LATEST NEWS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>INTERACTIVE TV MAY TAKE LONGER THAN EXPECTED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(810 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ATM, ETHERNET WILL COEXIST IN THE SHORT TERM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(724 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>1996 MAY BE BIGGEST YEAR YET FOR VIDEOCONFERENCING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(738 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>MSNBC BRINGS MICROSOFT ONE STEP CLOSER TO TECHNOLOGY&nbsp;DOMINATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(814 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>STRATACOM UNVEILS ATM SVC SWITCHING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(476 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>VIDEOSERVER ANNOUNCES MULTIMEDIA CONFERENCE SERVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(324 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>FIRST VIRTUAL UNVEILS DESKTOP MULTIMEDIA COLLABORATION&nbsp;PRODUCTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(369 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

INTERACTIVE TV MAY TAKE LONGER THAN EXPECTED

Although the promise of true interactive television still
captivates the public, analysts now believe it will take
longer to come to fruition than originally expected.
Recent interactive TV trials, including a 4,000 home
trial in Orlando, Fla., conducted by Time Warner, have
not gone as well as expected.  Analysts believe the
reasons include an immature system, a price point that
is too high for providers to make money, and a
marketplace that isn't quite ready to jump into
interactivity.

The nascent industry is still trying to overcome its
early boastful claims about the price and breadth of
services interactive TV would provide.  Analysts now say
those claims were blown out of proportion and caused
confusion in the marketplace.

Telephone and cable companies originally claimed that
interactive TV would be relatively easy to implement and
that it could be done in a cost-effective manner,
explained Jim Penhune, an analyst with BIS Strategic
Decisions (Norwell, Mass.).  "After a while, the
companies began believing their own claims and nobody
would admit that it would be harder to implement
technically and profitably than had originally been
believed," he said.

One stumbling block to fast adoption of interactive
television may be that consumers are not interested
enough or ready for interactive television in its current
incarnation.  As a result, the industry will have to
define a very low-cost entry point for interactive
television to become a reality soon, said Tom Maresca,
an analyst at Jupiter Communications (New York, N.Y.).

The level of sophistication of current interactive
television offerings also has been rather poor, which
doesn't endear consumers to the concept, said Walter
Miao, an analyst at Link Resources (New York, N.Y.).
Lack of standards and interoperability are other factors.
"TV viewers today are accustomed to being passive with
our TV sets.  The only thing that has even been a little
interactive up until now has been the remote control or
a video game," Miao explained.  "If interactive TV is
going to catch on, we need to define new levels of
interactivity, and we need to do it slowly.  You have to
start small, which is part of the mistake so far.  As
much as I admire Time Warner for putting in a full-
service network in Orlando, they are trying to do
everything.  That's a mistake, and it's expensive."

Starting small may mean creating an entry-level
interactive system just for games, Miao said.  "Show me
an interactive TV system I can just do shopping and
transactions on.  Then define that system as a scalable
system so I can scale it up from 20 to 200 households and
then to 2000 households.  Then I can start adding new
interactive services.  That's the way you can ratchet
things up."

The best way to deliver interactive television is to do
so incrementally, agreed Penhune.  "Reality is that more
limited forms of what we would call interactive TV will
deployed to more people over the next year or so.  We'll
see a scaled-down version of services.  You are going to
see more high-end pay-per-view TV from cable people and
near video-on-demand, where instead of being able to
choose any of 2,000 movies and run them instantly at any
time with stop, fast forward, and rewind, you will have
a choice of 50 to 100 movies, delivered at 15 minute
intervals.  The industry will see that there will be no
problem providing those types of services
cost-effectively."

THE FUTURE OF INTERACTIVITY

It may be that in the end, interactive television, the
Internet, and on-line services will all be melded
together.  "You are starting to see video and audio on-
demand on the Internet.  It is getting to the point where
it is starting to resemble TV more than it ever has
before," Maresca said.

Ten years from now, people probably will be accessing the
Internet in a much more robust fashion than via their TV
sets, "but this will be an Internet that has multimedia,
video, audio, and a heavy look and feel to it," Maresca
predicted.  Many of the services that are starting to be
done over the Internet now, including banking and
shopping, will most likely grow, and those same types of
applications eventually can be extended to the television
environment, he said.

The industry will have to mature a little more before
consumers can receive interactive television services
they will value at a cost they will pay, Miao added.  And
today's world is primarily an analog world, while
interactivity is best suited to a digital world.  These
factors mean that the beginnings of true interactive
television probably won't happen until at least the end
of 1996, Miao said.

WORLDWIDE SHIPMENTS OF INTERACTIVE TELEVISION
SUBSCRIPTIONS (Source:  Dataquest)

1993:     6,000
1994:    10,000
1995:    25,760
1996:    54.096
1997:    97,373
1998:   223,957
1999: 1,363,219
(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

ATM, ETHERNET WILL COEXIST IN THE SHORT TERM

LONG TERM UNCERTAIN:  IN THE SHORT TERM, ANALYSTS EXPECT
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) and Ethernet each to
have a secure place in the networking arena because each
serves a unique purpose.  On the desktop, Ethernet is the
clear protocol of choice, both in terms of efficiency and
price, said John Morency, an analyst at The Registry, a
consultancy in Newton, Mass.

Ethernet on the desktop, both at 10 megabits per second
(Mbps) and 100 Mbps, has a bright future, Morency said.
Fast Ethernet meets the capacity demand and appears to
have the support of virtually all of the major hub
vendors, including Cabletron, Bay Networks, and 3Com.
Most people will continue to deploy Ethernet to the
desktop because it is most cost-effective to do so, said
Dave Passmore, an analyst at Decisys (Sterling, Va.), a
network consulting firm.

Ethernet on the desktop also is popular because users do
not have to worry about support for ATM LAN emulation.
"All the current software people run on their desktop
machines today assumes a broadcast LAN environment like
Ethernet, and if you go to ATM, you open a Pandora's box"
of LAN emulation with ATM, the standard for which is
relatively new, Passmore explained.  But when it comes
to linking Ethernet switches together, ATM comes into
play.  Decisys sees ATM as the backbone to link those
switches together.

Just as Ethernet seems to have a lock on the current
desktop, ATM is currently best suited to the backbone,
or the pipe that provides quality of service along
multiple virtual connections, allowing the user to
process voice, video, and data simultaneously.  For the
next three years, Passmore advised counting on ATM as the
backbone to tie routers and switches together.

ATM prices are declining fairly rapidly, which bodes well
for the technology, said Mordechai Fester, ATM product
manager for Cisco Systems.  "In some situations, that
could make it tougher for Ethernet.  You could easily
imagine a scenario where if ATM had stayed at $2,000 per
server the way it was a year or two ago, people would be
delaying implementation of ATM and might favor another
technology," he said.

More important than declining prices for ATM is the
rollout of the next generation of ATM switching.
Production-ready ATM backbone switches will hit the
market this year, prompting many companies to move to ATM
as a mainstream backbone technology, Fester said.

ATM on the desktop will happen eventually, but don't
expect to see it in most commercial organizations until
the year 2000 at the earliest, Passmore predicted.

"We really don't see desktop ATM really taking off to any
significant extent in 1996," agreed Morency.  "Technology
will still be too expensive and there isn't going to be
real interoperability to exist to make network managers
feel comfortable enough.  It will take time for it to
really mature."

1997 AND BEYOND

Although 10 Mbps and 100 Mbps Ethernet have their place,
something much faster is on the horizon.  Gigabit
Ethernet will supply full-duplex fiber links over 20
kilometers; a copper version will cover shorter
distances.  Although the impact of Gigabit Ethernet on
the market in 1996 is negligible, it may take off in
1997, when the specification is expected to be released.
Gigabit Ethernet is still quite new, and it isn't clear
whether it will meet distance limitations, Passmore said.
"Today, if you are going to the trouble of putting fiber
in to give you any kind of distance, you might just as
well use ATM," he said.

When Gigabit Ethernet finally arrives, it may give ATM
a run for its money.  But because ATM has been around
longer and is more firmly entrenched, it may win out,
Passmore speculated.  Ethernet is more of a known
quantity on the desktop, though, and users may turn to
it.  "They might not like the idea of moving to a totally
new technology, therefore choosing the safety and
familiarity of Ethernet," Morency said.

"If we are at the point next year where ATM LAN emulation
really hasn't taken off, ATM desktop connectivity is
still too expensive and not very interoperable, there may
be a lot of shops that may look to Gigabit Ethernet to
provide a short-term tactical implementation to get the
advantage of higher performance," he said.
(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

1996 MAY BE BIGGEST YEAR YET FOR VIDEOCONFERENCING

Bill Gates, who has as many opinions as he has millions,
has said that videoconferencing, although a promising
technology, cannot compete with personal contact.  "A
face-to-face meeting is still a better way to collaborate
than the most ideal videoconferencing solution," he has
said.

For once, analysts agree with Gates.  But although
nothing can compete with a face-to-face meeting, it isn't
always possible or practical.  In those cases,
videoconferencing may be an ideal solution, especially
as the technology matures and standards designed to
support it are put into place.

1996 will be the year videoconferencing comes into its
own, predicted Sarah Dickinson, president of Dickinson
and Associates (Cambridge, Mass.), a videoconferencing
consulting firm.

More and more companies are entering the
videoconferencing market, and as large companies become
more involved, the market will begin to accelerate, said
Tony Paradiso, director of marketing in PictureTel's
personal systems division.  PictureTel has a 50 percent
market share, but it is smaller than many of its
competitors.  A growing installed base of PC users and
large companies like Intel and British Telecom, which
have recently entered the market, will help bring
visibility to the technology.  Such large companies help
educate the market and help accelerate the technology's
acceptance, Paradiso said.

STANDARDS WILL HELP ACCEPTANCE... AND PRICE

As standards for videoconferencing loom on the horizon
and the technology becomes simpler and less expensive,
the videoconferencing market will grow more quickly,
analysts believe.

The standard that will have the largest effect on
videoconferencing's expected boom is H.324, which will
create an integration of videoconferencing within the
domain of the home PC, Paradiso explained.  Approved last
month, H.324 is the standard everyone will build to, he
said.  It will force the quality of video to improve and
prices to become dramatically lower, and will foster
interest by the consumer market.

H.324 also will allow videoconferencing to be used with
regular telephone lines, but the jury is still out on
whether people are going to be interested in using
videoconferencing that way, Dickinson said.  Most
importantly, H.324 will bring videoconferencing into a
mobile environment for laptops and business travelers.
That capability is critical to widespread acceptance, she
said.

Another standard crucial to widespread acceptance of
videoconferencing is H.323, which allows for
videoconferencing over a local area network.  H.323 will
makes video over the LAN a very popular application,
Dickinson predicted.  It is expected to be approved by
the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) by the
end of this year.  And on the horizon is a planned
standard for videoconferencing for ATM, currently being
discussed at the ITU.

Such standards will lead to cost decreases, predicted
Paradiso.  "In the past, AT&T and other companies had
videophones, but they were $1,500, [they had] terrible
quality, and they were proprietary," he explained.  "But
with these standards, two videoconferencing users can buy
equipment from two different vendors.  You will begin
seeing PC vendors adding videoconferencing capabilities
to their platforms, and you will be able to do video over
standard phone lines.  All of this will bring the prices
down and availability up."

Last on the standards list is T.120, the information-
sharing piece ratified in 1995.  Although some vendors
claim compatibility, take that claim with a grain of
salt, warned Steve Kimball, an analyst with META Group
(Reston, Va.).  "They have probably tested it on their
own products, but haven't tested it yet with different
vendors' products.  It will be more toward the second
half of 1996 that T.120 compliance really gets
addressed," he said.

BY THE NEW MILLENNIUM

Videoconferencing over the Internet also is an important
advance, Dickinson said.  Products like Apple's QuickTime
conferencing kit will give users videoconferencing
capabilities over the Internet using TCP/IP or regular
Ethernet LAN and at the higher end, over ISDN.  This
capability will attract a new group of users, which is
crucial for the technology's continued success, she said.

As the decade progresses, widespread adoption of
videoconferencing by businesses will become more likely,
Kimball said, but it will take a few years for businesses
to realize enough benefit from the technology and for the
technology to become more affordable.  "If it becomes
cheap enough that it doesn't matter whether it is
installed [in PCs] or not, then all of a sudden people
get used to communicating that way.  At that point, he
said, it will become a commodity.
(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

MSNBC BRINGS MICROSOFT ONE STEP CLOSER TO TECHNOLOGY
DOMINATION

Last month, Microsoft and NBC struck a deal to create a
news service that will inform viewers across broadcast,
cable and the Internet.  The revolutionary news service,
dubbed MSNBC, is designed to take advantage of NBC's
newsgathering expertise and Microsoft's strength in
computer technology, both through its software and its
fledgling on-line service, Microsoft Network.

As Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates said when the deal was
announced, people want to be able to call up news on
demand at their convenience.  While watching breaking
news on television, consumers want to be able to get
access to more in-depth information on items of interest.
The deal with NBC will help create innovative interactive
news content and an integrated media experience, he
explained.

The deal calls for Microsoft to invest $220 million over
five years for a 50 percent stake in the all-news cable
station.  Both Microsoft and NBC will invest $200 million
over five years to fund the cable channel and a
supporting on-line service.

Areas of special interest for Microsoft include
interactive television and on-line computer services,
both of which will be incorporated into the MSNBC
venture.

Gates apparently wanted to enter the news business very
badly: when a deal to acquire a large stake in Turner
Broadcasting Service went awry last August, Microsoft got
back in the saddle and spent the next several months
contemplating and executing a plan to get what it wanted.
With the MSNBC deal, it may have done just that.

A BETTER PLAN

The MSNBC venture is a much better way to go than
Microsoft's previous idea, which was to form its own news
organization, said Peter Krasilovsky, an analyst with
Arlen Communications Inc. (Bethesda, Md.).  Microsoft had
hired more than 20 reporters, who would form the genesis
of what might have been Microsoft's unique news
organization.

But the current plan allows Microsoft to have a buffer.
"Not only does Microsoft get to provide state-of-the-art
news, but it also doesn't get taken to task as a news
agency, which might have been very difficult from a
corporate point of view," Krasilovsky said.

The MSNBC venture will have to prove that there is a
market for people who want to customize this type of
information, said Peter Bernstein, president of
InfoNautics Consulting Inc. (Ramsey, N.J.).  "I think
there is a small segment of the population that would be
interested in doing that, but the question is whether
they will be willing to pay a stiff price for it," he
said.  "Will the perceived value be there for the service
to get the kind of penetration it will need to be
successful?"

At this point, it is difficult to envision that people
who are accustomed to getting information one way will
change their behavior so radically as to heavily use the
service MSNBC plans to provide, Bernstein said.  "But
Microsoft and NBC have plenty of money, and if they want
to back it to the extent that it will probably need to
be backed to change people's behavior, they can do it.
It's a question of marketing, and Microsoft has proven
itself very good at marketing."

By entering into this deal, Microsoft is covering all
bases, trying to position itself as a premier content
provider.  This agreement, along with Microsoft Network
and Microsoft's strong interest in interactive
television, is Microsoft's move into the real-time
content business.  "They honestly believe that content
is going to be king in the future," and Microsoft wants
to own a large part of that empire, Bernstein said.

Content is key, agreed Jim Penhune, an analyst with BIS
Strategic Decisions (Norwell, Mass.).  Microsoft has made
many alliances for content, including the defunct deal
with Turner Broadcasting and its relationship with SKG
Dreamworks.

A STEPPING STONE TO INTERACTIVE TV?

Some say that providing on-demand news is an interim step
toward gaining a foothold in the interactive television
market.  Microsoft is hoping that MSNBC will be the
interactive TV vehicle for news information, some
believe.

"You can't go wrong with content because all of it is
fairly leveragable," Penhune explained.  "A year ago, or
even now, there is a lot of talk about [deals like this]
giving Microsoft content for interactive TV.  But even
if it doesn't, it gives them content for all these other
media as well, so it isn't like they are going to be
stuck with something they can't use."

Although projects like the MSNBC venture take plenty of
Microsoft's energy and money, they will not distract
Microsoft from its core projects, Penhune said.  Those
core projects are all targeted at the consumer market,
"and if you accept the premise that they are consumer-
and not business-oriented, then doing something like this
is not a distraction.  It is another way of addressing
the consumer market," he said.
(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

STRATACOM UNVEILS ATM SVC SWITCHING

StrataCom last week announced full support of high
performance switched virtual circuit (SVC) switching to
automate connection set-up and configuration.

ATM SVCs provide three benefits for carriers and end
users: scalability, flexibility and ease of use.  The
company said it expects to begin beta testing of ATM SVCs
with select customers in the first quarter of this year.

In addition, StrataCom unveiled a set of ATM signaling
and security features that give users more flexibility
and various levels of control across ATM wide area
networks.  The new features are designed to give
companies the ability to prevent unauthorized access
among users.

Available as a system software upgrade, StrataCom's ATM
SVCs will support ATM user-to-network (UNI) interfaces
ranging from T1/E1 (1.544/2.0 Mbps) and T3/E3 (45/34
Mbps) to OC-3/STM-1 (155 Mbps). StrataCom ATM SVC
signaling also includes compliance with both ATM UNI 3.0
and 3.1 with translation between these standards.

The company also said it will support ATM SVC signaling
for ATM Frame UNI (FUNI) and ATM Inverse Multiplexed
(AIMUX) interfaces with the delivery of these products
in the first quarter of 1996.  It will also support the
Interim Inter-Switch Signaling Protocol (IISP) which
provides interoperability with other vendor's ATM
switches and the Interim Local Management Interface
(ILMI) protocol for ATM connection management.

Unlike frame relay, ATM is widely viewed as the
underlying transport technology for multiple
services -- making ATM SVCs fundamental in supporting
large numbers of users and high volumes of traffic.  SVCs
are the foundation for several new ATM-based services
such as LAN interworking over ATM using LAN Emulation and
Multi-Protocol Over ATM (MPOA) standards.  These services
will require the ability to rapidly establish and
tear-down large numbers of connections.

While permanent virtual circuits or PVCs must be pre-
established and manually configured, SVCs make use of ATM
signaling information within each ATM cell allowing
connections to be automatically set up on-demand by
switches as ATM calls are requested by the user.

ATM SVCs provide an ideal foundation for multimedia
applications, according to Stratacom.  While router
architectures aggregate many users' traffic, the use of
ATM SVCs permits a separate connection for each pair of
users and each application.  This allows quality of
service guarantees which are essential for multimedia
communications.

Though PVCs remain attractive for customers with a
limited number of interconnected devices, as many more
users come online -- as is evidenced by the growth of the
Internet -- SVCs become a critical requirement.  SVCs
significantly reduce network administration by
eliminating manual configuration of connections while
increasing the flexibility by which devices can be added
to the network providing quicker connectivity to all
other devices.

The company is working on enhancements designed to scale
SVC capacity per switch to support millions of concurrent
SVC connections and thousands of SVC call set-ups per
second.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

VIDEOSERVER ANNOUNCES MULTIMEDIA CONFERENCE SERVER

VideoServer Inc., a provider of H.320-based multipoint
control units (MCU), announced availability of a new
member of its Multimedia Conference Server product family
targeted at large corporate users and service providers.

MCUs mix audio and switch video signals to each
conference endpoint, allowing each participant to see
anyone else in the conference and hear the complete
discussion.  Multipoint technology is critical for
multimedia conferences to approach the efficiency and
flexibility of face-to-face meetings, minus the high
travel costs.  Without an MCU, multimedia conferences are
limited to only two sites, hindering effectiveness as
virtual meetings.

The dual-bus Model 2020 is the most powerful offering in
VideoServer's Series 2000 family, which ranges from
entry-level MCUs to high-capacity units.  With
high-capacity, dual-bus design, the new model is targeted
at large corporate sites and conference service
providers, supporting up to 32 sites using internal
inverse multiplexers (IMUX) in 336 Kbps or 384 Kbps
conferences.

Most cost effective for large corporate videoconferencing
network usage charges dominate the life cycle cost of any
videoconferencing solution.  Over a five-year life cycle,
it's not uncommon for these charges to exceed equipment
costs by a factor of ten to one.  The challenge for
videoconferencing managers, then, is to deploy conference
networks that use MCUs to minimize network charges and
will scale with future demand.

While small, distributed MCUs keep phone costs down in
low-volume scenarios, large corporate facilities benefit
from large, centralized MCUs.  For organizations with
more than three or four hours of videoconferencing
between any two sites each day, running leased T1 or E1
lines from each remote site to a centrally located Model
2020 yields substantially lower network costs than
switched digital services.  In addition to lower overall
network costs provided by leased lines in higher volume
scenarios, the cost of conferences between satellite
offices that are connected through the centrally-located
Model 2020 is essentially free.  Management costs also
drop when the MCU is centralized.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA NETWORK TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

FIRST VIRTUAL UNVEILS DESKTOP MULTIMEDIA COLLABORATION
PRODUCTS

First Virtual Corp. announced several products targeted
at business users interested in desktop multimedia
collaboration.

The company's FIRST-Multimedia Switches deliver ATM to
the desktop at switched Ethernet prices, according to the
company.  The family is built with a "stackable/modular"
architecture allowing for a variety of scalable
configurations and can scale to support eight to 24 users
per switch; 120 users per stack and can further provide
scalability through the backbone.

The cost is $300 per 25 Mbps ATM port.  The switches are
support multimedia through modular options including: 25
Mbps ATM for the desktop, Ethernet, token ring for LAN
access, and 155 ATM OC3 for server or backbone switch
access.

The switch complies with ATM Forum UNI 3.0 and 3.1
Switched Virtual Circuit (SVC) signaling and LAN
emulation standards to ensure interoperability with
existing LAN data applications and other vendors' ATM
products.

The ATM telecom gateway has been enhanced to include
PRI/TI support.  The Gateway Server is an ATM-Telecom
Gateway which distributes high-quality, remote H.320
videoconferencing streams from the Telco WAN to the
desktop over a local ATM network.  It adds
high-performance ISDN PRI and T1 WAN rates, enabling
room-system quality wide-area videoconferencing and
greater capacity for multimedia traffic and users.

The FIRST-WWW Server enables Internet users to cache
data, graphics and video streams off of the web in the
FIRST-Multimedia Storage Server.  This storage cache
helps facilitate fast access and high quality playback
by users on the ATM or LAN network.  Users can store and
share commonly-used video streams, as well as documents
that incorporate video, data and images using standard
Internet browsers.

In addition to being a QoS manager for out-of-the-box
applications running over ATM, MOS now enables live video
streams to be encoded into MPEG-1 real-time, then
distributes them to various desktops within the
organization using ATM's point-to-multi-point features.
PC users can receive high-quality, broadcast video while
performing any network activity.

FIRST-H.320 introduces development capabilities, via a
Software Developers Tool Kit (SDK) for store and forward
of H.320 streams. This will allow applications such as
Video-Mail and Video Session storage.  Videoconferencing
users will have the same benefits as voice mail users,
namely, the ability to leave a video message.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>