
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B036-252</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te33.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045433 text/html 44373
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:52:26 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:03 GMT
Content-length: 44186
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te33.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet <BR>
October 2, 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* THIS WEEK'S LEAD STORIES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>SEARS STUDIES NETWORK&nbsp;ALTERNATIVES FOR PCRADIO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(973 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>CONVERSION TO OMNITRACS&nbsp;SIMPLE, SAYS U.S. XPRESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1014 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* DELIVERY *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>SYSTEMS LINK PLANNED ROUTES&nbsp;WITH ACTUAL PERFORMANCE DATA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1290 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>CUSTOMER GIVES THUMBS-UP&nbsp;TO CLI'S FUEL DELIVERY SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(747 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* FIELD SERVICE *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>MELARD EXPANDS PORTFOLIO&nbsp;WITH SERVICE ON RAM, ARDIS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1117 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* UTILITIES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>BOSTON EDISON TO EVALUATE&nbsp;STARTUP'S MOBILE DATA SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(988 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* HEARD EN ROUTE *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>  Speedwing Mobile Communications, a division of British</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego has filed a registration</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(127 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>  Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. and Racotek in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

SEARS STUDIES NETWORK
ALTERNATIVES FOR PCRADIO

  Sears Roebuck and Co.'s Product Services Division plans to
test the use of mobile data communications with a version of
IBM's new PCradio in about six months, says Stan Knipe,
executive vice president for product services at Sears in
Chicago. Knipe expects recommendations on how Sears should
conduct the tests, and what wireless network it should use,
from the division's systems people in about 60 days.

  Although Sears has stated its intentions to use the
portable computer from IBM, it can't begin hands-on work with
the product until it implements a new system to support its
field service operations, Knipe says. The system will allow
Sears to handle service requests through a small number of
regional centers, rather than through its 850 local service
centers.

  Call takers will schedule appointments with customers and
then transmit work orders to the local centers, from which
technicians are dispatched. "We have to have this software
system, and even the process changes that that drives, in
place before we're going to be able to feed and support the
remote access terminal type of thing," Knipe says. Sears
plans to roll out the new system nationally over the next 18
months.

  When the tests occur, they might or might not involve the
Ardis public mobile data network. In early 1990, soon after
IBM and Motorola announced their joint venture to form Ardis,
Knipe discussed imminent plans to test that technology for
field service applications (see our sister publication,
Mobile Data Report, February 12, 1990).

                    Tests Never Took Place

  The tests never took place, however, and now it's not clear
whether Sears will use Ardis, Knipe says. The company might
instead decide to use network facilities provided by Sears
Technology Services (STS) in Schaumburg, Ill.

  STS operates the data communications network for the Sears
family of corporations, including Dean Witter, Coldwell
Banker and Allstate Insurance as well as the retail
operation. It also operates three information processing
facilities -- in Schaumburg, Dallas and Columbus, Ohio --
which serve all the Sears companies except Allstate.

  The STS data network, which is based on IBM System Network
Architecture (SNA), uses special access circuits obtained
from local telephone companies to connect locations within a
local access and transport area (LATA) to a concentrator.
From the concentrator, data are transmitted to SNA boundary
nodes over 56,000 bit/second links, and from the boundary
nodes to host machines at the information processing
facilities at 56,000 bits/second or T-1. The processing
centers are linked by DS3 facilities.

  Knipe and a spokesperson at STS both decline to specify
what kind of radio frequency network STS could make available
to link the handheld terminals to host computer systems.
Neither will they discuss the details of the system that will
be used to link the regional service call taking centers, the
three information processing centers and the local service
centers.

  It's probably safe, however, to draw some analogies between
the product service system and the system Sears employs to
take catalog orders by phone. The 10 regional facilities
through which Sears will handle service calls are the same
ones at which it already operates its telecatalog service,
Knipe says.

  Telecatalog call-takers use "dumb" desktop terminals to
interact with host systems at the data centers. There is
considerable redundancy among systems at the three centers;
it is Sears' intention to be able to route applications
traffic to any of the three centers, depending on current
traffic, to maintain the fastest possible response time, says
the STS spokesperson.

  All data used in product service applications also resides
at the three central data facilities. Service representatives
use desktop terminals to access information such as history
of service on the appliance, whether the appliance is in
warranty and whether the customer has purchased an extended
service agreement. Under the new system, that function would
shift to the 10 regional centers.

  Adding portable terminals to the picture would allow the
local centers to dispatch technicians in the field to new
jobs. It would also allow technicians to close out jobs,
exchange messages with dispatchers, access technical
information about appliances and view schematic drawings. The
latter would not be transmitted over the network, but would
be stored on "a miniaturized CD-ROM," Knipe says.

  To handle data transmissions as economically as possible,
Sears expects to use a PCradio that can communicate over a
cellular network as well as over a public or private mobile
data network, Knipe says. Brief transactions would be routed
over the mobile data network. Large files would be
transmitted over cellular. (Of course, if Sears decides to
use privately-licensed frequencies rather than a public
network, it won't have to worry about paying by the packet
for transmitting large files, as it would on Ardis.)

                         In One Box?

  IBM is working on a version of the PCradio to meet Sears'
needs, Knipe says. But it's not possible to fit the hardware
for both cellular and mobile data network transmissions into
the same portable box, says Jim Robinson, the PCradio project
coordinator at Boca Raton, Fla.

  In August, IBM announced three versions of the PCradio.
Model 001 contains a 2,400 bits/second landline modem; model
002 contains a Motorola 400i packet assembler/disassembler
for use on Motorola radio networks, including Ardis; and
model 003 includes a cellular transceiver and a 2,400
bits/second modem for transmission over cellular. The
terminal can't accommodate both the 400i and a cellular
transceiver, Robinson says.

  A customer could, however, gain the ability to transmit
over two kinds of wireless networks by sacrificing some
degree of portability. For example, a customer could use an
RS-232 link to connect the cellular PCradio to an RF modem in
a vehicle, Robinson says. This would allow the user to
transmit over Ardis or a private network only while in the
vehicle, but over cellular from anywhere.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

CONVERSION TO OMNITRACS
SIMPLE, SAYS U.S. XPRESS

  When Geostar Corp. declared bankruptcy this May, U.S.
Xpress, a full truckload (TL) carrier in Tunnel Hill, Ga.,
was left in the dark. But the firm isn't kicking itself over
the time it spent integrating the now-defunct vehicle
tracking and messaging system with its operations. Thanks to
development work it did with its Geostar vendor, Hughes
Network Systems in Germantown, Md., U.S. Xpress is now having
an easy time linking applications on its AS/400 network with
data from its new satellite communications system, says Jim
Clerc, data processing manager at the trucking company.

  U.S. Xpress signed a $5.3 million contract this summer with
San Diego-based Qualcomm Inc. for service on its Omnitracs
system. The trucking firm is currently installing Qualcomm's
vehicle tracking and two-way messaging system on its trucks
at the rate of 50/week. All 550 trucks should be equipped by
sometime in November, Clerc says.

  Under the contract, another 250 units will go to a sister
company, Southwest Motor Freight in Chattanooga, Tenn. Once
the Georgia company finishes its own implementation, it will
replace Southwest's current dispatching and management system
with its own software, including the Omnitracs interfaces.

  The contract also includes an option to purchase an
additional 1,000 Omnitracs units to install on newly-acquired
trucks in the future. U.S. Xpress used the Geostar network
for about 15 months before bankrupt Geostar pulled the plug
on its service. The trucking firm worked closely with Hughes
to provide interfaces to its own dispatching and management
software, which was developed in-house.

  U.S. Xpress uses vehicle position data to help automate
fuel tax reporting, watch for trucks that go out of route and
estimate fuel consumption, among other applications.

  If Geostar had not gone out of business, U.S. Xpress
probably would have been perfectly happy to continue using
the system from Hughes -- but no one at the company regrets
the relationship with Qualcomm either, Clerc says.

  During the weeks when the company was "dark" -- between
Geostar's death and the contract with Qualcomm -- the
advantages of vehicle tracking and satellite communications
became extremely clear, he says. The company has seen a 20
percent increase in productivity through the use of the
satellite systems, he says.

  Unlike many of Qualcomm's other customers, U.S. Xpress is
flying solo in providing links to Omnitracs. Usually,
Qualcomm gives new customers a shopping list of interfaces
and applications it can provide. Once the customer decides
what it wants, a software applications engineer employed by
Qualcomm writes the code needed to import data from the
satellite network into databases used by pre-existing
applications on the customer's host, says Jan Stevens,
manager of software engineering at Qualcomm.

  Qualcomm does a great deal of this "external applications"
work, but Clerc recently told her that U.S. Xpress wouldn't
need any outside programming help, Stevens says.

  Applications at U.S. Xpress run on a network of five IBM
AS/400s. One of the machines, whose main function is to
manage communications, is currently linked by a dial-up
connection to Qualcomm's network facilities in San Diego.
This will soon be replaced by a leased T-1 circuit, Clerc
says.

  U.S. Xpress dispatchers work on "dumb" terminals tied to
the mainframe network. The multi-session CRTs allow them to
work in three applications at once, moving from one screen to
the next without having to exit one program and enter
another.

                     Link to Southwestern

  One of the functions the dispatchers can perform is to
access Southwestern's dispatching program, running on an
AS/400 in Chattanooga. Although the two firms dispatch their
fleets separately, their computer systems are linked by high-
speed lines.

  A U.S. Xpress dispatcher with a new load to assign can
query the Southwestern database to determine whether that
company has a truck in the area that's better able to handle
the job than a truck in his own fleet. The link between the
two system leads to "better utilization of both companies'
equipment. We're competing against each other, but we're also
helping each other," Clerc says.

  As part of the integration with Omnitracs, the dispatchers'
terminals will soon give way to 80286-based IBM compatible
personal computers operating at 16 MHz, with 2 megabytes of
RAM and 50 megabyte hard disks. Having the PCs will allow
U.S. Xpress to use Qualcomm's Intracs software. Intracs
displays vehicle location data, downloaded from the host
computer to a PC, on computerized maps.

  Each dispatcher will use the map display to view the part
of the fleet for which he is responsible. Data will be
downloaded from the AS/400 at set intervals and when the
dispatcher requests an update. Ultimately, Clerc wants the
system to update positions in the PC each time they're
updated in the host. (Generally, Qualcomm transmits a
vehicle's position once each hour plus each time the driver
sends a message.)

  Although the advent of the PCs will put new processing
power on dispatchers' desks, U.S. Xpress doesn't plan to take
advantage of the added muscle when it designs applications.
The desktop machine, with its super-VGA screen, is basically
"a high-priced graphics display," Clerc says. "If the AS/400
could do it [run the map display program], we probably would
do that."

  Further enhancements to the system will follow when
Qualcomm provides U.S. Xpress with sensors, allowing it to
transmit data from engines over the satellite network. The
company currently gets some idea of how engines are
functioning by making calculations based on position data,
but that's "kind of guesswork," Clerc says.

  Eventually, rather than have its system simply display
engine conditions to dispatchers, U.S. Xpress would like the
computer to analyze the data and make decisions about how to
solve problems, Clerc says.

  Although U.S. Xpress will probably want to go its own way
in handling data from sensors, Qualcomm is preparing to
release a packaged application designed to make use of that
type of information. The Sensortracs program has been in beta
testing for some time now, says Stevens.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

SYSTEMS LINK PLANNED ROUTES
WITH ACTUAL PERFORMANCE DATA

  Like the plans of mice and men, the best-laid plans for
delivery routes sometimes go awry. A firm might invest many
thousands of dollars in a routing and scheduling package that
uses sophisticated algorithms to analyze an information-
packed database. Overnight, that software might churn out
delivery plans designed to save fuel, use equipment
efficiently and keep customers delighted. But once the trucks
hit the road, real world problems -- like traffic jams,
overheated engines and errant drivers -- can play havoc with
ideal routes.

  To help bridge the gap between plan and performance, some
delivery organizations have been merging data from their
routing systems with data from trip recording computers. The
reports they obtain in this way at the end of each driver's
run can help them identify performance problems such as
unnecessary detours and missed delivery windows.

  In addition, at least two systems on the market today can
compare real-time data from automatic vehicle location (AVL)
systems with pre-determined routes to detect problems while
trucks are still on the road. These systems can calculate the
effect that a performance lag will have on deliveries later
in the day.

  They can then plan a new route to put things back on
track -- or at least to satisfy those customers with the most
stringent delivery requirements. Using a mobile data
communications network, they can automatically transmit
revised routes to computers or terminals in the delivery
trucks.

  Routing Technology Software, Inc. (RTSI) in Vienna, Va.
announced such a package this spring. The system uses the Ram
Mobile Data network to transmit location data from a Global
Positioning System (GPS) receiver mounted on a truck to a
host computer running RTSI's Roadshow routing and scheduling
package. For transmitting new routes and other messages to
drivers, RTSI is remarketing mobile data terminals from
Racotek in Burnsville, Md. and radio frequency modems from
Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J.

  RTSI designed Roadshow primarily to address dense delivery
situations in metropolitan areas, although it also has
customers with trucks serving multiple states. The other
product that can re-route drivers on the fly, the Mobile
Communications System (MCS) from Rand McNally TDM in Skokie,
Ill., is aimed at over the road operations.

  MCS accepts location data transmitted over Qualcomm's
Omnitracs or Motorola's Coverage Plus systems (and formerly
from the now-defunct Geostar system). It compares current
locations with planned routes, alerts the dispatcher when a
truck is falling behind its estimated time of arrival (ETA)
and detects when a truck is out of route.

                       Visiting Shirley

  A driver on a long distance trip might go out of route --
using extra time and fuel -- because of road construction,
bad weather or "because he's visiting Shirley," says Henry
Feinberg, president at Rand McNally TDM. Once the problem
becomes evident, the dispatcher can have MCS produce new
instructions to put the the driver back on target. He then
transmits those directions to the mobile data terminal.

  The two systems seem to have tremendous potential for
certain delivery situations, but both are still unproven in
the marketplace. Although RTSI and Rand McNally are solidly
entrenched in the routing systems market, they're only now
starting to market their mobile communications products.
Neither has yet signed a customer for its new system.

  Are the benefits that result from comparing planned and
actual routes in real time worth the extra cost of using AVL
and mobile communications systems?

  Perhaps for some operations, but not for E & J Gallo, says
Monty Maglinte, an industrial engineer with the Modesto,
Calif. winery. Gallo is starting to explore how to combine
data from its routing and scheduling system with data from a
trip recorder. Gallo's distributorships, some of which are
corporate owned, use a routing package called Truckstops 2
from Microanalytics in Arlington, Va.

  Maglinte and his colleagues at Gallo serve as technology
consultants to the distributors. The firm is currently
investigating trip recorders they will recommend for various
functions, including comparisons of actual trips with routes
created by Truckstops 2. Like others who are combining the
two technologies, Gallo wants not only to measure how drivers
progress from stop to stop, but also to track other factors,
such as how long drivers spend at each account and how many
cases of product they unload per hour.

  If the software creates effective routes, there won't be a
lot of problems the dispatcher needs to address in real time,
Maglinte says. A truck might break down, or problems with an
account might cause a driver to spend an hour at a stop
instead of the expected 20 minutes. But those complications
don't arise often enough to merit great concern, he says.

  Technology that can produce and transmit revised routes to
drivers is great, but it's more costly than it's worth, says
Mark Whalley, transportation product manager at STSC in
Rockville, Md. STSC's routing and scheduling package, Trucks,
is designed for both local and long-haul fleets. Most of its
users are private carriers, Whalley says.

  Drivers who cover the same geographic areas day after day
know their territories well, he says. When they encounter
delays, they can figure out their own shortcuts and
alternative routes.

  There would be no extra value to getting performance data
in real time rather than at the end of a delivery run, says
Gary Strzelczyk, director of transportation at Bevaco Foods
in Pittston, Pa. Bevaco, a food service distributor, makes
runs to 13 states out of its central location. Drivers make
trips of one to four days, delivering to restaurants, health
care facilities and other institutions.

  Bevaco has used routing software from Roadnet Technologies
in Timonium, Md. for about 3-1/2 years. The firm has been
using trip recorders from Cadec Systems in Londonderry, N.H.
for the past two years. Roadnet is now working out the bugs
in an interface that allows the Roadnet system to accept data
from the Cadec and produce printed exception reports,
Strzelczyk says.

  At the end of each run, a Bevaco staffer extracts data from
the onboard computer by inserting a cartridge into the Cadec
and then uses the cartridge to upload the data to a personal
computer. Bevaco uses a floppy disk to transfer drivers' trip
reports, containing the times they arrived at and left each
stop, to a second PC running the Roadnet system.

  The customers that Roadnet serves don't need real time data
communications to monitor routes, says David Carp, national
sales manager at the Maryland firm. Unlike long-haul trucking
carriers, private delivery operations don't assign new stops
to drivers while they're on the road.

  "Usually if you're dealing with a beer distributor, wine
distributor, food service distributor, they're not getting
any orders during the day. It's all pack 'em up and send 'em
out and let 'em come back empty," he says.

                        Enough Hiccups

  For drivers who make many stops in a compact, congested
urban territory, however, the workday contains "enough
hiccups" that it pays to track their progress all the time,
says Donald Soults, president at RTSI. The routing
software/trip recorder combination is a good tool for
evaluating driver performance, but RTSI's real time system
can help companies anticipate and avoid customer service
problems, he says.

  Dispatchers can use the mobile data network to transmit
revised routes not only when drivers fall behind schedule,
but also when parts of the road system become unavailable. A
dispatcher who learns, for example, that a bridge has been
closed uses a mouse to click on the image of that bridge on
Roadshow's video map display.

  Once the bridge is selected and deleted, the software
calculates new instructions for any drivers whose routes are
affected by the change, Soults says. The dispatcher can then
transmit the changes to the drivers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

CUSTOMER GIVES THUMBS-UP
TO CLI'S FUEL DELIVERY SYSTEM

  Following a 90 day pilot on the Ram Mobile Data Network, MB
Trucking Co. in New York City is implementing mobile data
terminals in 20 of its fuel delivery trucks. MB is using the
terminals in connection with the Fueltronic 2000 dispatching
system from Carrier Logistics, Inc. (CLI) in Rye Brook, N.Y.
CLI used the recently-concluded pilot to refine the new
dispatching system before marketing it to other fuel delivery
companies.

  Fueltronic 2000 is based on the dispatching portion of
CLI's Routronic 2000 routing and dispatching package for
less-than-truckload (LTL) carriers, says Don Adams, president
at CLI. The new application, customized for fuel delivery,
was designed specifically to be used with a mobile data
network.

  MB Trucking delivers heating oil to private homes,
apartment buildings and commercial buildings in the New York
metropolitan area. Vendors that use its services include
large companies such as Texaco and Amerada Hess as well as
independent retailers. During the pilot, MB operated mobile
data terminals from Ericsson GE Mobile Data in eight of its
45 trucks. It has now decided to place terminals in the 20
trucks that do regular residential deliveries -- to one- and
two-family homes and small, brownstone-type apartment
buildings -- says Joseph Magnone, general manager at MB.

                   More Forgiving Schedules

  Because trucks servicing larger accounts make fewer stops
per day, they operate on more forgiving schedules, and MB
doesn't think they need terminals "just yet," says Magnone.
Also, because homeowners are less likely than commercial
landlords to plan for their fuel needs in advance, there are
more emergency calls for same-day service on the home
delivery side of the business, he says.

  MB has been using software from CLI for various aspects of
its operations since the mid-1970s. The trucking firm's
primary computer is a Unix-based IBM RT, which soon will be
upgraded to an IBM RS/6000, Adams says. Fueltronic is running
on an 80386-based personal computer in a multi-user Unix
environment.

  Customer orders entered on the RT are passed to the 386,
where Fueltronic routes deliveries, manages communications
with the mobile terminals and receives drivers' status
reports. When a driver reports that a delivery is complete,
the relevant data are passed back to applications on the RT.
The 386 is linked to Ram's local switch via leased line.

  MB expects to boost productivity and streamline operations
enough to make back its investment in the new system in a
year and a half, says Magnone. One area where it plans to
improve is in assigning deliveries for "will-calls" --
customers who call when they need oil, rather than scheduling
deliveries in advance.

  Using their mobile terminals, drivers will report the
amount of product dispensed at each delivery, and the system
will keep track of how much they have left. This means a
dispatcher receiving a call for same-day service will know
not only which drivers are closest to the account, but which
are carrying sufficient fuel. Based on those two factors, the
dispatcher can assign the job to the appropriate truck and,
if necessary, reassign one of that driver's other stops to a
different truck, Magnone says.

  By transmitting data on completed deliveries in real time,
MB also expects to eliminate many hours of data entry time on
the RT. Currently, with that information reaching the office
at the end of the day, during the firm's peak season the data
entry staff often must work until midnight or 1:00 a.m. to
update records. "We could be reducing our computer room time
by three or four hours per day," Magnone says.

                   More Announcements Soon

  CLI's Routronic 2000 package can be used with or without an
interface to a mobile data network. CLI is able to provide
interfaces to both the Ram and Ardis public mobile data
networks and soon expects to announce its first Routronic
customers on both, says Adams. AAA Cooper Transportation in
Dothan, Ala. implemented the system at its Atlanta terminal,
with a link via private network to Motorola terminals in its
trucks, in 1986.

  Since many of the functions in the LTL system apply to
other transportation situations as well, other specialized
products could follow Fueltronic 2000 to market. The company
recently completed a system for a client doing food
distribution and could sell that package to others, with or
without a mobile data interface, Adams says. Other niches
might include general warehousing and delivery, furniture or
appliance delivery and messenger services.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

MELARD EXPANDS PORTFOLIO
WITH SERVICE ON RAM, ARDIS

  Melard Technologies Inc., a field service systems
integrator in Yonkers, N.Y., has added communications over
Ram Mobile Data to the list of services it will offer its
customers. Melard was recently appointed a systems integrator
for the Mobitex network operated by Ram, which is based in
New York City. Melard previously announced that it had signed
a joint marketing agreement with Ardis in Lincolnshire, Ill.,
This allows Melard to offer communications over Ardis'
nationwide mobile data network.

  The commitment to wireless communications is part of an
ongoing effort by Melard to reposition its business. The
company was established in 1983 to design, manufacture and
market handheld computers with communications capabilities.
More recently, its product line has included peripheral
hardware, such as barcode readers. Melard has carved a niche
for itself especially in the telecommunications industry.

  The firm has sold about 20,000 of its ruggedized handheld
computers, which use a proprietary operating system, says
Nick Scalera, Melard's director of market development.
Melard's current plan, however, is to provide turnkey mobile
information systems -- including hardware, software,
communications, training and support -- to a variety of field
service organizations.

  Offering communications over mobile data networks "is an
integral part of our business plan and always has been," says
Scalera. The right technologies at the right prices just
haven't been available until recently, he says.

                        Stymied by PBX

  Melard's product line has always included modems for
transmitting data over the public switched telephone network.
For many of its traditional customers, these have proven a
satisfactory solution. Technicians working for the regional
Bell operating companies (RBOCs) can always plug their modems
into outdoor equipment owned by their firms. But for
technicians working on other kinds of equipment, who might
have to ask a client's permission to use a phone, or might be
stymied by a client's PBX, landline modems pose a problem,
Scalera says.

  Melard's Access II product is a 2.4 lb., clamshell-style
handheld with 56K of internal memory allocated between RAM
and ROM and up to 512K of battery-backed RAM. The supertwist
LCD is available in either 8 lines x 40 characters or 16
lines x 80 characters. The 49-key QWERTY-style keyboard
includes 16 function keys. A 300/1,200 bits/second internal
modem is included. Melard uses a removable nicad power pack
to run the computer.

                      Engineers at Work

  Melard's engineers are working on how to integrate
Motorola's 400i radio packet modem into future products,
Scalera says. The 400i is compatible with Ardis as well as
with private networks using Motorola technology.

  Work on a handheld for the Ram network will have to wait
until a portable Mobitex RF modem reaches the market.
Ericsson Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. is expected to release
an external model in the first quarter of 1992.

  In addition to its own terminals, Melard will also provide
other end-user devices, including DOS-based machines. If the
system that suits a customer's needs includes Melard's own
terminals, "that's fine; but if not, that's fine too,"
Scalera says.

  Scalera won't discuss whether Melard is working on its own
DOS-based handheld. But, "I would think at this point anyone
who would continue to develop proprietary kinds of systems
would have a very short-sighted view," he says.

  Although Melard has yet to sign a customer for service on
either Ram or Ardis, it has customers conducting feasibility
tests and has seen a great deal of interest. "All of the
people that we've been talking to, especially those that
don't have such ready access to tip and ring, have been
waiting for this kind of thing to happen," Scalera says.

  Melard isn't the only vendor of field service systems
that's convinced there's a big demand for wireless
communications. Although only the largest field service
organizations were looking at the technology in the past,
with the advent of public mobile data networks, smaller firms
are also showing interest, says Rebecca Weber, marketing
services manager at Service Automation, Inc. (SAI).

  The Houston-based firm provides management systems for
companies that service computer systems, residential
appliances, medical equipment, telecommunications equipment,
office machines and restaurant equipment.

                   Still Piloting Internally

  SAI announced a version of its Service Automation System
for use with Ardis in April. Although the company has begun
marketing the wireless application, it's still piloting the
system internally and has not yet signed a customer, Weber
says.

  SAI does have about 100 service technicians transmitting
data over Motorola's specialized mobile radio system, Privacy
Plus, which provides local communications. Although those
users will continue to be supported, SAI is no longer
marketing data over Privacy Plus because Motorola is no
longer offering it to new customers, Weber says.

  A third field service applications vendor, The Data Group
in Burlington, Mass., first developed the Remote-Plus
wireless communications module to its Field Watch system for
use with Motorola's Data Radio Network. That three-city
network was combined with IBM's nationwide Digital
Communications System -- which Motorola built -- to form
Ardis in 1990. Ardis is jointly owned by IBM and Motorola.

  Like its competitors, The Data Group has not yet signed a
customer onto Ardis. One customer has decided to use the
mobile data network but is still weighing the pros and cons
of various remote devices, says Robert Fogler, senior project
manager at The Data Group.

                 Non-"Bursty" Communications

  Some of the applications that interest field service
organizations, such as transmitting new job assignments,
closing out jobs and checking parts availability, are just
the sort of "bursty" communications for which Ram and Ardis
were designed. But other functions that service organizations
want to move into the field, such as accessing equipment and
customer history data and using expert systems to perform
diagnostics, could demand enough airtime to make public
mobile data networks an expensive choice.

  An applications designer can keep costs down by designing
data transactions that require as little network time as
possible, Fogler says. It also pays to use a computer, rather
than a "dumb" terminal, as the portable device, he says. This
allows the system to operate in a client/server mode; data
are downloaded over the network as needed, but most of the
processing occurs locally.

  Although paying by the packet to use an expert system may
be costly, a lot of customers say it's worth the price, Weber
says. "There may be enough value in what they can charge for
that [service] call that it's okay."

  Melard's tactic for dealing with large transactions will be
to provide more than one communications option in one device.
Customers using radio networks will still need landline
modems for moving large amounts of data, Scalera says. Melard
has also said it plans to offer data communications over
cellular networks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

BOSTON EDISON TO EVALUATE
STARTUP'S MOBILE DATA SYSTEM

  Boston Edison Co. is about to begin a small pilot to
evaluate the use of mobile data in maintaining its electrical
distribution network. After running this "prototype system"
for a few months, the utility will use the knowledge it gains
to write a detailed request for proposals (RFP) for a larger-
scale system, says Larry Dexter, senior electrical engineer
for communications, who works in Boston Edison's Waltham,
Mass. office.

  Using hardware and software from Metric Systems Corp., a
small startup in Acton, Mass., the utility will download work
orders overnight to Zenith laptop computers in trucks used by
line repair crews in Waltham. During the day, repair crews
will use the system to request more information about their
assignments, report on their status, close out completed jobs
and receive assignments for emergency work.

  Currently, field technicians spend 15-30 minutes each
morning picking up computer printouts that list their
assignments for the day. By having the assignments waiting
for crews on their laptops, Boston Edison hopes to get a jump
on the work day, Dexter says. Also, by automating the way in
which crews report on work they've completed, the utility
company hopes to cut the time they spend reporting verbally
to the supervisor at the end of the shift, he says.

  Boston Edison will be using Mavric 2000, a wireless data
communications system provided by Metric Systems. In its
basic form, Mavric 2000 consists of: 1. a base station
controller, containing a radio, an RF modem and interface
circuitry, 2. several remote controllers, which are similar
to the base station but are housed in more rugged boxes, and
3. communications software. Mavric permits both two-way
messaging (host-to-remote or remote-to-remote) and bulk file
transfer.

  "Messaging," in the vocabulary of Metric, includes
interacting in real time with a host system as well as
transmitting text messages, says William Brown, president of
the Acton firm. It also includes completing fill-in-the-blank
forms and transmitting the contents of those forms to another
computer on the network.

  In addition to providing the basic package, Metric is
working with Boston Edison to develop the utility's
application. One part of the project is designing forms the
supervisor will use to transmit work orders at night. Working
on an 80386 personal computer, the supervisor will obtain
data on pending jobs from the utility's work management
system, which is used to schedule jobs and control equipment
inventory. Metric uses a 3270 terminal interface to connect
the PC to the IBM mainframe running the management system,
Brown says.

  Once the supervisor sets priorities and assigns jobs to
work crews, the Mavric system will automatically "dial" into
the laptop on each truck and download the appropriate work
order file. The form describing each job will consist of a
section in fixed format and one in free text, Brown says.

  Data will be transmitted over privately-licensed channels
in the 484 MHz-487 MHz range, says Dexter. In addition to
detailing the work to be done, the forms will outline the
materials needed. Once they have their assignments, crews
will stop in the parts room to stock their trucks before
heading out.

  Boston Edison chose to download the large work order files
at night to help minimize daytime data traffic on the
channels, which are used for voice as well, Dexter says.
Crews will also use the radios in the Mavric system in place
of their regular voice radios during the pilot. Voice mode
automatically overrides data whenever a user picks up the
radio's microphone and starts talking, Dexter says.

  Concern about boosting traffic on voice channels will keep
Boston Edison from considering mobile data for dispatching
workers for another operation -- customer service -- in the
near future, Dexter says. Users of wireless data networks
often report that traffic drops when they replace voice
communications with more spectrally-efficient digital
messages. But since the channels are licensed primarily for
voice, there's a limit to how much data the Federal
Communications Commission will allow the utility to transmit,
he says.

  Boston Edison might consider the technology for customer
service, however, after it switches its mobile communications
to an 800 MHz trunked network in 1993 or 1994, Dexter says.
In addition to Metric, the utility plans to investigate
vendors of mobile data systems that can operate on trunked
networks.

  The pilot with Metric is Boston Edison's first time out
with a mobile data network, Dexter says. The company had
investigated the possible use of conventional mobile data
terminals in the past but found they didn't have enough
storage to handle the volume of data it wanted to transmit.
Boston Edison hasn't worked with any of the established
utility system vendors -- such as TTI Technologies and Dowty
Control Technologies -- that can provide dispatching systems
based on intelligent mobile computers, he says.

  Although the pilot won't begin for a couple of weeks, the
vendor and customer already anticipate a second stage that
would allow Boston Edison to attach diagrams to work orders,
Brown says. Computerized graphics representing sections of
the electrical grid would be stored locally on the laptop.
When a supervisor entered a work order on the PC, the system
would determine what diagrams the line worker needed. Then it
would remotely check the laptop to make sure it contained
current versions of the necessary graphics.

  If the laptop needed an update, the PC (now linked to
computer-aided design workstations as well as to the
mainframe and mobile data network) would obtain the necessary
graphics and transmit them along with the text portion of the
work order, Brown says. The details of how this would operate
have not all been worked out.

  Metric plans to use its work with Boston Edison, and with
other early clients, to develop a variety of customizable
hardware and software packages that could be sold to other
organizations. The firm is concentrating primarily on the
utility and public safety markets.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

  Speedwing Mobile Communications, a division of British

  Speedwing Mobile Communications, a division of British
Airways, has signed a strategic vendor agreement with
Ericsson GE Mobile Data to market wireless data applications,
using Mobitex networks, to the airline industry. Possible
applications include linking roving personnel, such as
fueling crews, baggage handlers and catering staff, to host
computers.

  An article in the September issue of the British
publication, Mobile & Cellular, describes how British Airways
is using Ram Mobile Data's U.K. network at Heathrow Airport.
Ericsson GE will provide Mobitex modems and other hardware
for the systems.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego has filed a registration

  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego has filed a registration
statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission
proposing an initial public offering of 3,500,000 shares of
common stock. The company plans to offer 2,800,000 shares in
the United States and 700,000 shares internationally. The
offerings will be managed by Lehman Brothers; Bear, Stearns &
Co. Inc. and Alex. Brown and Sons Inc.

  Separately, Qualcomm announced a version of its Qtracs
software for IBM and IBM-compatible mainframe computers.
Qualcomm introduced Qtracs for IBM AS/400, System/36 and
System/38 machines last year. With Qtracs, trucking company
dispatchers can use Qualcomm's Omnitracs system to view
vehicle locations and communicate with drivers on terminals
linked to their regular host computers, rather than on a
personal computer dedicated to Omnitracs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
October 2, 1991

  Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. and Racotek in

  Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. and Racotek in
Burnsville, Minn. have signed an agreement to co-market
Racotek's DOS-based mobile data terminals for use on Mobitex
networks. Ericsson will supply vehicular radio modems for
connecting the terminals to the network, as well as marketing
and technical support.

  Racotek is already providing terminals to Toronto-based
Camco, a field service organization operating on the Rogers
Cantel Mobitex network; and to the Hoboken, N.J. Fire Dept.,
which recently signed an agreement for service on the Ram
Mobile Data network. In addition, Routing Technology Software
Inc. in Vienna, Va. is including Racotek terminals in a
system, using Ram's network, that integrates automatic
vehicle location, computerized routing and wireless
messaging.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>