
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-309</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi71.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003908 text/html 49273
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:36:42 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:20 GMT
Content-length: 49084
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi71.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Seafirst Bank Expands Its ATM Network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>EBT Ground Rules Elicit Some Boos From The Bleachers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(419 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Another Internet Company Goes Public</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>A New Year's Revolution In ATM Pricing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Deluxe Corp.  Sneezes, Deluxe Data Catches Cold</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>The Quest Begins For A National EBT Network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1414 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Visa Aims For Debit Summit From Plus' Denver Base</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(886 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>When It Comes To ATM Deposits, Money Talks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>First Fidelity Gets A Charge Out Of Balance Inquiries</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(310 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>What's An ATM?  'Just A Vending Machine That Dispenses Cash'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(415 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>EFTA Tries Again To Accelerate Into The Fast Lane</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(965 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Seafirst Bank Expands Its ATM Network


Seafirst Bank, a Seattle-based subsidiary of Bank of America, has won a
contract to install 140 ATMs in Safeway convenience stores in Washington,
Idaho and Oregon.  The deal will increase the bank's ATM base 19% to 878
units.  Installation will begin January 15 and is expected to be completed in
90 days.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

EBT Ground Rules Elicit Some Boos From The Bleachers


The electronic benefits council agreed to a number of rules in principle at
its December meeting.  The rules are circulating among the council's 38
members and will be released to the public by March.  Recommended rules
include:

* Printing balances on receipts.  Terminal drivers must print a recipient's
account balance on the transaction receipt for approved food stamp purchases,
food stamp refunds and when a food stamp purchase is denied due to
insufficient funds.  Printing a balance is optional for cash benefits at the
point-of-sale.  Terminal drivers aren't required to print balances under
commercial rules.

* Record retention.  Operating rules should reflect commercial standards and
require issuing or acquiring financial institutions to keep transaction
records for at least two years.  Food stamp records must be kept three years
by issuing institutions.

* ATM transactions.  Recipients should be able to download at least $20 and a
maximum of no less than $200 from ATMs.  Most EFT networks currently provide
minimum and maximum withdrawal requirements.

* Technical specifications.  Participating cards must comply with Independent
Sales Organization and American National Standard Institute operating
standards.  Primary account numbers must be displayed on the face of the
cards, and a signature panel or signature image is required.

* Settlement procedures.  Settlement procedures will mirror commercial
standards where settlement takes place on a daily basis.

* Scrip machines (under review).  Scrip machines can be used for dispensing
benefits as long as they're treated as point-of-sale terminals and not ATMs.
With scrip machines, recipients get vouchers that can be redeemed for cash
from a store clerk.

Tom McLaughlin, vice president with Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data, takes issue
with several rules, including the option of printing account balances on
receipts for cash benefits at the point-of-sale.  "If recipients don't have
balances on receipts, we could see more denials and help desk calls," he says.
"Making it optional could run up the cost of EBT."


Kansas And Illinois Announce EBT Deals

The Midwest is the latest hotbed for electronic benefits transfer programs.
Late last year, the Kansas Department of Social Services awarded a seven-year,
$11.6 million EBT contract to Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems.  The
program will begin in Wichita in July, with a statewide rollout to be
completed by July 1997.

In other EBT developments, the Illinois Department of Public Aid has selected
Texas-based Transactive Corp.  to negotiate a five-year EBT contract.  The
program will initially serve 65,000 households and expand to 500,000
households statewide.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Another Internet Company Goes Public


CyberCash Inc.  is going public.  The Reston, Va.-based developer of
encryption software for financial transactions over the Internet filed with
the Securities and Exchange Commission late last year for an initial public
offering of two million shares of common stock.  Underwriters will have the
option to purchase an additional 300,000 shares.  The estimated price of the
stock will be $15 to $17 per share.

CyberCash plans to spend the estimated $34 million in proceeds on new product
development and on marketing two new services, Secure Check and Coin Check.
Secure Check will be the equivalent of an electronic certified check, while
Coin Check will encrypt small denomination payments over the Internet.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

A New Year's Revolution In ATM Pricing


There's no question how much a can of soup is worth on the free market.  The
price is clearly marked, and if it's too high the grocer will soon know
because his shelves will remain full.

That's not been the case for the price of using an ATM in most areas, as
networks rules have prevented ATM owners from charging the consumer directly
for getting cash.  But the industry appears poised on the brink of a
fundamental shift in the pricing of ATMs as major networks relax their
surcharging bans and allow market forces to determine the price of a service
many consumers have come to view as a necessity.

And early returns from markets that allow surcharging suggest consumers may
value the convenience of ATMs more than many in the industry believed.

The momentum toward surcharging has grown in recent years as 14 states passed
laws that allowed surcharging, overriding the restrictions of both the
Visa/Plus and MasterCard/Cirrus national ATM networks.  While surcharging
spread rapidly in those states, many of them heavily touristed areas in the
South and West, the Plus and Cirrus rules effectively prevented the practice
from spreading to the major population centers of the Northeast, Midwest and
West Coast.

The big breakthrough came last fall when Plus announced it would allow
surcharging at ATMs bearing its logo beginning April 1.  Last month, the
largest of the regional networks that still banned surcharging, Delaware-based
MAC, announced it, too, would allow the practice on April 1.

Industry participants now expect Cirrus and other major regional networks to
fall into line.  "I would imagine it would be a foregone conclusion," says
Charles Raphael, first vice president of electronic banking at First Chicago
NBD.  "In order to hold their members, and obviously the big deployers of
ATMs, I don't think they would have a choice."  A Cirrus spokesperson says,
"It is very likely the Cirrus board will take up this issue at its next
meeting, which probably will be in March."

With Plus and many of the larger regionals allowing surcharging, the holdouts
are left in a position many view as untenable.  If Cirrus were to maintain its
ban, an ATM deployer in California, for instance, could place a machine with
the logos of Star System, which allows surcharging, and Plus, and serve the
big majority of consumers.

Regionals Feel the Heat

And if Cirrus does allow surcharging, the pressure will shift to regional
networks like Virginia-based Most that maintain the ban.  Because a Most
member must put its ATMs into the network, it would not be able to surcharge,
while a competitor that did not belong to the network could surcharge on a
machine bearing the Plus and Cirrus logos and accept most ATM cards.

Rather than put its members at a disadvantage, the Most board will reconsider
its policy at a meeting later this month, says David A.  O'Connor, president
of the network.  "We see the pattern," he says.  "The forces of the
marketplace seem to be driving the industry towards surcharges.  I think
that's a fairly strong movement that we probably won't resist."  Executives at
Michigan-based Magic Line, the seventh-largest network, and Missouri-based
BankMate, the ninth-largest, say they, too, may have to reconsider their
surcharging bans.

New Rules

Some networks whose owners oppose surcharging, such as Chicago-based Cash
Station, may hold the line for a while, says George Albright, president of the
Atlanta-based Speer & Associates consulting firm.  "But, over time, as the
ownership changes as a result of mergers, and banks come in that are
surcharging in other regions, you're not going to just be able to say, 'Our
rules don't allow it.' They'll say, 'Let's change the rules,'" Albright says.

Why are more banks anxious to surcharge now?  Industry participants offer many
explanations, but among the most common is the growing pressure on banks to
generate increased non-interest income.  "People see a lot of untapped
potential in ATMs," says Raphael.  "The hardware and the switching system are
there, so the additional revenue you can produce off that network is almost
pure profit."  Another banker who requested anonymity observes, "For ATM
deployers, this is a Christmas present of enormous potential."

Off-Premise Rivalry

At the same time, non-banking companies, such as Texas-based Electronic Data
Systems, and Affiliated Computer Services, have been moving aggressively into
off-premise locations.  Banks, which enjoy low maintenance costs and no rental
fees when placing ATMs in their own lobbies, have moved more slowly because
they were not certain they could generate enough revenue from off-premise
locations to justify the investment, observes David Baker, director of
marketing at Fujitsu-ICL Systems Inc., an ATM manufacturer.

"But," Baker adds, "they don't want to see all the locations snapped up by
nonbank deployers.  Bigger banks are saying, 'Give us the opportunity to
surcharge, lower the transaction volume needed for profitability, and we're
going to go head-to-head with ACS and EDS.'" As an example of that approach,
Baker points to NationsBank's outbidding EDS and ACS in August for the
contract to place ATMs in 661 Stop-N-Go convenience stores owned by National
Convenience Stores in Texas, a state that allows surcharging.

The successful implementation of surcharging by some major banks also has
influenced their peers, says Albright.  Among large banks, he says, the
pioneer was Bank One of Texas, which began the practice in 1993, and led the
way in raising the typical surcharge in the state from 25 cents to 50 cents.
"They showed they could do it and not get hurt in the marketplace," he says.
"All of a sudden the whole state of Texas was charging and the price went up
to 50 cents."

Many Will Pay

Albright says developments in Texas and other states suggest consumers are
willing to pay more for ATM convenience than they were being charged.  He
points out that at the same time as surcharges were being imposed in Texas,
issuing banks raised the foreign fees they charge their customers who use ATMs
not owned by the bank.  "The typical foreign fee went from 50 cents to $1.25,
and some banks are charging $1.50," Albright says.  With Bank One and other
Texas institutions raising their surcharges to $1 in recent months, many
consumers now are paying more than $2 to use an ATM, counting both foreign
fees and surcharges.  "And exactly the same thing has happened in the state of
Georgia just from March 1995 to the end of the year," says Albright.

Is the price too high?  Apparently not for many consumers, based on network
reports of only temporary declines in transaction volumes.  Network officials
in Alabama reported an initial drop in volume of 8% and in Texas of 15%,
Albright says, "but everyone tells me after six to nine months it comes back."

And that occurs despite the spread of surcharging in most cases to include
many machines on bank premises as well as off.  Network executives say 75% of
ATMs surcharge in Alabama, 60% in Texas and more than half in Utah.

Ultimate Test

Nonetheless, some believe surcharging will spread more slowly in the major
Northern cities.  Lynch says some NYCE members may not surcharge at all in
hopes of pressuring competitors to refrain from the practice.  "There are many
large organizations that have the point of view the revenue isn't worth the
risk to the customer relationship," he says.

Albright and Lynch both warn that consumer advocates and regulators are more
likely to raise objections in the Northeast than elsewhere.  And, Albright
adds, "the New York press will jump on it, whether the rest of the country is
doing it or not."

With all those factors, he says, the Big Apple may be the ultimate test for
surcharging.  "If the same thing happens in New York that has happened in
Georgia and Texas," he says, "then surcharging will have become the norm."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Deluxe Corp.  Sneezes, Deluxe Data Catches Cold


When a company's board of directors holds a special meeting just before
Christmas to implement a major restructuring, subsidiaries can expect big
changes early in the New Year.

And that's what's happened at Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems, whose
president, James E.  McGowan, was relieved of his duties last week and placed
on special assignment, reporting to J.  A.  "Gus" Blanchard, president and CEO
of Deluxe Corp., the Minneapolis-based corporate parent.  John B.  Benton,
chairman and CEO of the Benton International consulting firm which has been
involved in the Deluxe Corp.  restructuring, was named interim CEO, an
assignment he says will last two to three months.

The moves follow Deluxe Corp.'s announcement of the closing of several
check-printing plants and unveiling of a plan for growth that highlighted new
products from Deluxe Data.  "I felt this major expansion required new
leadership to move us to this higher plane," Blanchard said in a statement.

Industry sources say Deluxe Data is at a crossroads, having lost major
processing contracts in recent years at the NYCE and Yankee 24 regional EFT
networks, which took their processing in-house, and facing aggressive
competition from Electronic Data Systems, which now processes for two of the
10 largest regional networks, Cash Station and The Exchange.  They add the
company's major investments in electronic benefits transfer have yet to pay
off.

Deluxe Data also has lagged in offering newer technology, such as home
banking, Internet access and prepaid phone cards.  While Deluxe Data is
expected to unveil a home banking and bill payment product soon, they trail
competitors like EDS, Servantis and FIserv, says Richard Yanak, president of
the New Jersey-based NYCE network.

McGowan, who came to Deluxe Data 28 months ago, after many years at IBM, may
lack the EFT experience needed to chart a new course for the company, says
Donald Mauer, senior vice president of Gensar, a Pennsylvania-based processor.
"What's required here is not just broad management skills," he says.  "You
need someone who can define what this company's going to be."  Adds Yanak,
Benton's interim role "may signal there isn't anyone inside the company that's
likely to get the job."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

The Quest Begins For A National EBT Network


In the early days of ATMs, customers could only use their cards in machines
owned by their own bank.  To give the ATMs more value, financial institutions
formed shared EFT networks so that customers could use their cards in machines
owned by other banks, including those in different parts of the country.  The
networks then teamed up with retailers to let customers use their cards to
make purchases at the point-of-sale.

Now a second electronic payment evolution is underway.  But rather than create
more national ATM and POS networks, coalitions are forming for interstate EBT.

State governments involved in electronic benefits transfer programs are
teaming up with other industry participants to let welfare recipients receive
benefits at ATMs and POS terminals across state lines.  While some states have
already rolled out EBT programs, recipients from one state usually can't
receive benefits in other states because the programs don't have common
operating rules.  The National Automated Clearing House Association's
electronic benefits council is trying to change that by developing common
rules.

The electronic benefits council, a multi-industry trade group that includes
state governments, retailers, third-party processors and EFT networks, adopted
a set of standards in principle late last year (see sidebar).  The rules
represent the first major action of the council created in September in
collaboration with the U.S.  Department of Treasury and the Federal EBT Task
Force, a federal agency that oversees EBT implementation.  The council also is
negotiating with the board of directors of the Quest shared EFT network to use
the Quest logo as a national mark for EBT cards.

Common Rules

"Rather than have 50 states develop their own systems individually, we're
trying to lay the framework in advance so everyone knows what to expect," says
Helena Sims, senior director of the council.  While states with current EBT
projects can negotiate with EBT contractors in other states to let recipients
receive benefits across state lines, the process is often burdensome and
time-consuming, she says.  And because most EBT contracts have a five-year
limit, the agreements have to be constantly renegotiated with new contractors.

Some industry participants, however, believe the council faces a tough task in
creating national operating rules that all EBT participants can agree on.
"The effort is noble, but it's as unattainable as worldwide peace," says
Stephen Cole, president of the Chicago-based Cash Station EFT network.  "Every
ATM network has different rules depending on state and local laws, and coming
up with one set is very difficult.  They said they're going to have the rules
ready by March, but I'd be surprised if they have them out by December."

Skeptics say rules developed by shared EFT networks and state and federal
governments already do the job.  The contradiction of existing rules is one
area of concern.  If an ATM overdispenses $10, for example, a network and bank
are permitted under network rules to reconcile the transaction without the
consumer's knowledge.  With food stamps, however, it is considered an adverse
action under federal law to debit a recipient's account without notice.

"The council is addressing issues that are covered by network, state and
federal regulations, and we're concerned about duplication and conflict," says
Thomas McLaughlin, vice president of Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems.  "If
there are EBT policies that are contrary, who will arbitrate the disputes?"

James McCarthy, executive vice president with the San Diego-based Star System
EFT network and chairman of the electronic benefits council, says the issue of
account adjustments can be resolved.  "As a network, I operate a lot of
gateways with people who have different rules than me.  They're not
conflicting, just different.  We're working with state and federal personnel,
as well as networks and financial institutions, to come up with procedures."

Advantage To Retailers

Retailers stand to gain from the electronic benefits council's efforts.
"Retailers who participate in EBT programs should benefit from the efforts of
the EBT council," says David Bragin, treasurer of Florida-based Winn Dixie
supermarkets.  "If the states adopt these national operating rules, any EBT
cardholder or authorized retailer will be able to conduct EBT transactions no
matter which government entity issued the benefits or in which state the
retailer operates."  Winn Dixie has approximately 1,175 stores in 14 states.

While each state has the option to follow the operating rules, the eight-state
Southern Alliance of States and seven-state Northeast Coalition are
incorporating the rules into their contracts.  The two programs comprise
nearly 50% of all welfare recipients in the U.S.  The rules must comply with
federal requirements that EBT programs not be more expensive to run than
current paper-based systems, says Dan Berry, program manager with New York
State.  "The bottom line is these systems have to be cost-effective," he says.

Although welfare benefits-such as food stamps and Aid to Families with
Dependent Children-are usually redeemed in the state where the recipient
lives, the U.S.  government also plans to use EBT programs to distribute
benefits to a population that is more likely to travel, such as Social
Security recipients.  "These programs will eventually deliver much more than
just welfare benefits," Berry says.  Additional benefits may include military
and railroad pensions and unemployment insurance.

To let consumers know where they can receive their benefits, the council is
negotiating with the owners of the Kentucky-based Quest shared EFT network to
use the Quest logo as a national mark for EBT cards.  The mark would be
displayed on cards, ATM and POS terminals and at merchant locations.  The
Quest network dissolved in July, 1995, after its members migrated to the
Delaware-based MAC regional EFT network.

Buying A Logo

Using an existing logo is cheaper than developing a new logo, Sims says.  "If
you start from scratch, there's a lot of paperwork and forms you must fill out
in developing a logo," she says.  The council hopes to complete the
negotiations by the end of January, she adds.  The logo would be purchased
with funds collected from member dues.  Terms of the deal, including what the
council will pay to use the logo, were not revealed.

In the event the deal does go through, the Quest EBT network would be similar
to the Plus and Cirrus national ATM networks, McCarthy says.  If a recipient
from New York uses his card at a Quest ATM in Florida, for example, the
transaction would be sent to the government-designated issuer in the Southern
Alliance of States who would route the transaction to the Northeast Coalition
for authorization.  The transaction would then be switched by a regional
network or other entity designated by the prime contractor in the Southern
Alliance of States.  Supermarket chains with a presence in both EBT programs
may opt to switch transactions themselves, McCarthy adds.  "We're trying to
allow as much flexibility as possible," he says.

And the state coalitions should bring sizeable volume to regional EFT
networks.  That's particularly true with the Northeast Coalition.  "By
bringing welfare recipients into the EFT networks, we're bringing a huge
volume to the market that was never there before," says William Kilmartin,
Massachusetts comptroller and vice chairman of the electronic benefits
council.  The Northeast coalition, for example, will bring approximately two
million new cardholders into the New Jersey-based NYCE shared EFT network, he
says.  By providing each cardholder with four transactions per month, the
coalition could bring NYCE at least 96 million new transactions each year.
"If [NYCE] is paid per transaction, and we double their volume, it's extremely
significant for them," he says.  The Northeast Coalition plans to announce the
winning bidder later this month.

Some industry participants are concerned the council could impose a licensing
fee on financial institutions and merchants who use the logo.  Elliot McEntee,
NACHA president, says some form of fee may be imposed, but it won't be large
enough to inhibit participation.  "There may be a charge to cover the costs of
distributing the logo, but it's not a money-making venture," he says.

While the electronic benefits council faces a tough task developing rules that
everyone can agree on, most industry participants believe there should be a
national set of operating rules as EBT takes on a national flavor.  "If we
take on a national approach, instead of each state building its own EBT
system, it'll be much easier to bring on additional benefits," Kilmartin says.
"Once we figure out a common ground, it'll be cheaper and better for
everyone."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Visa Aims For Debit Summit From Plus' Denver Base


His first priority after taking the helm of the Plus System, says David A.
Brooks, was to calm fears of wholesale changes at Visa's national ATM network.
But the rest of his to-do list includes plenty of change, including a broader
role for Visa in debit processing and more prominent use of the Visa name at
ATMs.

Much will stay the same, however, says Brooks, 55, who was named acting
president and CEO last month.  He replaces Denny D.  Dumler who resigned to
head up TransAlliance, a new joint venture between Electronic Data Systems and
the owners of the Washington-based Exchange regional ATM network.  The Plus
board is expected to ratify Brooks' appointment later this month.

For one thing, he has assured Plus members, the team running the network will
remain in place.  "They were concerned Visa not do anything that would give
people concern for their futures and disrupt operations by having defections,"
says Brooks.  Nor are there plans to move the network out of Denver, Brooks
says.

Remote Control

Brooks' own home base and responsibilities also change little.  He remains at
Visa headquarters in San Francisco and retains the title of executive vice
president of market development at Visa U.S.A., a job he took two years ago
after holding retail banking and administrative posts at First National Bank
of Chicago, Crocker Bank and Citicorp.

Some observers wonder how effectively Brooks can guide Plus from afar, as well
as about his limited EFT experience.  "He's a very capable man, but he's not
an EFT guy," says one regional network executive.  "And Brooks remaining in
San Francisco doesn't sound like a strong management move for Plus."

Brooks emphasizes the experience of the Plus team resident in Denver, led by
Ron Reed, senior vice president, as well as the benefit of his remaining in
San Francisco.  "My value is integrating Plus into the mainstream of Visa," he
says.  And, he adds, a major focus of Plus will remain a project that is well
underway:  the deployment of a new debit processing platform of Tandem
Himalaya computers and Deluxe Data Systems software that Visa has installed in
Denver at a cost of "multiple millions of dollars."

The new platform will ultimately support all of Visa's debit products,
including Plus, the Interlink point-of-sale network and the Visa check
off-line debit card.  While Plus is not scheduled to move to the new platform
until 1997, the first Visa check customer will go live by February, according
to Reed.

That will put the Visa/Plus data center into competition with third parties
that handle the bulk of processing for Visa check, as well as for MasterCard's
MasterMoney off-line debit card.  And that's just the beginning of the
competition they'll be getting from Visa, as Brooks says the new platform has
the capacity to offer processing services to regional networks, which would
pit Visa against major processors such as Deluxe Data and EDS, as well as some
of the regional networks themselves.

Brooks calls this a step towards greater EFT efficiency.  "As an industry," he
says, "we have to get rid of redundancies in systems and networks.  Our
strategy will be to offer this functionality to our customers at the lowest
possible cost."

Some network executives applaud the effort.  "The financial industry needs to
respond with processing capability that's superior to what nonbanks can
offer," says Richard Lyons, chief operating officer of Virginia-based Most.

Others point out competition is keen in EFT processing.  "How successful
they'll be depends a great deal on what they offer and at what price," says
Richard P.  Yanak, president of New Jersey-based NYCE.  "That's become a very
low-margin business because competition has driven down the price."

While Visa tried unsuccessfully to enter the processing arena in the early
'90s, several observers say they're not surprised by Visa's new foray into EFT
processing or MasterCard's decision last year to acquire the BankMate regional
network and bring in-house processing for its Cirrus national ATM network

"MasterCard and Visa have got a lock on the credit card side of electronic
payments, but not on debit," says a regional network executive.  "If they can
get a lot of transactions running through their computers they'll have a
toehold that would be difficult to pry loose."

While the battle for transaction volume rages behind the scenes, Brooks says
there may be more visible changes in the Plus logo at the ATM.  He says Visa
is "about 75% of the way through a major brand study" that indicates Plus is
increasingly known by its target audience of people who travel, but still has
nowhere near the recognition of Visa.  While he does not anticipate dropping
the Plus logo, he says he could envision a brand name such as "Plus by Visa"
that would emphasize the connection.

A final change Brooks foresees is the completion in November of Visa's
acquisition of Plus, a deal announced in 1993.  The price was not disclosed.

While some insiders have wondered whether Visa, with its credit card emphasis,
would make the final payment, Brooks says the sale will go through.  "We've
got a total debit strategy, and I don't know why we would want to back away
from that," he says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

When It Comes To ATM Deposits, Money Talks


For many consumers, withdrawing cash from an ATM is as commonplace as buying a
pack of gum from a convenience store.  By swiping a debit card and entering a
personal identification number, consumers can access funds and be on their
way.

But while financial institutions have succeeded in getting people to use ATMs
to make withdrawals, convincing them to make deposits is another story.
According to a national survey in late 1994 by Atlanta-based Synergistics
Research Corp., 92% of 613 ATM users made cash withdrawals at ATMs, while only
32% of the consumers used ATMs to make deposits.

Industry insiders point to several factors discouraging consumers from making
ATM deposits, ranging from fears a check will collect dust in the bottom of a
terminal to safety concerns about filling out a deposit envelope at a poorly
lit machine.  Worries that a deposit won't be promptly credited-or credited at
all-also contributes to consumer unease.  The ATM deposit slip does little to
calm those fears, they say.

"Many consumers have a fear of the unknown-depositing checks at ATMs is
something they haven't done," says Anne Morgan Moore, Synergistics Research
Corp.  president.

Financial institutions have used a number of strategies to overcome those
fears, ranging from financial incentives that reward ATM deposits to $3 fees
for each teller transaction.  Other institutions have deployed
advanced-function terminals that lift an image of a deposited check onto the
ATM screen to let consumers know their check isn't falling into a bottomless
pit.

Financial Incentives

Cleveland-based KeyCorp is using both financial incentives and penalties to
encourage ATM deposits.  KeyCorp introduced a checking account late last year
that pays consumers 25 cents for each ATM deposit.  The KeyMoney Access
account pays consumers up to $1 a month, requires no minimum balance and
carries no fees.  Consumers are charged $1.50 for in-branch deposits.  The
account is available in Ohio, Michigan and Indiana and will be rolled out to
all KeyCorp branches by March.

Larry Peterson, KeyCorp senior vice president, says the bank saves
approximately 50 cents on each ATM deposit, excluding the price of the
machines.  Consumers that make four ATM deposits per month are paid a maximum
of $1, netting the bank around $1 in profit.  "This is not a tremendous money
maker," he says.  "We're paying customers to learn about the functionality of
ATMs and get comfortable with the machines."

The KeyMoney Access account isn't the first time KeyCorp has used incentives
to change consumer behavior.  The bank launched three 60-day marketing
campaigns in the fall of 1994 that rewarded a consumer with $5 if three out of
five monthly ATM transactions were deposits.  The bank also enrolled consumers
in a $10,000 sweepstakes for every ATM transaction and gave consumers $10 to
sign up for various direct-deposit accounts.  The promotions took place in
Syracuse, N.Y; Columbus, Ohio; and Seattle, Wash.

Easy To Use

Although Peterson was unable to reveal how many deposits were migrated from
tellers to ATMs, the bank issued eight times more ATM cards during the market
launch in Columbus than the comparable 60 days in 1994, he says.  KeyCorp also
opened eight times more new direct-deposit accounts, he adds.

But while KeyCorp was successful with its campaigns, other banks haven't been
so lucky.  First Chicago ran a two-month promotion in late 1994 where
consumers were given $2 tokens they could redeem by making ATM deposits.
While the bank saw a modest increase in ATM deposits during the promotion,
those deposits gradually subsided during the following four months.  "People
eventually went back to the old way of doing things," says Tom Tremain, First
Chicago vice president.

First Chicago has since introduced a plan in which consumers with accounts
requiring no minimum balance are charged $3 for each teller visit.  Customers
with a $250 minimum balance or more have one free teller visit per week, and
customers with a $250 minimum balance and direct deposit have six free teller
visits per month.

Positive Results

And the results have been impressive.  First Chicago witnessed a 125% increase
in ATM deposits during the first four months after the changes were made.  "We
saw a huge increase in deposits, and a corresponding decrease in teller
transactions," Tremain says.  The bank saw a net loss of customers for a few
months, but now is signing up more new customers than it is losing, he says.

But some banks, including Florida-based Barnett Banks, prefer education and
incentives to penalties.  The bank is considering several strategies at its
Tampa and Ft.  Lauderdale branches over the next few months, including
in-branch demonstrations on how to make ATM deposits and $1 coupons that
customers can redeem by making ATM deposits.

"I don't like First Chicago's and KeyCorp's negative approach-you don't take a
customer and slap them on the hand," says Len Ferman, Barnett Banks' director
of self-service banking.  Such pricing structures can give the impression a
bank is only concerned about its bottom line, he adds.  "No one knows what the
long-term ramifications are for charging customers for things they expect to
be free," he says.

Other institutions have opted for high-technology hardware to encourage ATM
deposits.  InterBold and AT&T Global Information Solutions both offer
check-imaging ATMs that display checks on the ATM screen.  InterBold also
offers an ATM that images a copy of the check onto the ATM receipt to give
consumers an extra layer of comfort.

"The ATMs have eliminated the black-hole syndrome," says Robert Morris, vice
president of electronic banking with Bank of America Arizona, which is
piloting six check-imaging machines in Phoenix.  The terminals have made a
modest impact on increasing ATM deposits, he says.  The machines have one
drawback, however.  Because the ATMs can accept checks without envelopes,
checks that are wrinkled are sometimes rejected.  "In some situations, the
teller will have to cash the check," he says.

Some bankers, however, say check-imaging ATMs are too costly.  The ATMs cost
up to $50,000, well above the $25,000 price tag on standard deposit-accepting
ATMs.  "With the results we've seen [from price incentives], the imaging
technology is way too expensive for the added value you get," Tremain says.

Other bankers believe direct deposit is the way to go.  Joseph Pendleton,
senior vice president with Reading, Pa.-based Meridian Bank, says processing
direct-deposit checks via the automated clearing house is less expensive than
processing deposits through ATMs and tellers.  It costs around two cents to
process direct-deposit checks versus 85 cents for an ATM deposit and $1 for a
branch deposit, Pendleton says.

"People are resistant to making deposits at ATMs, and you can spend a lot of
money trying to change their ways," Pendleton says.  "The returns aren't as
great as spending money to convince people to use direct deposit."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

First Fidelity Gets A Charge Out Of Balance Inquiries


While financial institutions are trying to get consumers to make deposits at
ATMs, one bank is focusing on moving balance inquiries to machines.

Beginning Feb.  1, New Jersey-based First Fidelity Bancorp will charge
customers whose deposits fall below minimum balance requirements 75 cents for
balance inquiries from tellers and 50 cents for balance inquiries on a
toll-free number.  Customers receive two free inquiries per month from tellers
and two from the voice response number.  Senior citizen accounts and accounts
with high minimum balances will not be affected.

The aim is to migrate branch inquiries to ATMs and get customers to maintain
larger balances, a First Fidelity spokesman says.  First Fidelity has 715 ATMs
in New Jersey and surrounding states.  The fees are not related to the bank's
merger with First Union Corp.  earlier this year, he adds.

While several banks offer checking accounts that encourage ATM usage by
charging low monthly fees-and for teller transactions-First Fidelity appears
to be a pioneer in imposing fees solely on balance inquiries.  And industry
observers expect other institutions to follow suit.  "There's certainly a
trend in channeling consumers to lower cost services," says Anne Morgan Moore,
president of Synergistics Research Corp., an Atlanta-based banking
consultancy.  "Customers who want face-to-face contact should be willing to
pay more," she says.

Some industry participants, however, are surprised the bank plans to charge
customers for balance inquiries using its voice response system.  Such systems
are usually less expensive than ATMs, they say.  The First Fidelity
spokesperson says a small number of customers were calling the bank up to four
times a day to check balances.  "The fees are focused on a very small number
of people who are making excessive calls," he says.  He predicts less than 10
percent of the bank's 2.5 million customers will be affected by the change.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

What's An ATM?  'Just A Vending Machine That Dispenses Cash'


Many expect the spread of surcharging to attract new nonbank ATM deployers.
They may look a lot like Nationwide Money Services.

Based in Calabasas, Calif., Nationwide has 1,100 orders to place ATMs and cash
dispensers that do not accept deposits, including a contract for 400 Pantry
convenience stores in the Southeast.  Robert Peisner, the company's chief
operating officer, says most of those machines will be deployed by June, which
would make it one of the 20 largest ATM owners in the U.S.

That's fast work for a company that was founded in 1993 by card-processing
veterans Peisner and Jack O'Toole and only owned about 20 ATMs a year ago,
when it got an infusion of capital from California-based Cardservice
International, an independent sales organization that processes credit and
debit transactions.  CSI subsequently acquired a controlling interest in
Nationwide.

Surcharging is central to the company's business plan, and its deployments are
concentrated in surcharging states.  Nationwide charges up to $1 for a
withdrawal, Peisner says.

But the real secret to its fast growth, says Peisner, is low
overhead-processing and other services are outsourced-combined with using the
cash-dispensing terminals to generate revenue in as many ways as possible.

"In essence these are just vending machines," he says.  "One of the products
they dispense happens to be cash."  Nationwide machines also offer postage
stamps, prepaid telephone cards and coupons.  The company charges $50 a month
to issue coupons for up to 12 vendors per machine.

Promotion also is key, Peisner says.  As part of the seven-year contract with
Nationwide, merchants agree to place signs announcing the terminals and to
include in their advertising that the store has an ATM that dispenses coupons
as well as cash.  Peisner says consumers walk away with coupons that, if used,
more than repay them for both the surcharge and the foreign fee charged by the
consumer's bank.

And while the company's original five-year plan called for the deployment of
1,500 machines, Peisner says that's been revised to between 5,000 and 7,000 by
the year 2000.

Such high hopes on the part of new ATM deployers may be dashed by the reality
that the best ATM locations are taken and retailers are expecting a larger
share of revenues, says Tommy Rouse, senior vice president of Dallas-based
Affiliated Computer Services, a leading third-party deployer.  "Over the next
year, we expect 50% of the new players installing ATMs will file for
bankruptcy," Rouse says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

EFTA Tries Again To Accelerate Into The Fast Lane


As the EFT industry has matured, competition has grown sharper, profit margins
have grown smaller and the responsibilities of executives have grown heavier.
That makes it harder to lure busy executives away from their desks to
participate in trade associations.

At the same time, the issues have grown more complex, creating a greater need
for trade groups that can help sort them out.  If the agenda is compelling
enough, people will come, as evidenced by the record turnout at last month's
Bank Administration Institute Retail Delivery Conference in Atlanta.

By the admission of its own leadership, the Electronic Funds Transfer
Association hasn't done a good enough job in recent years of convincing EFT
participants that they can't afford to miss an EFTA meeting.  But it's going
to give it another try.

The association has announced its second management shakeup in just over a
year, this one featuring a multi-year agreement with the Benton International
consulting firm, which will provide consultants to help plan meetings and
write reports about them for the association's membership of bankers,
processors, hardware and software vendors and government officials.

Help Wanted

The other major move is the promotion of H.  Kurt Helwig, the association's
director of government relations, to the post of executive director.  He
replaces Wayne Boucher, who resigned in September, less than a year after
taking the post as part of a new management team that included Robert P.
Barone, the retired president of Diebold Inc.  Barone remains at EFTA as
chairman and chief executive officer.

Barone admits to disappointing results in his first year on the job.  "We've
had some success in terms of new membership, but frankly weren't as successful
as I would have liked in terms of increasing the importance of the association
to the industry," he says.  "We couldn't get our hands around good,
content-oriented material, and we weren't following up very well on our
special interest groups and councils and reporting their activities.  We
decided we had to get some people involved who can help us do this."

That's where the Benton firm comes in.  A Benton consultant will be assigned
to each of the EFTA's committees to help chairmen develop strategy, plan
meeting agendas and prepare reports.

Free Advice

John B.  Benton, the CEO of Benton International and a long-time EFTA board
member, says his staff will work for free until the association's revenues
cover budgeted EFTA expenses for the year.  If revenues exceed that budget,
his staff will bill at cost; in future years, he says, any dramatic growth in
revenues would be shared with the Benton firm.  Benton says he does not see
the deal as an income generator as much as an opportunity to revitalize the
association while offering his staff a chance to network with industry
leaders.  "If our people build some new relationships, we'll get out of it
what I want to get," he says.

Helwig says EFTA considered other consulting firms, but "Jack's been on our
board and been very active and that tipped the balance toward Benton
International."  Several EFT insiders applauded the choice.  "Benton's
extremely well-regarded and he's done a lot of high-level work in the EFT
business, so that should help," says Charles Raphael, first vice president of
First Chicago NBD.

Benton's staff will be working with the EFTA's councils and special interest
groups.  There are two councils, which are empowered to take positions without
getting approval of the EFTA board, whose diverse composition makes it
difficult to reach a common stance.  One council focuses on electronic
benefits transfer; the other is a council of regional EFT network executives
formed last year after the Shared Network Executives Association merged with
the EFTA.

Revitalized Board Meetings

The three special interest groups are designed to be educational, and don't
adopt positions.  One focuses on electronic commerce and home banking, another
on point-of-sale and a third on EBT.  The association plans to form a fourth
dealing with regulatory and legislative issues this year, Helwig says.

In addition to upgrading the meetings of these committees, Barone says the
association will change the character of board meetings.  "They've been
basically business meetings, taking up such things as finances," he says.  "We
really need to focus on industry issues and that's what we'll do from this
point forward."  And, in an effort to broaden participation, the size of the
board has been increased from 33 to 50.

The association, which has a membership of nearly 1,300 individuals from 175
companies, also plans a recruitment drive.  As part of that effort, a new
individual category of membership has been created, costing $1,000 a year.
Corporate memberships range from $6,000 to $15,000 annually.

Bankers Wanted

Helwig says there will be an emphasis on increasing participation from
financial institutions, which observers say has been a weakness of the
organization.  In particular, he says, it is hoped the work of Benton and his
staff will help attract more senior bankers.  But Richard Speer, an
Atlanta-based consultant, says that, as a result of bank mergers and the
growth of the EFT business, many high-level managers just don't have the time
for industry meetings.  "It's very difficult right now to get senior bankers
involved in any of these industry forums, it's not just the EFTA," he says.

And it's not just bankers who are busy, says Donald Mauer, senior vice
president of the Pennsylvania-based Gensar processing company, and someone who
has skipped recent EFTA meetings.  Speaking of Benton, Mauer says, "Jack has
to make it more striking and relevant.  I have to believe I'll learn more in
three days at a meeting than I could learn in three months, and that it will
move my business."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>