
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B38-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B024-152</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi117.html 205.156.212.5 19970115005945 text/html 43560
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:57:18 GMT
Last-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 21:05:21 GMT
Content-length: 43372
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi117.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CREDIT SUISSE OFFERS PHONE LINK TO GERMAN INVESTORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(333 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>UNITED STATES:  SIGNET MAIL LOANS MEET LOSSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(786 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>WINTHERTHUR GOES DIRECT WITH SWISSLINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>BANC ONE RETHINKS SCREENPHONE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(371 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BARNETT TESTS CABLE NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>AMEX TESTS IN GERMANY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(330 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>DUTCH COURAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2063 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>HONG KONG SET TO LEAP-FROG DIRECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1688 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>NAB LEADS IN PHONE BANKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ADVANCE ON THE NET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>UK WELCOMES DIRECT ROUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(291 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CREDIT SUISSE OFFERS PHONE LINK TO GERMAN INVESTORS

CREDIT SUISSE has become the first Swiss bank to launch a telephone
sales service in Germany. The service is called CS-Direct Invest and
follows the May 1995 launch of CS-Direct Invest in Switzerland.

German clients will be able to carry out investment business via an
"account/safekeeping account" in Switzerland. With a minimum investment
of DM10,000 ($7,000), German clients can use CS-Direct Invest to build
up a portfolio from Credit Suisse's Credis Investment Funds.

A Credit Suisse spokeswoman confirmed that because the accounts are
based in Switzerland, German customers are covered by Swiss banking
secrecy laws. Recent years have seen a number of clamp-downs by the
German authorities on banks for allegedly facilitating customers in
avoiding tax through Luxembourg-based funds.

Credit Suisse priced its Swiss product high - mainly to avoid losing
too much business from other areas of its banking service. But the
approach in Germany has been different: "CS-Direct Invest has a
competitive price structure in Germany, but there is a clear
differentiation from discount banks such as Direkt Anlage, Comdirect
and Bank 24," said a bank spokeswoman."Our selling point is not so much
price as service."

The product comes with investment advice and a personal adviser, unlike
German competitors Direkt Anlage, which pared costs to the bone by not
including advice, though it provides information.

The German funds market has grown 25 percent a year since 1990, and
Credit Suisse expects it to grow at least 15 percent a year until 2000.
A spokesman for rival Swiss Bank Corporation said that while it had no
plans to launch a similar product in Germany it was closely observing
the market.

The project will not involve any co-operation with the Winterthur
insurance company, which CS has linked up with in Switzerland.

There are no plans at the moment for PC banking with CS-Direct Invest,
but the bank is watching developments, especially in relation to
improving security.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED STATES:  SIGNET MAIL LOANS MEET LOSSES

AN INNOVATIVE direct loan programme by US regional bank Signet of
Richmond, Virginia has encountered high loan loss rates and sparked
concern among bank analysts. But Signet says the high loan losses are
part of its statistically-driven "cell testing" method and are no cause
for alarm.

Signet's "loan by cheque" programme is one of the most daring
experiments yet in "branchless" banking. The programme uses databased
marketing and advanced computer models to generate pre-approved
consumer loans of up to $10,000. For each pre-approved loan, the bank
simply mails out a cheque to the targeted consumer, who can then cash
it at his local bank.

The new programme relies on the statistical science of "information
discovery", an approach first developed by the US credit card industry
and used to great effect by Signet's highly successful credit card
operation, which the bank spun off into Capital One in early 1995.
Capital One, which uses information discovery to generate customised
new card offers, increased its accounts by 22 percent and its
receivables by 42 percent in 1995.

Information discovery studies each customer's behaviour and calculates
the "net present value" of each customer relationship. It then
continuously analyses customer data to isolate behavioural clusters
that permit the bank to generate customised card or consumer loan
offers. Once these offers are tested and retested among the bank's
existing customers, the resulting models, or "hypotheses", are used to
generate new offers to non-customers taken from external lists.

Signet's cheque-by-mail programme is part of an ambitious bid to
transform the mid-sized regional bank, which has $10 billion in assets
and some 250 branches, into a national consumer bank. Since 1993, the
bank has used statistical modelling and bought lists to mail out offers
for consumer credits, student loans, home equity products and mutual
funds to tens of thousands of prospective customers, who have only to
phone a toll-free telephone number to accept the terms offered.

The bank's declared strategy is to take the statistical methods
pioneered by the credit card industry and extend them into consumer
lending and direct banking. A number of large US banks, including First
Bank and Wells Fargo are using similar methods for national marketing
drives in small business lending and home equity loans, for example,
but Signet's effort is the most aggressive and broadly-based.

"Signet is turning into a cross between a consumer finance company and
a regional bank. It could turn into a huge national company," said Tom
McCandless, an analyst at PaineWebber in New York. "Many banks are
trying to emulate what they're doing."

But the experimental nature of Signet's marketing methods have lately
become a cause for concern among analysts. Signet's programme ran into
trouble in the third quarter of 1995, when its gross charge-offs rose
to $9.3 million, up 63 percent from the previous quarter. As a result,
Signet was forced to double its loan loss provisions to $8.7 million,
and redoubled them again in the fourth quarter to $18.6 million. The
bank's total net charge-offs jumped 20 percent from the third quarter
to $15.6 million.

Signet explained that the higher loan losses were the result of two
mailings the company made in late 1994 to test how lower acceptance
criteria would affect response and profitability. The two mailings
generated $175 million in new loans, but three quarters later they had
created an annualised loss rate of 11.23 percent.

Signet has responded that the third-quarter losses were the result of
mailings the bank deliberately made to higher-risk segments. "In order
to build more effective models, we had to have some losses, and in
order to get some losses, we had to mail to higher risk segments,"
Signet chief operating officer Malcolm McDonald told American Banker.

While the bank was expecting a higher loss rate for these mailings, it
did not expect the high response level - and resulting loss levels -
that the mailings produced. Earlier mailings, he said, did not produce
enough losses to build statistically robust models. McDonald explained
that each mailing has expected losses built into it, and that Signet's
cheque-by-mail programme could sustain higher loan losses and still
generate a"positive net present value".

But fourth-quarter losses have further highlighted the problems of the
loan-by-cheque programme. The loan loss ratio of the programme's two
high-risk mailings reached a miserable 19.5 percent in the fourth
quarter, against 2 percent for the rest of the programme. But Signet
stands by the programme, whose loans its hopes to double in 1996. It
expects high losses to continue in the coming quarters, as high-risk
loans decline as a percentage of the total loan-by-cheque portfolio.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WINTHERTHUR GOES DIRECT WITH SWISSLINE

WINTERTHUR, the Swiss insurance company, has launched a direct
insurance subsidary called Swissline. The company says the opportunity
exists because of the deregulation of the mandatory motor insurance
market.

Balz Hoesly, chief operations officer of Swissline, expects volume to
grow to between 10 percent and 15 percent of the non-life insurance
market by 2000, and expects to make a profit in four to six years.
Swissline will initially offer motor insurance and linked products like
legal help and breakdown recovery, but it is hoped that it will expand
into other forms of insurance "fairly soon".

Swissline is a stand-alone company, and is legally the underwriting
agent for Wintherthur Insurance and Wintherthur Life. It employs 70
people.

"We are aiming to gain lasting competitive advantage in the entire
value-added process," said Hoesly. He cited motivated staff,
first-class service, cost advantages for customers, rigorous cost
management and a high-tech infrastructure as the basics needed for the
success of the direct operation.

Swissline says it deliberately waited for the deregulation moves to
start operations.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BANC ONE RETHINKS SCREENPHONE

A SCREENPHONE pilot launched by US super-regional Banc One has stumbled
badly after three months, forcing the bank to rethink its commitment to
screen telephony. Banc One's poor results highlight the screenphone's
failure to achieve any success in the US market in 1995. Several large
institutions, including Citibank, withdrew from screenphone pilots last
year, and many other banks chose to focus on PC banking instead.

Banc One launched the pilot in the Dallas-Fort Worth area in September,
in partnership with hardware vendor GTE and processor Visa Interactive.
GTE's screenphone was priced at $150, perhaps the lowest price on offer
in the US, where some high-end models have sold for $700. GTE hoped to
sell 2,000 units by the end of 1995, but it sold only several hundred.
Most of the buyers were blue-collar men who were older and less
affluent than expected.

Banc One mailed 150,000 screenphone offers to its customers in Texas,
but the promotion generated far more inquiries about the bank's PC
banking programme than its screenphone service. (Banc One currently
offers PC banking in Ohio through on-line service Prodigy, a programme
it plans to extend to other markets this year.)

In its 1996 Home Banking Report, Jupiter Communications in New York
estimated that PC home banking accounts in the US at 750,000 in 1995
and predicted they would grow to 13 million by the year 2000. But for
screenphones, Jupiter Communications offered a less sanguine view - the
19,000 US households using screenphones for remote banking in 1995
would grow to 600,000 by the year 2000. Since screenphones, unlike PCs,
bear the enormous marketing and hardware risks involved in launching a
new consumer device, Jupiter's screenphone projection should be enough
to dissuade most large banks from trying.

While the screenphone was widely discussed at the 1994 Retail Delivery
Systems conference, it received no attention at all at the 1995 RDS
show, where speeches on PC and Internet banking drew huge crowds. Asked
at one 1995 RDS session to name his greatest marketing failure, Keycorp
marketing chief Steven Cone replied,"At Citibank, my biggest mistake
was backing the screenphone, a wonderful device that no one uses."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BARNETT TESTS CABLE NETWORK

AFTER NEARLY a year of delays, Barnett Banks of Jacksonville, Florida
will offer home banking over Time Warner's Full Service Network (FSN),
an interactive cable service which the entertainment group launched in
December 1994. Time Warner's FSN, the first interactive cable pilot in
the US, has signed up 3,500 customers in Orlando, Florida and now
offers customers local phone service as well as broadband data
transfer.

Barnett's programme, the first US home banking pilot that uses
full-motion interactive television (ITV), will allow FSN subscribers to
combine remote banking with such interactive services as video on
demand, home shopping and video games.

Barnett's home banking package, which is free for all FSN customers who
also bank at Barnett, allows users to check their balances, view
statements and transfer funds by manipulating displays on their TVs
with the help of cable set box. All customer information resides with
Barnett, which encrypts and secures transaction information on its own
proprietary operating system.

Once the holy grail of remote delivery, interactive cable in the US was
completely eclipsed last year by the phenomenal growth and popularity
of the Internet. Only two operators have introduced interactive cable
pilots - Time Warner and regional telco Bell Atlantic, which launched
its service in New Jersey last month.

The expense of upgrading infrastructure has delayed the progress of
both projects and cast doubt on their commercial viability. Bell
Atlantic, for example, said its current cost for telephone and
interactive video service installation is $17,000 per household.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AMEX TESTS IN GERMANY

AMERICAN EXPRESS says its pilot direct bank in Germany is performing
well, though it is "too early" to give figures on the number of new
customers.

The bank offers a Eurocheque card which allows cash withdrawals, cheque
deposits, direct debit functions, and ATM access to thousands of ATMs
across Europe and the world. The service - Giro Direkt - was launched
in October.

The number of accounts in American Express Bank in Germany rose 30
percent between April and October 1995. Of new customers, 50 percent
were not holders of American Express cards.

"Amex Bank has been successfully selling a similar product to its card
members since 1991. We saw that there was growing interest outside the
card member base to offer a similar product.

"We are waiting to see the results of that test, and will then review
the situation," said a spokesman.

Giro Direkt will be evaluated on, among other criteria, the number of
customers and their profiles and usage patterns.

It is possible that the company will open a similar operation in the UK
or elsewhere, if the German operation is a success. American Express
has direct banking operations for card holders only in Paris,
Singapore, Taiwan and Hong Kong.

But a spokesman warned: "There are no plans to do anything in the UK at
this stage. We will look at the banking environment, what consumer
interest there is and then move from there."

The project started in Berlin and Hamburg, where the bank says there is
a clear reflection of its current customer profile.

Giro Direkt customers can bank by phone, fax or letter from anywhere in
the world. The bank is hoping to have PC banking by the summer "at the
latest".

Amex declined to say how many staff work on the direct bank, but
American Express Bank employs 220 people from its Frankfurt
headquarters.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DUTCH COURAGE

The Netherlands was one of the first countries to embrace direct
delivery. Yet the country's major institutions show marked differences
in their approach. Diarmuid MacConville reports

DUTCH FINANCIAL institutions were among the pioneers of direct
delivery, and the Dutch are among the world's keenest users of direct
services. At present, about 8.5 percent of retail bank customers use
the telephone, and UK market research company Datamonitor believes that
by the year 2000 almost a quarter of the Dutch population will be
banking by phone.

Direct banking in Holland started in 1978, 15 years before banks
elsewhere realised that customers wanted more flexibility in banking.
Postbank, before its privatisation and absorption into NMB Bank, and
ultimately ING Group, coined the phrase "Thuisbankieren", which is now
used generically for all home banking.

Only cash withdrawals and lodgements required a visit to the post
office; all other transactions could be carried out at home, usually
over the phone. Postbank prospered with direct banking: market share of
savings rose to 17 percent in 1989 from 13 percent in 1978.

Three players - Rabobank, Postbank, and ABN AMRO - dominate the Dutch
market, and account for 80 percent to 90 percent of most types of
banking business. But smaller players, including insurance companies
like Achmea and Aegon, are starting to nibble at the edges of the
direct banking market. Postbank has been by far the quickest into the
direct market; the other big banks are only slowly starting to add
direct banking services to the main offering.

A spokesman for a rival bank said: "That is because for us, direct
banking is only one channel of distribution, not the main one, like it
is for Postbank."

Postbank, part of the ING group, is basically a stand-alone direct
bank, though it does have dedicated counters in post office branches
around the country. It started experimenting with alternative
distribution channels in the 1960s, while it was still state-owned.
Today, the telephone is its main distribution channel. It claims a
banking relationship with one-third of Dutch households, about 6
million people.

Postbank has 500 staff at four processing centres, all dealing with
customer queries. The bank generates most of its customer credit
inquiries from the post offices (60 percent) compared to 27 percent
from mailed material, which is also used extensively.

Some 800 customer service agents at 11 Postbank call centres deal with
8.5 million inquiries. This has been supplemented by Girofoon, an
Automatic Voice Response (AVR) unit launched in 1993. But Postbank
managers are sceptical about customer acceptance. "We are convinced
that many of our best customers do not yet appreciate it," said Herman
Huizinga, Postbank's head of telephone banking. "Because we are not yet
convinced of the full acceptance of the medium, we are not forcing
customers to use voice response."

The bank also has AVR units to reply to questions about share prices
and its mortgage products.

ABN AMRO, which also has an AVR unit, started its pilot human operator
phone banking service early in 1996. Clients of 33 branches can use it,
allowing them to buy and sell stocks and shares and obtain market
information. From February 19, a service line will be available,
allowing account transfers and other banking services.

An ABN AMRO spokeswoman said that the continuation of manned phone
banking depends on the results of the pilot. The bank wants to focus
the direct banking as an add-on service for branch-based customers
rather than as a stand-alone operation. Now employing about 50 people,
the call centre is expected to expand to several hundred if the manned
telephone banking operation goes ahead.

Achmea Group came from the merger of Avero Central Beheer Group (AVCB)
and Zilveren Kruis Group and started operating at the start of 1995. A
Salomon Brothers study put the market penetration of its Dutch direct
car insurance service (Centraal Beheer, set up in 1975) on a par with
Direct Line, the UK's largest motor insurer.

Direct banking, run by AVCB Bank, was started as part of the Central
Beheer direct insurance operation in 1988. It offered consumer credit
and started operating as a stand-alone bank in 1992 when it got a
banking licence allowing it to offer savings accounts. It now also
offers credit cards.

The bank makes use of the insurance operation's call centre, mostly for
non-clients who call to get information about the bank, often after a
mail-shot. Existing clients phone the front offices direct to transact
business, and staff at the front offices spend most of their time
dealing with client calls. Product manager Cobi Weddepohl said very few
clients feel the need to call in person to the bank offices.

All banking activities are being reorganised within Achmea; there are
currently three banks with AVCB Bank selling products under four
different labels. The aim is to have one bank holding company with one
back office and several front offices.

Co-operative Rabobank Nederland, which has about 4.9 million retail
customers, has an AVR unit. This was only set up in late 1994 and
allows balance inquiry, funds transfer and information on personal
loans.

A Rabobank spokesman said its priority is "advisory banking", and that
any telephone services are additional. "Meeting customers face-to-face
is a very important part of the relationship." But the spokesman added:
"That could change if the there's a need in the market. For example,
our order line for share buying came in due to competition from
others."

Generale Bank Nederland (formerly Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland),
while much smaller than its rivals, has dipped into the direct banking
market with Direktbank. It offers a limited range of banking services,
and its main distribution channel is through a network of independent
intermediaries. Sources in Generale have indicated it could turn more
to direct banking to increase market share without the expense of
creating more branches.

VSB Telebank, part of the financial conglomerate Fortis, was started in
1990 as a result of an efficiency drive in the VSB Bank. It started
with five staff and now has 30. Some 18 telemarketing staff man the
lines 24 hours a day, 365 days a year
- the first Dutch bank to offer this service.

Calls doubled after the first year and have grown linearly since then.
At the same time, branches are being closed or are reducing their
opening hours.

An AVR unit deals with simple queries and standard calculations. When
more detail is required on a particular item, telesales staff will
arrange a meeting with staff in the nearest branch.

The bank strongly believes in tying most customers to their branches,
thus overcoming the resentment often felt by established branches from
the development of a direct banking operation. Branches are credited
with sales made by telemarketing staff who take commission on it.

The bank is careful to point out that it also has stand-alone customers
in niche markets; this relates generally to the "upscale market
segment" where it operates with financial advisers Finles, a company
specialising in advising professional associations.

VSB said that the conversion rate - the number of contacts that lead to
a direct sale - is substantially higher for VSB Telebank than for
branch contacts, and said that 70 percent of VSB Telebank sales are
settled on the phone rather than through the post or branch visits.

Spaarbeleg, the banking subsidiary of insurer Aegon, believes its low
overheads allow it to offer some of the most competitive interest rates
on the market. Customer numbers have doubled since 1993 to 700,000.
Revenues increased by two-thirds to DFL488.5 million ($268.4 million)
over the same period. It positions itself as a simple, high-interest
alternative in the savings market.

One of its two products is a savings account for employees of
corporations which allow employers to offer their employees a fixed sum
of money in a tax-efficient manner at an attractive rate of interest.
Aegon thinks that the savings market will continue to grow in response
to the government's policy of encouraging citizens to provide for
themselves.

Heinie Hakker, banking analyst at BZW, said that of the insurance
companies nibbling the edges of the market, Aegon's Spaarbeleg has been
the most successful, because it offers better interest rates than the
banks and also uses direct marketing techniques.

A Postbank spokesman, commenting on the high interest rates offered by
Spaarbeleg, admitted it would not be able to compete with this rate on
all its accounts, but said Postbank has the huge advantage of a very
strong position in the payments system.

The next development in direct banking in the Netherlands is the
October 1996 launch of a multifunctional chip card. PTT Telecom, the
Dutch telecom company, has joined forces with ING to create a card
which can be used in shops, phone booths and banks. They can be loaded
with money at post offices, telephone booths, and eventually at home
with a special attachment to existing phones. The money added to the
card will be debited from a customer's account.

Between them, the phone company and the bank have "access to
practically every household in the Netherlands", according to Ben
Verwaayen, president of PTT Telecom.

The system is especially designed to be an open one, and the designers
hope other retail groups will take part in it. The Dutch partners say a
project on this scale has never been tried before in Europe and
possibly beyond.

They did not wait for the consensus that is usual among Dutch banks
before launching a project. "The speed to market was all-important,"
Verwaayen said.

A similar electronic purse is being piloted by the other Dutch banks,
though it is a less ambitious project than the "multifunctional" card
venture.

ABN AMRO and most other banks say they are undecided about joining the
new venture, pointing out that they are already committed to an
all-bank chip card project, currently under test in Arnhem.

BZW analyst Hakker said: "Both ING and PTT are putting themselves
behind it, and they are in dominant positions in their markets. It can
become a big success. The Arnhem card has been badly received by trade
and industry because it is too inflexible and too expensive."

Rabobank said it will "certainly not" be involved in the Postbank card.
A spokesman said that the combined banks' card would probably be
available in a few months, before the Postbank card, and that research
from the pilot project in Arnhem was very positive.

"On a scale of one to ten, customers gave it 7.2 and retailers gave it
6.9. Retailers don't think it's too expensive. And 58 percent of
retailers would recommend it to others, said a Rabobank spokesman.

PC-based home banking is well advanced. For example, Postbank has
117,000 customers, including 91,000 retail who subscribe to Girotel,
the PC-based home banking service launched in 1988. Subscriptions have
taken off since September 1994 - a three-fold growth was seen after the
introduction of a friendlier home banking system.

The service is off-line, so users can complete all the necessary data
and send when they are ready. This has led to cost savings for the bank
as well as for customers who do not have to wait for processing to be
done on-line, saving them on the phone bill.

Rabobank has 80,000 private customers and 70,000 companies banking via
PCs, and expects this to grow to 200,000 within "a couple of years".
The bank's PC banking started in 1992. A typical day would have about
150,000 corporate transactions and 35,000 personal transactions.

The use of smart phones has met with little success, however. On a
Postbank test, while technically successful, customers felt that the
added convenience of banking with screenphones did not outweigh their
high costs.

"At the moment, we draw the conclusion that the coming years will be
dominated by the use of the straightforward phone. Rapid penetration of
mobile telecommunication can support this. And in all circumstances we
have to rely on our staff to communicate with the customer," said
Postbank's Huizinga.

AVCB Bank is trying out PC banking in 1996, and may go ahead depending
on the results of the pilot.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HONG KONG SET TO LEAP-FROG DIRECT

A variety of factors particular to the territory mean that the
development of direct delivery is taking an unusual course in Hong
Kong. Andrew Moody reports

HONG KONG, like many centres in Asia, is a major focus for technology.
The people, too, are gadget-obsessed. It is therefore somewhat
surprising that this culture of technology has not spread to direct
delivery.

The lack of development in this area is not because Hong Kong is
unsophisticated in banking terms - it is one of the leading financial
centres of the world, and its 400 banks are a key element of that
strength.

But while the corporate banking community is fairly advanced in
technology terms, retail banking appears pretty slow off the mark. A
key reason for this is that Hong Kong is by geographical and
sociological accident clumsily suited to the primary forms of direct
delivery in banking.

Telephone banking often requires huge space but Hong Kong, where land
comes at a higher premium than anywhere in the world, does not have
much to spare. And in a country where unemployment has until recently
been insignificant, no-one, particularly anyone calling themselves a
banker, wants to be a telephone operative.

Sergio Rial, general manager of ABN AMRO in Hong Kong, agrees that the
steps towards telephone banking in the territory are only tentative.
"The real challenge and the barrier to phone banking in Hong Kong is
the people. In a place of full employment, no professional wants to be
behind a phone. I don't think they would be able to hold their heads up
as a real banking professional," he says.

And he adds: "Going through password procedure and paying people's
utility bills would not be anybody's idea of fun. Everybody here wants
to be part of a go-ahead marketing team, not this."

So what have Hong Kong banks been doing in terms of direct delivery
systems? The first steps towards telephone banking came in the late
1980s and early 1990s, pioneered by the territory's major players,
Hongkong Bank, Hang Seng Bank, Citibank and Standard Chartered.

"We have been in direct banking since 1990 in one form or another. We
can do telephone, we can do fax and we have been looking at the most
cost-effective and customer-receptive forms of direct banking to
implement," says Eric Tai, senior executive, retail, marketing and
planning for the Hongkong Bank and a leading figure within the
territory's banking community.

"Most banks in Hong Kong have some direct banking offer but it is still
offered within the bank itself rather than by setting up a separate
entity such as First Direct."

But the services offered in Hong Kong are more primitive compared to
many of those in the west. The standard product is automated so that a
customer speaks to a voice-activated machine which is able to carry out
simple routine transactions. Generally, only AB and high-rated
customers get the chance to speak to a person, but that individual may
be someone from their branch who they would normally deal with during
the course of their conventional banking transactions.

High employment and land prices are not the only barriers to telephone
banking. The greater role played by the ATM compared to the west may be
another.

In Hong Kong, the ATM is not just something in which you insert your
card to check your balance and withdraw cash but something much more
highly prized. People can pay their utility bills, swap money between
different accounts and carry out a variety of other functions.

In fact, in most streets in Hong Kong the ATM machine seems to be a
community focal point, like some open air post office, where people can
stop and gossip, judging by the crowds they tend to gather around them.

Staggeringly, there are 7 million ATM cards in use in the territory
serving a population of 6 million.

In part, the ATM has taken over many of the functions served by
telephone banking in the west, and the average ATM transaction costs
the bank one-eighth of what it would cost over the counter.

ATMs, however, are still more costly than more modern methods of direct
delivery. They don't operate independently of branches. In fact, many
operate within them, so this halfway house towards full direct delivery
is far from ideal.

But the real catalyst for a wholesale change to more sophisticated
forms of banking could be the economy itself. So far, economic
pressures on the banks to adopt new methods of technology have
certainly been nowhere near as great as in the west.

Retail banking in Hong Kong is as profitable as virtually anywhere in
the world. Much of this has to do with the fact that Hong Kong has
averaged economic growth rates of between 5 percent and 8 percent for
the last decade. It has also operated an infamous interest rate cartel.

Bank customers have, therefore, been getting richer and more
middle-class. There have therefore been fewer bad debtors, savings
rates have been higher and the bottom line of the banks ever bigger. In
1993, for example, the Hang Seng Bank, 62 percent-owned by the Hongkong
Bank, was the most profitable retail bank in the world, according to
credit rating agency IBCA. Consequently, banks have not been forced to
cut costs by closing branches, get rid of staff and move more quickly
towards automated methods of banking.

This factor, however, is beginning to change. GDP growth forecasts for
Hong Kong, particularly over the difficult period of 1997 when the
colony transfers from British to Chinese control, look very uncertain.
A survey by the Economist Intelligence Unit, published in January,
points to growth slumping to 1.7 percent in 1997, compared to around 5
percent now. If this is the case, retail banking in Hong Kong can no
longer rely on the ever-increasing wealth of their customers to dig
them out of a hole.

The new harsher economic environment has undoubtedly begun to change
the thinking among senior bank executives within the major banks.

Alex Au, vice chairman and chief executive of the Hang Seng Bank, is in
no doubt the banks will have to adapt to the new environment.

"What is coming will be dramatic and will totally reshape the business.
By the end of the millennium retail banking will have undergone major
plastic surgery," he says. "It has become increasingly apparent that
the future of banking lies in automation and technology applications.
With the higher cost of operations, finding a more efficient way to
deliver banking services to customers is one of the critical factors
for financial institutions."

ABN AMRO's Rial believes that Hong Kong banks in their evolutionary
development will actually by-pass conventional telephone banking and
take a quantum step from branch banking to PC home banking. "Because of
the constraints within the market, I can see this happening. There are
also many local factors making it difficult to operate telephone
banking in any meaningful sense, so I would not be surprised if Hong
Kong banks took this peculiar step forward," he says.

Some, however, do not quite hold with this theory. Peter Wong,
vice-president of global consumer banking for Citibank in Hong Kong,
believes there is mileage in telephone banking. From his office next to
the futuristic Hong Kong Telecom Tower in Hong Kong's Quarry Bay, he
mainly deals with higher net worth customers.

"We have had considerable take-up of our telephone banking services,
and they have gone down well with our customers. We have a satisfaction
rating for this service of 90 percent, compared with 82 percent for our
conventional banking," he said.

Assuming, however, that the era of telephone banking in Hong Kong is
some form of interregnum - a brief stop on the way to more
sophisticated systems of direct delivery - what methods do the banks
have in mind?

The leading banks are already investing heavily behind closed doors
into technologies that will make home PC or TV banking a reality.
Electronic banking is already available to the corporate market and it
will inevitably spread into the retail market. Consumers in Hong Kong
are very computer literate; it is estimated that 200,000 people in the
territory are already Internet subscribers. And it is expected that
within just a few years, once banks have developed secure transaction
technology, there will be a flood of customers wanting to do their
banking over the Internet.

The direct delivery of banking services into people's homes through
interactive multi-media services may happen even more quickly. A number
of banks are planning to broadcast product information through this
technology in 1996 paving the way to them conducting transaction
banking through this medium.

Electronic cash could soon become a reality in Hong Kong with the
imminent introduction of smart cards. The Mondex card is expected to be
on trial later this year with a major launch in 1997. How it will take
off is difficult to judge. It is seen in the west as an anti-crime
measure but in Hong Kong there is virtually no cash crime.

A bank likely to lead the market is the Hongkong Bank, which has been
investing heavily in this new technology. "We are not doing home
banking yet but we are coming along with it. We are currently working
with Hongkong Telecom jointly to do TV banking. All the different
interfaces which are possible technologically are being looked at,"
says Hongkong's Tai.

Its sister bank, the Hang Seng, is also a driving force. "In terms of
technology products in use Hong Kong is still in the early stages of
technology banking when compared to the western countries," says Alex
Au.

"But although investment in new technology involves huge sums, banks
cannot afford not to make the investment. For in the end, technology
banking means - for both external and internal operations - improved
efficiency, higher productivity, better risk control and lower costs."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NAB LEADS IN PHONE BANKING

NATIONAL AUSTRALIA Bank has leapt ahead of its major competitors in
phone banking by permitting loans to be issued over the phone.

In late December, the bank announced that it had launched a telephone
loans service which will approve homes loans within 25 minutes, and a
personal loan or a credit card approval in around 15 minutes, using a
computer-based credit assessment system developed by the bank over the
past two years.

Provided the customer passes all tests, loan approval is subject only
to the customer presenting the required documents when calling into a
branch to sign loan documents.

Telephone banking has come very much into its own over the past two
years in Australia, with most of the smaller banks notably ahead of
their major rivals in offering phone services. NAB managing director
Don Argus, said National was the only bank "offering this level of
convenience".

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ADVANCE ON THE NET

SECOND TIER Australian bank, Advance Bank, has become the first
Australian institution to allow its customers to access accounts
through the Internet.

Using software developed by an Australian company Techway, based in
Sydney, Advance announced in late December that its customers could now
use a pin number to gain access to their accounts through the bank's
site on the Internet.

A bank spokesman said the information accessible was initially limited
to basic account information, but the bank hoped to extend the services
available into a full alternative to its existing phone inquiry
service.

The security of the system is guaranteed by two levels of encryption,
with the second level involving a 128-bit key used for each session, as
opposed to the commonly used 40-bit encryption key.

The customer needs adequate Internet access, but does not require any
additional software.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
DIRECT DELIVERY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UK WELCOMES DIRECT ROUTE

BANKS AND building societies came top of the supplier list for people
who would buy life assurance, pensions and investments over the phone,
according to a UK survey by consultants Prospektus.

When asked which type of company they would buy direct, "My bank or
building society" was the preferred choice of 76 percent, almost twice
the number choosing a "traditional insurance company", the next most
popular choice.

Anna Ellison, director of consultants Prospektus, says that people feel
that their bank is less likely to sell them an unsuitable product.
"It's the idea of the old-fashioned bank manager - a relationship where
they don't want to see me get into trouble."

The survey found people tended to associate selling by insurance
companies with pressure to spend more than they could afford.

One quarter of the 4,000 people surveyed said they were prepared to
complete the purchase direct, either by phone, mail or computer. This
seems to contradict the general view that these products are too
complex to sell direct, and require advice and advisers.

A major attraction of buying direct seems to be"the positive experience
of the price and service benefits delivered by companies such as Direct
Line and First Direct". Six out of ten customers cited value for money
as their key motivation for wanting to buy this way.

Banks were most popular among the mass market while affluent customers
tended to see pensions and insurance as more complex matters requiring
advice.

Customers cited companies like Marks and Spencer (17 percent), the Post
Office (34 percent), and even the utility companies (16 percent) as
places where they would buy life assurance, pensions and investments.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>