
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-107</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh48.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020504 text/html 49322
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:03:02 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:41 GMT
Content-length: 49135
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh48.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
July 1993<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>ATC PREVAILS ON CAUSATION ISSUE IN MISSISSIPPI TRIAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>HIGH COURT LETS PRISONER'S 8TH AMENDMENT ETS EXPOSURE SUIT PROCEED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(722 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INDUSTRY SUES EPA IN NC FEDERAL COURT OVER ETS REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(483 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>6TH CIR.: NO ERROR IN DISALLOWING ETS EVIDENCE IN MARITIME ASBESTOS SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(764 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HIGH COURT FINDS FOR B&W IN GENERICS WAR ANTITRUST DISPUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1404 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>WA SMALL CLAIMS CT. REJECTS EX-SMOKER'S CESSATION CLAIMS AGAINST PM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>HIGH COURT: JUDGES SHOULD DECIDE RELIABILITY OF SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1337 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS $10 MILLION WV PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1315 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>MARYLAND APPEALS CT. FINDS NO REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CANCER-FEAR EVIDENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(607 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

ATC PREVAILS ON CAUSATION ISSUE IN MISSISSIPPI TRIAL

    A jury empaneled in the Washington County, MS, Circuit Court on
June 17 returned a defense verdict for American Tobacco Co. in a
long-fought cigarette wrongful death action, determining 11-1 that the
plaintiffs' decedent's death resulted from a blood clot caused by urinary
tract surgery and not his lung cancer or emphysema (Wilks et al. v.
American Tobacco Co. et al., MS Cir. Ct., Washington Cty., No. 91-12,
355(B)(W)).

    After eight days of trial that featured primarily medical testimony,
the jury deliberated for two and a half hours before returning the
verdict.  Anderson Smith's lung cancer was first diagnosed four months
before his death in 1986; no autopsy was ever performed.  The panel also
cleared New Deal Tobacco Co., a regional distributor, of any liability.

    Jeanette Wilks, Smith's daughter, lodged her complaint in November
1987, seeking $17 million in damages from the defendants.  Smith began
smoking ATC's Pall Malls as a teenager when he entered the U.S. Army in
1943.  Smith's habit grew to three packs a day and would endure for 40
years; Smith became mentally incompetent during his tenure in the
Service, and he resided at a V.A. hospital for a number of years.  Wilks'
sister subsequently joined the action as a plaintiff.

    Presiding Judge Eugene M. Bogen would make various significant
rulings during the litigation's course.  In April 1991, he denied summary
judgment to the defense, finding the plaintiffs' risk/utility theory of
recovery to be viable.  This ruling ran contrary to an earlier
determination made in another Mississippi cigarette products suit by
Judge Bogen himself, and the state Supreme Court in 1992 refused to
review the inconsistency.

    Last May, Judge Bogen granted a plaintiffs' motion and held
cigarettes to be defective and unreasonably dangerous as a matter of law
and found their manufacturers to be absolutely liable on product claims.

    Don Barrett of Barrett Law Offices, Lexington, Mississippi, Victor
McTeer of McTeer & Byers, Greenville, Mississippi, and Fred Clark,
Greenwood, Mississippi, represent the plaintiffs.

    James E. Upshaw of Upshaw, Williams, Biggers, Page & Kruger,
Greenwood, Johnny Walls, Greenville, and Bruce Sheffler of Chadbourne &
Parke, New York, represent the American Tobacco Co.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

HIGH COURT LETS PRISONER'S 8TH AMENDMENT ETS EXPOSURE SUIT PROCEED

    The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed in a 7-2 ruling on June 18 a March
1992 Ninth Circuit opinion and permitted a Nevada inmate to pursue an
Eighth Amendment claim against state prison officials for involuntary
exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (Helling et al. v. McKinney, U.S.
Sup. Ct., No. 91-1958).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    William McKinney, who is serving a life sentence in Nevada, filed a
{1983 action in 1987 with the U.S. District Court for the District of
Nevada against officials of the Carson City prison.  McKinney, a
nonsmoker, had a cellmate with a five-pack-a-day habit; his requests to
be housed with a nonsmoking cellmate had been repeatedly denied.

    McKinney had asserted that the unabated ETS exposure had constituted
cruel and unusual punishment; a federal magistrate entered a directed
verdict for the defense in 1989, finding the plaintiff to have no
constitutional right not to be exposed to ETS.  In February 1991, the
Ninth Circuit reversed, finding that McKinney should have been permitted
to enter evidence regarding the level of his ETS exposure and whether
such exposure presented a health risk.

    The prison officials petitioned the Supreme Court in August 1991,
seeking a remand for reconsideration in light of Wilson v. Seiter, a 1991
opinion that established the "deliberate indifference" standard for
prisoners making Eighth Amendment claims.  The high court granted the
petition the following October.

    In March 1992, the Ninth Circuit reinstated its earlier opinion,
holding that Wilson only added an additional element that McKinney would
have to demonstrate to press his action.  The high court granted the
defendants' certiorari petition the following June; oral argument was
heard last Jan. 13.

    Justice Byron R. White delivered the opinion of the court, in which
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John
Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, And David H.
Souter joined.  "Petitioners...submit that unless McKinney can prove that
he is currently suffering serious medical problems caused by exposure to
ETS, there can be no violation of the Eighth Amendment.  That Amendment,
it is urged, does not protect against prison conditions that merely
threaten to cause health problems in the future, no matter how grave and
imminent the threat....

    "We have great difficulty agreeing that prison authorities may not be
deliberately indifferent to an inmate's current health problems but may
ignore a condition of confinement that is sure or very likely to cause
serious illness and needless suffering the next week or month or year,"
the court continued.  "We thus reject petitioners' central thesis that
only deliberate indifference to current serious health problems of
inmates is actionable under the Eighth Amendment."

    The court rejected the stance taken by the United States in its
amicus brief that the harm that ETS exposure causes to any one individual
is speculative and that exposure to ETS is not contrary to current
standards of decency.  As well as having to demonstrate that his exposure
has unreasonably endangered his future health, the court stated, McKinney
"must also establish that it is contrary to current standards of decency
for anyone to be so exposed against his will and that prison officials
are deliberately indifferent to his plight."

    The court noted that since the institution of his lawsuit, McKinney
has been transferred to another prison and is no longer housed with a
heavy smoker; and that the Nevada prison system adopted a formal smoking
policy in January 1992.  The court stated that these realities would
weigh against McKinney's ability to demonstrate the elements of his claim.

    Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissent in which Justice Antonin
Scalia joined.  "Last term," stated the dissent, "the Court held that the
Eighth Amendment prohibits the use of force that causes a prisoner only
minor injuries....  Today the Court expands the Eighth Amendment in yet
another direction, holding that it applies to a prisoner's mere risk of
injury.  Because I find this holding no more acceptable...I again
dissent."

    Nevada Attorney General Frankie Sue Del Papa argued on behalf of the
petitioners.

    Cornish F. Hitchcock of Public Citizen Litigation Group, Washington,
DC, argued on behalf of the respondent.

    Deputy U.S. Solicitor General John G. Roberts Jr. argued on behalf of
the amicus curiae.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

INDUSTRY SUES EPA IN NC FEDERAL COURT OVER ETS REPORT

    Philip Morris Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and four other industry
entities filed a complaint June 22 in the U.S. District Court for the
Middle District of North Carolina against the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, seeking to have the agency withdraw its January 1993
decision and risk assessment classifying environmental tobacco smoke as a
Class A carcinogen (Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative Stabilization Corp. et
al. v. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency et al., MD NC, No. 6:93CV370).

    (The complaint is available from Andrews Document Access Service.
Call 1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    Joining the two manufacturers in the suit are Flue-Cured Tobacco
Cooperative Stabilization Corp., a North Carolina cooperative marketing
association that purchases flue-cured tobacco from growers and sells to
manufacturers; the Kentucky-based Council for Burley Tobacco Inc., which
represents growers and sellers of burley tobacco; Universal Leaf Tobacco
Co. Inc., a Virginia processor of leaf tobacco who purchases from growers
and sells to manufacturers; and Gallins Vending Co., a North Carolina
vendor/distributor.  The complainants asserted that they "have been and
will continue to be directly affected and injured by [the] unauthorized
and unlawful decision to classify ETS as a human carcinogen."

    The action, which also named EPA Administrator Carol Browner,
asserted that the Agency's actions were violative of the Radon Gas and
Indoor Air Quality Research Act of 1986, the Administrative Procedure Act
and the plaintiffs' due process rights under the Fifth Amendment.  The
plaintiffs seek a withdrawal of the decision and a declaration that the
classification and risk assessment are arbitrary, capricious, violative
of required procedures and unconstitutional.

    The complaint asserted that the EPA's actions overstepped its mandate
under the Radon Act and violated requirements to consult with specific
advisory committees.  The decision, the complaint asserted, "did have a
substantial impact throughout the country, including but not limited to
compelling increased restrictions on smoking by private entities and all
entities of government."

    The complaint deemed the EPA's conclusions "wrong as a matter of law
and science....  EPA was able to reach its conclusion only by
manipulating and 'cherry-picking' data, ignoring critical statistical
studies and chemical analyses...and generally altering EPA's models,
assumptions and methodologies when use of the Agency's usual models,
assumptions and methodologies would not have supported its conclusions."

    Submitting the complaint were Dewey W. Wells, Keith W. Vaughan and
Jeffrey L. Furr of Womble Carlyle Sandridge & Rice, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina, on behalf of Philip Morris Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and
Universal Leaf Tobacco Co. Inc.; James K. Dorsett Jr. and James D. Blount
of Smith, Anderson, Blount, Dorsett, Mitchell & Jernigan, Raleigh, North
Carolina, on behalf of Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative Stabilization
Corp., and The Council for Burley Tobacco Inc.; and Richard B. Howington
of Allman Spry Humphreys Leggett & Howington, P.A., Winston-Salem, NC, on
behalf of Gallins Vending Co.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

6TH CIR.: NO ERROR IN DISALLOWING ETS EVIDENCE IN MARITIME ASBESTOS SUIT

    The federal trial court which heard the asbestos-exposure claims of
three merchant seamen did not err by preventing the seamen from arguing
that the shipowner-defendants were liable for exposing them to passive
cigarette smoke, as well as asbestos, or by permitting alternate jurors
to participate in jury deliberations, the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of
Appeals ruled June 3  (Smith v. Gulf Oil Co., 6th Cir., No. 91-3034;
Carbone v. American President Lines et al., No. 91-3036/3037; and Reeves
v. American Export Isbrandsten, No. 91-3040.)

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    The claims of the three merchant seamen -- Harry Smith, Joseph
Carbone and Ashton H. Reeves -- were tried with one other case in federal
court in Cleveland in 1990.  In the first phase of a bifurcated trial,
the trial court allowed the shipowner defendants to present evidence of
the seamen's smoking.  The seamen attempted to counter this defense with
evidence that the shipowners had exposed them to dense, secondhand
tobacco smoke aboard ships.  The court, however, refused a request by the
seamen that it rule that a ship laden with tobacco smoke renders a ship
unseaworthy, and it refused another request by the seamen that to
instruct the jury that dense cigarette smoke may support a finding that
the ship was unseaworthy.

    The case was given to a panel of 10 jurors, including four alternates
who were allowed to participate in the deliberations but not to vote.

    The jury found that neither Smith, Carbone nor Reeves suffers from an
asbestos-related injury.  It awarded $166,000 to the fourth claimant,
Moline.  (The judgment in the Moline case was appealed, and the Sixth
Circuit addressed that appeal in a separate opinion earlier this year in
Miller v. American President Lines.)

    In their appeal, Smith, Carbone and Reeves argued that the trial
court had erred in precluding their claim that the presence of tobacco
smoke in the ships rendered the ships unseaworthy and that the shipowners
were negligent in permitting smoking in unventilated areas of the ships.
They also alleged error in the court's decision to allow alternate jurors
to participate in jury deliberations.

    The Sixth Circuit affirmed.  It said that it need not address "the
novel and difficult question whether a shipowner, by virtue of
maintaining a ship dense with cigarette smoke generated by its occupants,
may have breached its Jone Act duty of care or its maritime law duty to
maintain a seaworthy ship" because the seamen never pleaded that theory
of liability.  Instead, the court said, they presented the theory "in an
altogether off-hand manner" during the trial.  "We conclude that the
district court was well within its discretion to eliminate the issue as
unworthy of trial," the panel said.

    The court added that counsel for the seamen suggested that he was
raising the cigarette smoke liability theory only as a "tactical effort"
to persuade defense counsel to drop their smoking defense.  "Here,
counsel [for the seamen] never seriously suggested that he was prepared
to advance this novel arugment with proof," the panel said.

    The court added that it was not deciding whether a properly presented
claim of cigarette-smoke liability would stand as a matter of law.

    With regard to the jury issue, the appeals court said that the record
showed that the parties had stipulated at trial to the unusual
arrangement, albeit after the trial court judge had threatened to
eliminate consolidated trials for other seamen if the plaintiffs refused
to agree to the arrangement.  It noted that the seamen were represented
by able and experienced counsel and that counsel agreed to the jury
arrangement during an off-record conference without the judge's
presence.

    "Based upon this record, we cannot say that the trial judge's strong
words were enough to overcome plaintiffs' counsel's ability to act in the
perceived best interest of his clients," the court said.

    It held that the seamen had waived their right, under FRCP 47(b), to
have the alternate jurors discharged after the jury retires to
deliberate.

    The seamen are represented by the Jacques Admiralty Law Firm in
Detroit, by Merrit Green with Green, Ashley & Wegian in Toledo, Ohio and
by Dean Robb with Robb, Messing & Palmer in Traverse City, MI.

    Defense attorneys involved in the case included Thomas A. Heffernan
and Richard C. Binzley with Thompson, Hine & Flory in Cleveland, David G.
Davies with Ray, Robinson, Hannian & Carle in Cleveland, and William
Tousley Smith with Calfee, Halter & Griswold, also in Cleveland.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

HIGH COURT FINDS FOR B&W IN GENERICS WAR ANTITRUST DISPUTE

    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 21 affirmed the Fourth Circuit's May
1992 determination that Brooke Group Ltd. (nee Liggett Group Inc.) could
not sustain its claim under the Robinson-Patman Act against Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corp. for predatory pricing in connection with the
generic cigarette war of the mid-1980s.

    Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, writing for a 6-3 majority, accepted the
theoretical viability of Liggett's contention that an oligopolist could
engage in predatory pricing tactics, but found that the plaintiff failed
to prove the level of industry orchestration that such a claim would
require (Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., U.S. Sup.
Ct., No. 92-466).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    Liggett, whose share of the domestic cigarette market stood at
roughly 2% in 1980, became in that year the first American manufacturer
to enter the black-and-white field.  Within three years, generics came to
account for 65% of Liggett's sales volume; by 1984, Liggett's overall
market share stood at 4%, and the company had 97% of the overall generic
market.

    B&W entered the market in 1984 with black-and-white packaged product,
offering distributors both volume rebates and higher bonuses for stocking
their generics exclusively.  Liggett responded by increasing its rebates;
it would do so four more times to try to beat B&W's terms.  Liggett
shortly thereafter lodged a Lanham Act/Robinson-Patman Act complaint
against B&W in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of North
Carolina.

    Following a 115-day trial, the jury found for Liggett in March 1990.
The plaintiff was awarded the costs of engaging in the rebate war, $49.6
million, statutorily trebled to $148.8 million.  Six months later, the
presiding judge granted B&W's motion for JNOV, holding that the plaintiff
had failed to demonstrate that the defendant's practices would injure
competition in the overall U.S. market or that such injury would result
from price discrimination.

    The Fourth Circuit predicated its May 1992 affirmance on the
rationale that, as a member of an oligopoly, B&W could not reasonably
expect to recoup the losses that pursuit of a scheme of predatory pricing
would by necessity involve.

    Justice Kennedy's affirmance was joined by Chief Justice William H.
Rehnquist, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, Justice Antonin Scalia, Justice
David H. Souter and Justice Clarence Thomas.  "[W]hether the claim
alleges predatory pricing under { 2 of the Sherman Act or primary-line
price discrimination under the Robinson-Patman Act, two prerequisites to
recovery remain the same," wrote the Court.  "First, a plaintiff seeking
to establish competitive injury resulting from a rival's low prices must
prove that the prices complained of are below an appropriate measure of
its rival's costs....

    "The second prerequisite," the Court continued, "is a demonstration
that the competitor had a reasonable prospect, or, under { 2 of the
Sherman Act, a dangerous probability, of recouping its investment in
below-costs prices."  The Court stated that in the oligopoly context, the
plaintiff would have to demonstrate that the below-cost prices would
likely cause the plaintiff to leave the market or raise its prices to
supracompetitive levels, and show that the below-costs prices would
result in injury to competition, i.e. that the predator would have to
raise its prices above competitive levels to cover the costs of the
predation.

    "These prerequisites to recovery are not easy to establish," stated
Justice Kennedy, "but they are not artificial obstacles to recovery;
rather, they are essential components of real market injury.... It would
be ironic indeed if the standards for predatory pricing liability were so
low that antitrust suits themselves became a tool for keeping prices
high."

    The Court found the likelihood of predatory pricing by a oligopolist
to be lowest where "there is no express coordination.  Firms that seek to
recoup predatory losses through the conscious parallelism of oligopoly
must rely on uncertain and ambiguous signals to achieve concerted
action.... This anticompetitive minuet is most difficult to compose and
perform, even for a disciplined oligopoly."

    The Court rejected the Fourth Circuit's dismissal of the viability of
predatory pricing occuring within an oligopoly.  "A predatory pricing
scheme designed to preserve or create a stable oligopoly, if successful,
can injure consumers in the same way, and to the same extent, as one
designed to bring about a monopoly.... [W]hen the realities of the market
and the record facts indicate that it has occurred and was likely to have
succeeded, theory will not stand in the way of liability."

    Ultimately, however, the High Court determined that Liggett did not
have a case to take to the jury.  "The record in this case demonstrates
that the anticompetitive scheme Liggett alleged, when judged against the
realities of the market, does not provide an adequate basis for a finding
of liability."  Justice Kennedy found the evidence sufficient to show
that B&W envisioned or anticipated the anticompetitive results of its
actions; that it priced its generics below cost for a year-and-a-half;
and that Liggett sustained losses as a result of that pricing.

    "[H]owever," the Court continued, "[Liggett's] proof is flawed in a
critical respect: The evidence is inadequate to show that in pursuing
this scheme, Brown & Williamson had a reasonable prospect of recovering
its losses from below-costs pricing through slowing the growth of
generics.... [N]o evidence suggests that [B&W] was likely to obtain the
power to raise the prices for generic cigarettes above a competitive
level."

    The Court determined that Liggett's market evidence did not support
its theory of the case.  "[T]he price and output data do not support a
reasonable inference that [B&W] and the other cigarette companies
elevated prices above a competitive level for generic cigarettes.... the
record evidence does not permit a reasonable inference that output would
have been greater without [B&W]'s entry into the generic segment."

    The Court was unmoved by the plaintiff's citation to price behavior
of generic and branded cigarettes through the remainder of the 1980s.
"All of Liggett's data is based upon the list prices of various
categories of cigarettes.  Yet the jury had before it undisputed evidence
that during the period in question, list prices were not the actual
prices paid by consumers...  Liggett's gap data ignores the effect of
'subgeneric' cigarettes... Liggett itself, while supposedly under the
sway of oligopoly power, pioneered this development in 1988".

    The Court held that "rising prices do not themselves permit an
inference of a collusive market dynamic."  Justice Kennedy found
significant that Liggett's own officers had "consistently denied that
they or other firms [priced] their cigarettes through tacit collusion".

    The High Court found that the evidence did not even show a likelihood
of supracompetitive pricing, noting that the industry in 1984 faced a
decline in demand and substantial excess capacity.  "[T]he situation
facing the cigarette companies in the 1980's would have made such tacit
coordination unmanageable," Justice Kennedy determined.

    "We understand that the chain of reasoning by which we have concluded
that Brown & Williamson is entitled to judgment as a matter of law is
demanding," the Court concluded.  "But a reasonable jury is presumed to
know and understand the law, the facts of the case, and the realities of
the market."

    Justice John Paul Stevens authored a dissent in which Justice Byron
R. White and Justice Harry A. Blackmun joined.  "The fact that a price
war may not have accomplished its purpose as quickly or as completely as
originally intended," wrote Justice Stevens, "does not immunize conduct
that was illegal when it occurred...

    "That B&W executives were willing to accept [$15 million in losses]
during the entire 18 months is powerful evidence of their belief that
prices ultimately could be 'managed up' to a level that would allow B&W
to recoup its investment," the dissent stated.  "[The majority relies] on
the supposition that an 'anticompetitive minuet is most difficult to
compose and perform, even for a disciplined oligopoly'... I would
suppose, however, that the professional performers who had danced the
minuet for 40 to 50 years would be better able to predict whether their
favorite partners would follow them in the future than would an outsider,
who might not know the difference between Haydn and Mozart."

    Philip Areeda, Cambridge, Massachusetts, argued on behalf of the
petitioner.

    Robert H. Bork, Washington, D.C., argued on behalf of the respondent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

WA SMALL CLAIMS CT. REJECTS EX-SMOKER'S CESSATION CLAIMS AGAINST PM

    Judge Linda Jacke of the Mercer Island County, WA, District Court on
June 22 dismissed as time-barred the small claims suit lodged against
Philip Morris Inc. by a Kirkland design engineer who sought to recoup
$1154 in expenditures incurred as a result of his quitting smoking
(Deskiewicz v. Philip Morris Inc., Mercer Island Cty., WA, Dist. Ct.,
No. 16917).

    Judge Jacke determined that Alfred Deskiewicz Jr.'s claims against PM
began to run in the 1970s, when he first unsuccessfully tried to kick a
Marlboro habit that lasted 34 years.  Deskiewicz, 51, had argued that he
first realized that he was addicted to smoking in 1989; his expenses
represented the costs of doctor's visits, nicotine patches and a health
club membership in order to lose the weight gained after he quit.

    Judge Jacke also determined that the plaintiff failed to prove that
he could not stop smoking without outside aid.  Deskiewicz had made two
unsuccesful attempts at quitting before breaking his habit.

    Mr. Deskiewicz was self-represented.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

HIGH COURT: JUDGES SHOULD DECIDE RELIABILITY OF SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY

    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 28 held that federal judges should be
active gatekeepers charged with insuring that "any and all scientific
testimony or evidence admitted is not only relevant, but reliable"
(Daubert et al. v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., U.S. Sup. Ct.,
No. 92-102).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    The Supreme Court case involved Jason Daubert and Eric Schuller, who
were born with severe and permanent limb-reduction birth defects.  In
1984, their parents, individually and as guardians ad litem
(collectively, Daubert), filed suit in California state court against
Merrell Dow, alleging that the birth defects had been caused by the
company's anti-nausea drug Bendectin, which each child's mother had taken
during the limb-development phase of pregnancy.  Eight experts testified
in support of the allegation that Bendectin had caused both sets of limb
defects.  Merrell Dow elected to remove the cases to the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of California, based on diversity of
citizenship.

    After preliminary discovery, Merrell Dow moved for summary judgment
on the issue of causation, claiming there exists no scientific proof that
Bendectin causes birth defects and, therefore, it could not have caused
the birth defects at issue in this case.  The district court granted
summary judgment on the basis that none of Daubert's expert testimony was
admissible "because it lacks the sufficient foundation necessary under
[Federal Rule of Evidence] 703."  The evidence was excluded on the basis
that either:  (1) the testimony excluded epidemiological data, or (2) the
testimony included epidemiological data but the expert did not cite a
specific, published, peer-reviewed study that, considered in isolation,
proves causation with "statistical significance," i.e., 95% certainty.

    Daubert appealed, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed, advancing its own
ground for excluding Daubert's expert testimony.  Citing Frye v. Unites
States (293 F. 1013, 1014 [DC Cir. 1923]), the court held that expert
opinion based on a scientific technique is admissible only if it is
generally accepted as a reliable technique among the scientific community.

    Daubert filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the U.S. Supreme
Court, which granted certiorari on Oct. 13.  During a March 30 hearing,
Michael H. Gottesman, professor of law at the Georgetown University
School of Law, argued the case for Daubert.  He urged the court to permit
expert testimony based on animal studies, cell studies, chemical
composition studies and the re-analysis of epidemiological studies.  He
claimed the Ninth Circuit incorrectly adopted a requirement that
scientific evidence appear in peer-reviewed journals.  He said the
correct law, the Federal Rules of Evidence, would allow the evidence to
be admitted.

    Former Solicitor General Charles Fried, currently a law professor at
the Harvard University College of Law, argued the case for Merrell Dow.
He called 'scientific knowledge,' as used in Rule 702, "that body of
propositions which have been produced by the methods and procedures of
science."  He contended Daubert's propositions "have not been produced by
the methods and procedures of science."

    In an opinion written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, the Supreme Court
said that the trial judge must determine at the outset whether an expert
is proposing to testify to (1) scientific knowledge that (2) will assist
the trier of fact to understand or determine a fact is issue.  It said,
"This entails a preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning or
methodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid and of
whether that reasoning or methodology properly can be applied to the
facts in issue.  We are confident that federal judges possess the
capacity to undertake this review.  Many factors will bear on the
inquiry, and we do not presume to set out a definitive checklist or test."

    But the court did find some general observations to be appropriate.
"Ordinarily, a key question to be answered in determining whether a
theory or technique is scientific knowledge that will assist the trier of
fact will be whether it can be (and has been) tested....  Another
pertinent consideration is whether the theory or technique has been
subjected to peer review and publication.  Publication (which is but one
element of peer review) is not a sine qua non of admissibility; it does
not necessarily correlate with reliability,...and in some instances
well-grounded but innovative theories will not have been published....
Some propositions, moreover, are too particular, too new, or of too
limited interest to be published.  But submission to the scrutiny of the
scientific community is a component of 'good science,' in part because it
increases the likelihood that substantive flaws in methodology will be
detected....  The fact of publication (or lack thereof) in a
peer-reviewed journal thus will be a relevant, though not dispositive,
consideration in assessing the scientific validity of a particular
technique or methodology on which an opinion is premised....
Additionally, in the case of a particular scientific technique, the court
ordinarily should consider the known or potential rate of error,...and
the existence and maintenance of standards controlling the technique's
operation," the court said.

    "Finally," the panel continued, "'general acceptance' can yet have a
bearing on the inquiry....  Widespread acceptance can be an important
factor in ruling particular evidence admissible, and 'a known technique
that has been able to attract only minimal support within the
community'...may properly be viewed with skepticism.  The inquiry
envisioned by Rule 702 is, we emphasize, a flexible one....  Throughout,
a judge assessing a proffer of expert scientific testimony under Rule 702
should always be mindful of other applicable rules.  Rule 703 provides
that expert opinions based on otherwise inadmissible hearsay are to be
admitted only if the facts or data are 'of a type reasonably relied upon
by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon
the subject.'  Rule 706 allows the court at its discretion to procure the
assistance of an expert of its own choosing.  Finally, Rule 403 permits
the exclusion of relevant evidence 'if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of
the issues, or misleading the jury....'"

    The court addressed Merrell Dow's concerns that abandonment of
"general acceptance" as the exclusive requirement for admission will
result in a "free-for-all" in which befuddled juries are confounded by
absurd and irrational pseudoscientific assertions.  It said, in this
regard, Merrell Dow "seems to us to be overly pessimistic about the
capabilities of the jury, and of the adversary system generally.
Vigorous cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and
careful instruction on the burden of proof are the traditional and
appropriate means of attacking shaky but admissible evidence....
Additionally, in the event the trial court concludes that the scintilla
of evidence presented supporting a position is insufficient to allow a
reasonable juror to conclude that the position more likely than not is
true, the court remains free to direct a judgment....  These conventional
devices, rather than wholesale exclusion under an uncompromising 'general
acceptance' test, are the appropriate safeguards where the basis of
scientific testimony meets the standards of Rule 702."

    The court added, "We recognize that in practice, a gatekeeping role
for the judge, no matter how flexible, inevitably on occasion will
prevent the jury from learning of authentic insights and innovations.
That, nevertheless, is the balance that is struck by Rules of Evidence
designed not for the exhaustive search for cosmic understanding but for
the particularized resolution of legal disputes."

    Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote a partial dissent.  "I do
not doubt that Rule 702 confides to the judge some gatekeeping
responsibility in deciding questions of the admissibility of proffered
expert testimony.  But I do not think it imposes on them either the
obligation or the authority to become amateur scientists in order to
perform that role.  I think the Court would be far better advised in this
case to decide only the questions presented, and to leave the further
development of this important area of the law to future cases," he said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS $10 MILLION WV PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARD

    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 25 affirmed the determination of West
Virginia's highest court that a $10 million punitive damage award granted
by a jury on a $19,000 slander of title claim was not violative of the
14th Amendment's Due Process Clause (TXO Production Corp. v. Alliance
Resources Group et al., U.S. Sup. Ct., No. 92-479).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    The litigation arose from the petitioner TXO Production Corp.'s 1984
decision to obtain the rights to develop oil and gas resources on a
1000-acre West Virginia tract.  TXO approached the rightsholder Alliance
Resources Group with an offer of $20 per acre and a 22% royalty on all
oil and gas revenues in exchange for Alliance's interests; Alliance
accepted the offer in 1985, agreeing to return all consideration paid if
its title was found invalid.

    TXO's lawyers subsequently uncovered a 1958 deed executed by
Alliance's predecessor in interest that conveyed interests in mining
rights.  TXO's lawyers spoke to the recipient of the deed, and his
subsequent transferees, and all understood that the deed solely applied
to mine coal.  The 1958 deed stated on its face that the conveyor
retained all oil and gas rights.

    Despite this knowledge, TXO thereafter apprised Alliance that a
"distinct possibility or probability" existed that its title was flawed.
TXO obtained a quitclaim deed to the mineral rights from the last
deedholder, and unsuccessfully tried to persuade the recipient of the
1958 deed to sign a false affidavit indicating that the deed might
contemplate oil and gas rights.

    TXO thereafter sought to renegotiate the agreement, and filed the
instant suit after negotiations failed.  The McDowell County Circuit
Court rejected TXO's claims; moreover, a jury found for Alliance on its
counterclaim for slander of title.  Among the evidence before the jury
was TXO's knowledge of the validity of Alliance's title; the bad faith in
which TXO acted by challenging the title; the large size of TXO and its
parent company; that the anticipated revenues (and royalties) were
substantial; and TXO's comparable behavior in other business dealings.
The jury based its $19,000 actual damages award on Alliance's defense
costs.

    The trial court denied TXO's J.N.O.V. and remittitur motions, and TXO
appealed to the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, arguing the
punitive award as unconstitutional per the U.S. Supreme Court's 1991
holding in Pacific Mutual Life v. Haslip.

    The state high court rejected the appeal, finding the award supported
by each factor in its recognized "reasonable relationship" test, i.e.,
the potential harm TXO's actions could have caused; the maliciousness of
TXO's actions; and the penalty necessary to discourage similar conduct in
the future.

    "The parties' desire to formulate a 'test' for determining whether a
particular punitive award is 'grossly excessive' is understandable,"
wrote Justice John Paul Stevens in an opinion joined by Chief Justice
William H. Rehnquist and Justice Harry A. Blackmun.  "Under respondents'
rational basis standard, apparently any award that would serve the
legitimate state interest in deterring or punishing wrongful conduct, no
matter how large, would be acceptable....

    "On the other hand, we reject the premise underlying TXO's invocation
of heightened scrutiny," the court continued.  "[I]n determining whether
a particular award is so 'grossly excessive' as to violate the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, ...we return to what we said
two Terms ago in Haslip:  'We need not and indeed we cannot, draw a
mathematical bright line between the constitutionally acceptable and the
constitutionally unacceptable that would fit in every case.'"

    In response to the petitioner's emphasizing that the punitive award
was 526 times the amount of the actual damages, the court wrote that it
has "eschewed an approach that concentrates entirely on the relationship
between actual and punitive damages.  It is appropriate to consider the
magnitude of the potential harm that the defendant's conduct would have
caused to its intended victim if the wrongful plan had succeeded, as well
as the possible harm to other victims that might have resulted if similar
future behavior were not deterred....

    "While petitioner stresses the shocking disparity between the
punitive award and the compensatory award," the court continued, "that
shock dissipates when one considers the potential loss to respondents, in
terms of reduced or eliminated royalties payments, had petitioner
succeeded in its illicit scheme."

    The court refused to find the award "grossly excessive" in light of
"the amount of money potentially at stake, the bad faith of petitioner,
the fact that the scheme employed in this case was part of a larger
pattern of fraud, trickery and deceit, and petitioner's wealth."

    TXO had argued that, unlike in Haslip, the jury was instructed to
take "the wealth of the perpetrator" into account in arriving at the
punitive award; this distinction did not alter the majority's final
analysis.  "[I]n Haslip we referred to the 'financial position' of the
defendant as one factor that could be taken into account in assessing
punitive damages....  We also note that TXO did not squarely argue in the
West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals that these aspects of the jury
instruction violated the Due Process [Clause], possibly because many
States permit the jury to take account of the defendant's wealth," the
court stated.

    The court was unmoved by the criticism engendered by the West
Virginia high court's drawing of distinction between classes of "really
mean" and "really stupid" defendants in weighing a punitive award.  "That
those terms played little, if any, part in [the West Virginia Supreme
Court's] actual evaluation of the propriety of the damages award is
evident from the reasoning in its thorough opinion....  Moreover, two
members of the court who wrote separately to disassociate themselves from
the 'really mean' and 'really stupid' terminology shared the views of the
rest of the members of the court on the merits."

    Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who concurred in part and concurred in
the judgment, wrote separately to state that he "was not in full
agreement [with] the plurality's discussion of the substantive
requirements of the Due Process Clause....  To ask whether a particular
award of punitive damages is grossly excessive begs the question:
excessive in relation to what?  The answer excessive in relation to the
conduct of the tortfeasor may be correct, but it is unhelpful, for we are
still bereft of any standard by which to compare the punishment to the
malefaction that gave rise to it."

    Justice Antonin Scalia, who concurred in the judgment, wrote a
separate opinion in which Justice Clarence Thomas joined.  Justice Scalia
stated that the plurality "makes explicit what was implicit in Haslip:
the existence of a so-called 'substantive due process' right that
punitive damages be reasonable....  I am willing to accept the
proposition that the Due Process [Clause] incorporates certain
substantive guarantees specified in the Bill of Rights; but I do not
accept the proposition that it is the secret repository of all sorts of
other, enumerated, substantive rights."

    Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote a lengthy dissent that was joined
by Justice Byron R. White and in part by Justice David H. Souter.  "In
[Haslip]," the dissent stated, "this Court held out the promise that
punitive damages award would receive sufficient constitutional scrutiny
to restore fairness in what is rapidly becoming an arbitrary and
oppressive system.  Today the Court's judgment renders Haslip's promise a
false one."

    "The procedures that converted this commercial dispute into a $10
million punitive verdict," the dissent continued, "were wholly
inadequate.  Rather than producing a judgment founded on verifiable
criteria, they produced a monstrous award....  In my view, due process
does not tolerate such cavalier standards when so much is at stake."

    Carter Phillips of Sidley & Austin, Washington, DC, argued the case
for the petitioner.

    Prof. Laurence Tribe of Harvard University Law School argued the case
for the respondents.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

MARYLAND APPEALS CT. FINDS NO REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CANCER-FEAR EVIDENCE

    The Maryland Court of Special Appeals on April 28 affirmed a $407,224
judgment against Keene Corp. in an asbestosis case after rejecting
Keene's arguments that the trial court had erred in admitting evidence of
the claimant's fear of cancer and that the claimant presented
insufficient evidence to overcome Keene's state-of-the-art defense (Keene
Corp. v. Lewis, MD Ct. of Special App., Sept. Term 1992, No. 1479).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    Plaintiff William Lewis alleges asbestosis from exposure to asbestos
while working as a sheet metal worker at the Bethlehem Steel shipyard in
Baltimore between 1942 and 1944.

    His original suit against 16 defendants alleged mesothelioma and
asbestosis, but the claim of mesothelioma was withdrawn after he learned
that it had been misdiagnosed.  Before the trial, Keene sought to prevent
all references to cancer or mesothelioma.  The trial court denied the
motion to the extent that it would have precluded all evidence concerning
Lewis' fear or emotional distress at the prospect of contracting cancer,
but it also ruled that evidence concerning the prospect of Lewis'
contracting cancer would not be allowed absent evidence of the medical
probability of contracting the disease.

    The case went to trial against Keene only.  The jury found Keene
liable on Lewis' strict liability claim and awarded him $402,224 in
compensatory damages, and awarded his wife $5,999 for loss of
consortium.

    Keene appealed, arguing that the court erred in allowing references
to cancer and evidence of Lewis' fear of cancer and in submitting the
strict liability claim to the jury.

    Affirming, the appeals court noted that the record of the trial
contains 79 scattered references to the word "cancer" and 41 references
to the word "mesothelioma."  But, it refused to regard these "incidental
references" as grounds for reversing, observing that the both plaintiff's
counsel and the court had told the jury that Lewis was making no claim
for present or future cancer.

    The court said that it could locate no testimony by Lewis in the
record concerning a current fear of cancer; the only testimony it could
locate concerned his relief upon learning that his mesothelioma had been
misdiagnosed.  "The only evidence that the jury heard in this regard was
essentially positive -- that Mr. Lewis did not have cancer and that he
was making no claim for either present or future cancer.  He gave no
testimony as to any present emotional distress but expressed only his
delight in knowing that he was 'going to be here for a while,'" the court
observed.

    "In summary, then, we do not see in this record a sufficient
intrusion of inappropriate evidence to require reversal."

    The court also rejected Keene's argument that Lewis presented
insufficient evidence to show that, at the time of his exposure in the
early 1940s, it had or should have known that its product, as used in the
shipyards where he worked, was sufficiently dangerous to require a
warning.

    The court simply reviewed the relevant state-of-the-art testimony
from Kenneth Nelson and from Lewis, and concluded that it was sufficient
to show that the product was dangerous when used in ships on which Lewis
worked, that Keene should have known of its danger to shipyard workers by
February 1943, and that it failed to warn Lewis and others in his
position of the danger.

    Lewis is represented by Shepard Hoffman and Deboarh Hines with
Connerton, Ray & Simon in Washington, DC, and by G. Mitchel Mowell of
Chestertown, Maryland.  Keene is represented by Ford Davis and John
Billmyer with Whiteford, Taylor & Preston in Baltimore.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>