
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B30-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B002-293</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch14.html 205.156.212.5 19970114210025 text/html 33703
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 20:58:35 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:45:56 GMT
Content-length: 33516
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ch14.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>***************&nbsp;SLANTS & TRENDS&nbsp;***************</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1009 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>RSPA IMPROPERLY CEDES AUTHORITY&nbsp;UNDER TICKET PROPOSAL, NPCA SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(709 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PE%A ANNOUNCES DELAY&nbsp;IN NAFTA CROSSINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(656 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>RSPA PROPOSES EXPEDITED PROCEDURE&nbsp;FOR ISSUING NON-CONTROVERSIAL RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(321 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>EFFORTS TO ACCELERATE TIMETABLE&nbsp;FOR RADWASTE SHIPMENTS QUICKEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(892 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>NTSB COUNTS HEAD SHIELDS, COUPLERS&nbsp;AS BEING AMONG ITS TOP ACHIEVEMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(386 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>CLINTON NOMINATES GEORGIAN&nbsp;FOR TRANSPORT SAFETY BOARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>U.S. HAZMAT REGS PREEMPT&nbsp;NEW YORK RULES, RSPA SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(476 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

***************
SLANTS & TRENDS
***************


THE ASSOCIATION of American Railroads (AAR) last month
completed the consolidation of hazmat and other research
facilities at its Transportation Technology Center (TTC) in
Pueblo, Colo. As part of the consolidation, AAR closed its
Chicago Technical Center (CTC) at the Illinois Institute of
Technology. Thirty CTC employees were relocated to the TTC.

'CONSOLIDATION of our TTC and CTC facilities will result in
annual savings of more than $2 million," AAR President Edwin
Harper said. "By combining AAR's rail research experts and
equipment at one location, we will increase our research
effectiveness and TTC's capacity to attract future research
and development projects."

* * *

PRESIDENT CLINTON entered office three years ago this month
pledging to make government more efficient. In keeping with
that promise, the Research and Special Programs
Administration (RSPA) has proposed placing administrative
procedure on its head. On non-controversial rules, RSPA will
promulgate first and ask for comments later (See story, p.
5).

* * *

QUOTE, UNQUOTE: "If a pilot ticketing program is
implemented, shippers should have the opportunity to contest
alleged violations by telephone as well as in writing. There
have been numerous occasions when letters of warning or
verbal warnings have been issued inappropriately due to
incorrect interpretation of the regulations by inspectors.
These enforcement errors can often be resolved over the
telephone. Under the proposed program it appears that the
relative ease of issuing tickets could result in more
penalties being proposed and that tickets could only be
contested in writing." - American Crop Protection
Association, commenting on a RSPA proposal to issue tickets
for minor hazmat transport violations.

* * *

RSPA SURVIVED 1995 INTACT. A Clinton administration proposal
to combine the Department of Transportation's 10 agencies
into three modal offices apparently got lost in the
legislative shuffle last year.

RSPA Clarifications

     Selective testing: Aldrich Chemical Co., Milwaukee,
asked whether alternative closure methods for packages may
be used interchangeably without retesting, so long as the
packages provide an equivalent level of performance.

     RSPA responded that under the agency's Selective
Testing Variation 4 [Section 178.601(g)(ii) of the Hazardous
Materials Regulations], testing is not required when the
structural design of the tested-out packaging, including
methods of closure, "is maintained." The agency added,
"Thus, any change to the originally tested closure results
in a different packaging design type requiring design
qualification testing."

     Competent authority: The Glidden Co., Cleveland, asked
whether it would need a Competent Authority Permit Number
from the U.S. Transportation Department, and display that
number on all shipping papers, to export a product in RSPA-
approved UN1A2 (open-head) drums. The International Maritime
Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code generally requires shipments to
be made in steel, closed-head drums unless another type of
drum is permitted under competent authority.

     RSPA responded that so long as the U.S. company
complies with the Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) it
has permission from competent authority and does not need
other documentation. "The RSPA associate administrator for
hazardous materials safety is the United States Competent
Authority for purposes of the IMDG Code," RSPA said. "The
provisions contained in the HMR constitute competent
authority approval for the United States for transportation
of hazardous materials in instances where the IMDG code ...
specifically permit[s] a variation based on the approval of
competent authority."

     Reportable quantity: The Technical Group Inc.,
Washington, asked whether it is better to rely on the
intended formulation "batch sheet" information or on the
actual laboratory analysis of the end product to determine
whether the lead content of a material meets or exceeds its
assigned reportable quantity of 10 pounds per package.

     RSPA said it is the shipper's duty to classify a hazmat
properly, and the agency "does not prescribe a particular
method a shipper must follow in determining whether a
material is a hazardous substance." Added RSPA: "If any
constituent equals or exceeds its listed RQ per package,
then the material meets the definition of a hazardous
substance. Therefore, if the amount of lead content in a
material equals or exceeds 10 pounds per package, the
material is a hazardous substance."

     Unflanged heads: New Progress Inc., Arthur, Ill., asked
whether Department of Transportation (DOT) regulations
permit cargo tanks with unflanged heads to be used to
transport hazmat. New Progress said if DOT rules allow, the
company would proceed with building chassis-mounted truck
tanks with unflanged heads.

     RSPA had bad news for the company: DOT regulations
prohibit the use of tanks with unflanged heads. "Unflanged
heads have no radius and are unacceptable," RSPA said.
"Flanged heads having a knuckle radius less than that
permitted by Section 178.346-1(d)(3) [of the Hazardous
Materials Regulations] also are not acceptable."

     Made in the USA: Olympic IBC Corp, Kirkland, Wash.,
asked whether it may apply the "USA" mark to bulk containers
the company primarily manufactures at its affiliate in
Mexico. Because it takes full responsibility for the
markings and the final step of manufacture is completed in
the United States, Olympic IBC said it believes the
containers may be marked USA.

     However, the company is wrong, RSPA said. Under the
agency's HM-215A rule, RSPA said, "A USA marked packaging
should be manufactured and marked only in the U.S." The rule
is published in the Dec. 29, 1994, Federal Register.

     Shipping, fueling: Consolidated Edison Company of New
York Inc., New York, asked whether the Hazardous Materials
Regulations, which apply to cylinders used as shipping
containers, apply to cylinders used as part of a system to
fuel a compressed natural gas-powered vehicle.

     "Cylinders used as fuel tanks for propulsion and not to
transport cargo are not subject to regulation under the
federal hazardous materials transportation law or the
Hazardous Materials Regulations," RSPA responded.

     "In addition, as long as those cylinders are mounted on
your vehicles and used only as fuel tanks, there is no legal
requirement to reinspect or retest them under the
exemption," the agency stated. "Therefore, you may make your
own determinations about what reinspections and retests are
necessary for safety purposes."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

RSPA IMPROPERLY CEDES AUTHORITY
UNDER TICKET PROPOSAL, NPCA SAYS


     The Research and Special Programs Administration, in a
proposal to ticket hazmat violations that do not
substantially harm safety, improperly surrenders much of its
hazmat oversight responsibility to the U.S. Coast Guard, a
group of paint-makers, suppliers and distributors has told
RSPA.

     The National Paint and Coatings Association (NPCA) also
derided the proposal as ambiguous and a way to discourage
companies from paying fines, even as the group  praised RSPA
for trying to simplify hazmat enforcement procedures.
Nevertheless, the focus of the association's objections is
RSPA's proposal to have Coast Guard hearing officers handle
shippers' appeals of these tickets.

     Under the controversial proposal, RSPA inspectors would
be allowed to write tickets for violations that have "no
substantial impact on safety," including: operating under an
expired exemption, neglecting to register, failing to
maintain training records and not filing incident reports.
The tickets would state the facts supporting the alleged
violation and a penalty amount "substantially less than the
penalty that would be proposed under current procedures,"
RSPA stated.

Coast Guard Would Hear Cases

     Other provisions of RSPA's proposal would give alleged
violators the choice of paying the ticket or contesting the
proposed penalty within 30 days of receipt. Companies
contesting the ticket would have a hearing before a U.S.
Coast Guard hearing officer, a proposal NPCA derided as
unfair to industry.

     "Final resolution of alleged violations by the Coast
Guard, without any recourse back to RSPA, is troubling
because the industry is not familiar with Coast Guard
procedures and the industry is unsure of the Coast Guard's
familiarity with RSPA regulations and the practice of the
motor transportation industry," NPCA said.

     "Although the Coast Guard may have some expertise with
hazardous materials regulations as they relate to maritime
shipping, the Coast Guard has no history of interaction with
motor carriers," the group added. "Therefore, they are not
familiar with the general practices of the industry and this
fact will be an obstacle to a smooth resolution of these
cases."

     NPCA urged RSPA to increase its own role in the
proposal by giving alleged violators a right to appeal the
Coast Guard's decision to the RSPA administrator. After all,
RSPA would be the agency that enforces the Coast Guard's
ruling, the association added.

     "RSPA's desire to offload some of the burden of
handling 'insubstantial' violations through a ticketing
program...to better service cases or violations that do
concern safety issues is laudable," NPCA said. "However,
even in cases where there is no substantial impact on
safety, there may come a time during the resolution process
that the enforcing agency's office needs to examine the
case."

     In addition to its objection regarding the Coast
Guard's role, NPCA said RSPA has failed to define adequately
what the agency means by "no substantial impact" on safety.
"Although it does seem clear that the ticketing option will
only be used for the seemingly innocuous recordkeeping type
of violations, there is no built-in mechanism within the
proposal that clearly establishes succinct boundaries for
inclusion in the program," NPCA said.

Proposal Would Discourage Payment

     RSPA's proposal to permit minor violations to count
against a shipper's safety record, and thereby increase the
company's penalties for future violations, will discourage
the payment of fines. Companies, instead of paying the fines
immediately, would try their luck at a hearing, thereby
delaying payments, the association added.

     "If the ticketing proposal is meant to be a streamlined
method of dealing with 'insubstantial' violations and will
result in a certain percentage of cases being moved away
from RSPA, RSPA will want to encourage companies to
participate in this new streamlined process," NPCA said.

     "If, however, companies learn that the most innocuous
'insubstantial' violations will result in escalating fines
or other ramifications (like an increase in insurance
premiums because of a number of tickets, being published in
the year-end report of violations with a list of tickets),
there will be no incentive to pay the ticket," NPCA added.
"Faced with escalating fines or other ramifications, most
companies will choose to contest the ticket."

     RSPA's ticket proposal was published in the Aug. 21
Federal Register. Contact: RSPA's Office of Chief Counsel,
(202) 366-4400; Office of Hazardous Materials Enforcement,
(202) 366-4700.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

PE%A ANNOUNCES DELAY
IN NAFTA CROSSINGS


     Approval for trucking companies wishing to conduct
cross-border traffic between the United States and Mexico
under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is on
hold until U.S. and Mexican transportation officials meet
and further "improve safety and security measures,"
Department of Transportation (DOT) Secretary Federico Pe$a
said Dec. 18.

     Under NAFTA, Mexican and U.S. truckers were to be
allowed to cross the border and operate throughout those
U.S. and Mexican states along the border starting Dec. 18.

     Mexican drivers wanting to operate past the up-to-15-
mile commercial zone must file for approval from the
Interstate Commerce Commission's successor agency. Though
that agency, the Surface Transportation Board, will take
applications from Mexican truckers, approval will be
withheld until safety meetings occur, Pe$a said.

Mexico: Move Violates NAFTA

     Since the announcement, the Mexican government wrote to
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor declaring the U.S.
delay a violation of the principles of the agreement and
threatening to file a complaint under NAFTA's enforcement
mechanism. U.S. officials expressed surprise about the
Mexican complaints, saying the Mexican government knew of
the U.S. intent far in advance.

     And, said Kantor in a return letter excerpted in The
Washington Post, despite the Mexicans' concerns, "we must
first and foremost ensure the safety and security of our
citizens."

     The trucking industry, cautiously concerned when Pe$a
first announced the delay, became "outraged" as the week
went on, said Linda Bauer-Darr, vice president of
international relations at the American Trucking
Associations (ATA). "Obviously, there is no deadline" to end
the delay, Bauer-Darr said. "Obviously [the delay] was
brought about because of political pressures.

     "This is not a good way to be conducting business ...
with our important trading partners," Bauer-Darr said.

     As Dec. 18 approached, safety advocates such as
Citizens for Reliable and Safe Highways (CRASH) and unions
such as the International Brotherhood of Teamsters stepped
up protests to the pending opening of the border.

     The groups contend Mexican trucks do not meet state and
federal standards regarding safety, weight or insurance and
that Mexican drivers are not sufficiently trained in hazmat
procedures. They also contend state and federal officials in
the United States are not sufficiently staffed, funded or
prepared to enforce U.S. safety standards on the Mexican
trucks. Officials in the four border states - Arizona,
California, New Mexico and Texas - share those worries.

     Giving in to pressure from those groups will hurt the
U.S. trucking industry in the long run, Bauer-Darr said.
"This is going to play very dangerously when it comes to
other pending trade issues with Mexico," she added.

     U.S. and Mexican negotiators are trying to work out
disputes over such issues as small-package delivery, wheat-
transportation rules and the use of 53-foot trailers in
Mexico.

     "This delay destroys any political leverage [the United
States] had at all," Bauer-Darr said. "Here we're saying
it's very important for [Mexico] to live up to its NAFTA
commitments, but then we don't live up to ours."

     The labor and safety groups were "cautiously
optimistic" about the delay. "The delay is good news ...
only if it means that Mexico will ultimately raise its
truck-safety standards to meet our own," said CRASH
Executive Director Jack Rendler. "Our government should be
doing more, not less, to address truck safety, and NAFTA
should not result in any loosening of U.S. truck-safety
standards.

     Despite the delay on the open-border rule, other
actions took effect Dec. 18 as scheduled, such as the cross-
investment rule, which permits U.S. trucking companies to
invest in their Mexican counterparts, and vice versa.
Contact: DOT's public-affairs office, (202) 366-5580; ATA,
(703) 838-1700; Office of the U.S. Trade Representative,
(202) 395-3000.

* * *

Hazardous Materials Handling Certification for DOT HM-181,
HM-215A and HM-126F is a seminar scheduled for Jan. 17 in
Baton Rouge, La. Contact: Environmental Resource Center,
(800) 537-2372 or (919) 469-1585.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

RSPA PROPOSES EXPEDITED PROCEDURE
FOR ISSUING NON-CONTROVERSIAL RULES


     The Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA)
Dec. 18 - in what would be a break from usual regulatory
procedure - proposed a new system of issuing rules in non-
controversial areas first and then inviting interested
parties to submit their objections.

     Under the usual procedure, RSPA - like other federal
agencies - proposes rules and invites the public to comment
on the proposals. Only after the time for comments has
expired does the agency issue its regulations.

     However, in an effort to make the agency more
efficient, RSPA has proposed bypassing the notice-and-
comment period by publishing "non-controversial" rules in
the Federal Register and then seeking input from parties who
object to the rules. If RSPA does not receive a "significant
adverse comment" or notice that a party intends to file an
objection by a certain date, the rule would go into effect.

Agency Defines 'Non-Controversial'

     In its proposed procedural change, RSPA defined non-
controversial rules as those that effect minor, substantive
changes to regulations; incorporate by reference the latest
edition of technical or industry standards; or extend
compliance dates.

     The agency also defined significant adverse comment as
a statement from an interested party that explains why the
rule is inappropriate, ineffective or unacceptable.

     "Comments that are frivolous or insubstantial would not
be considered adverse under this procedure," RSPA said. "A
comment recommending a rule change in addition to the rule
would not be considered a significant adverse comment,
unless the commenter states why the rule would be
ineffective without the additional change."

     Parties wishing to comment on RSPA's proposed "direct-
final-rule" procedure must do so by Feb. 16. For more
information, contact: Nancy Machado of RSPA's chief-counsel
office, (202) 366-4400.

     RSPA's proposal is published in the Dec. 18 Federal
Register, p. 65210. The three-page proposal also is
available via BPI's DocuDial Service% as #75-1102. To order,
see page 6.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

EFFORTS TO ACCELERATE TIMETABLE
FOR RADWASTE SHIPMENTS QUICKEN


     Efforts to accelerate the timetable for shipping high-
level radioactive waste cross-country seems to be gathering
steam, despite opposition from the Clinton administration.

     Under the 1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act (NWPA), the
Department of Energy (DOE) must begin accepting high-level
waste from U.S. nuclear power plants by 1998. However, DOE
is behind schedule in constructing a permanent storage
facility, slated for Yucca Mountain, Nevada.

     Next month, the House may vote on legislation (H.R.
1020) that would require DOE to open an interim storage
facility at Yucca Mountain. Sen. J. Bennett Johnston (D-La.)
introduced similar legislation (S. 167) in the Senate, but
that measure has stalled. Both bills call for the interim
facility to begin accepting waste by 1998, but several
issues must be resolved before the shipments can begin.

O'Leary Cites Concerns

     Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary Dec. 14 told the Senate
Energy and Natural Resources Committee the administration
could not support proposals siting the interim facility at
Yucca Mountain until it finishes suitability studies on the
permanent repository. However, O'Leary said DOE could
complete its suitability determination by the end of 1998,
and, if Yucca Mountain appears suitable, the agency may
consider building an interim facility.

     That day, Sen. Rod Grams (R-Minn.) introduced a bill
(S. 1478) to privatize interim storage, a proposal backed by
nuclear-power interests in his home state. Grams' bill would
let a private consortium build and operate an interim
storage facility and allow DOE to contract with the
consortium for waste storage. The facility would be built on
government-owned land, probably in Nevada.

     "For 16 years, DOE has been charged with the
responsibility of our civilian spent fuel," Grams said. "In
that time, DOE has spent nearly $5 billion of ratepayers'
money, including over $250 million from Minnesota's electric
customers...Privatizing the interim storage program would
improve efficiency and lower costs to the taxpayers."

     But most in the nuclear industry are pinning their
hopes on DOE building an interim facility. "It
[privatization] would be a last resort," said Scott Peters
of the Nuclear Energy Institute.

RSPA Appeals Action

RSPA Ref. No. 90-82-SB. In the Matter of Morton
International Inc., Respondent.

Background

     On Aug. 16, 1991, the Research and Special Programs
Administration (RSPA) fined Morton International $2,000 for
having knowingly violated several sections of the Hazardous
Materials Regulations (HMR). These provisions included 49
CFR 171.2(a), 171.2(c), 172.202(a)(1), 172.202(a)(2), and
173.102.

     RSPA reduced to $2,000 a $3,500 fine the agency
proposed in an Aug. 23, 1990, Notice of Probable Violation.
The company appealed the $2,000 fine.

Discussion

     Morton International conceded RSPA's finding that the
company had violated HMR by failing to mark "DOT 12B" on
each side of the package. But the company contested RSPA's
other findings.

     RSPA said the company was required to meet all mandates
of Exemption DOT E 8214 when offering hazmat for interstate
transportation pursuant to the exemption. Failing that, the
shipments had to meet HMR mandates, the agency added.

     RSPA charged Morton International with violating the
HMR by failing to mark properly its otherwise complying
packagings with the "12B" specification.

     RSPA said Morton International knowingly offered hazmat
for transport in commerce in unauthorized, non-DOT
specification packaging, in violation of Exemption DOT E
8214 and 49 CFR 171.2(a) and 173.102. The company said the
hazmat was part of a shipment from Utah to California, where
it was awaiting transfer to Japan.

     Morton International argued the International Air
Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations
govern movement of the material to Japan and said these
regulations prohibit "double marking" of packages with
United Nations (UN) markings and DOT markings. The company
said this prohibition on dual UN and DOT markings barred it
from placing the otherwise necessary "DOT 12B" markings on
the packages.

     However, RSPA said the company was wrong in believing
that IATA regulations control movement of the packages and
that a prohibition exists on DOT markings on packages
offered for international transportation. The International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Technical Instructions
govern international transport of hazmat and permit dual
markings, RSPA added.

     Even if dual markings were prohibited, Morton
International's violations concern the offering of material
for transportation from Utah to California; that is within
the United States, RSPA said. If a prohibition on dual
markings on international shipments did exist, the company
would still be required to mark the packages with the
requisite DOT specification marking for interstate trans-
portation within the United States and to make any necessary
modifications before offering the packages for international
transportation, RSPA added.

     Because Morton International did not comply with the
DOT exemption, it was required to comply with the HMR, and
its violation lay in its failure to comply with the HMR,
RSPA said. While it met the basic requirements of the "DOT
12B" specification, the company failed to meet with the HMR
because it did not mark the packages with the "12B"
specification, RSPA said.

Findings

     "I find that a civil penalty of $1,500 is appropriate
in light of the nature and circumstances of these
violations, their extent and gravity, respondent's
culpability, respondent's lack of prior violations,
respondent's ability to pay, the effect of a civil penalty
on respondent's ability to continue in business, and all
other relevant factors," RSPA administrator D.K. Sharma
said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

NTSB COUNTS HEAD SHIELDS, COUPLERS
AS BEING AMONG ITS TOP ACHIEVEMENTS


     The National Transportation Safety Board counts the
NTSB-inspired requirement that railroad tank cars
transporting hazmat be equipped with head shields and shelf
couplers as being among its greatest achievements.

     In a recent report, NTSB said these safety features
have dramatically reduced the number of tank-car explosions
and ruptures during the past 10 years. Nevertheless, NTSB
warned the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), railroads
and shippers to remain vigilant.

     "The danger still exists, and accidents still occur,"
NTSB wrote in its report We Are All Safer: NTSB Improvements
in Transportation Safety. The report detailed NTSB studies
on freight-railroad accidents and resulting board
recommendations the federal government or private sector has
adopted. These agency and corporate steps have enhanced
transportation safety, NTSB said.

NTSB Praises Railroads

     For example, NTSB praised the railroad industry for
responding to board suggestions by improving communication
with communities near railyards and rail routes. In
addition, FRA, the Association of American Railroads and
locomotive manufacturers have met to establish a program to
gather data on fuel-tank damage and fuel spills.

     The board singled out CSX Transportation (CSXT) for
special praise for its response to a 1989 derailment and
butane spill in Akron, Ohio. Based on NTSB recommendations,
CSXT began training its railroad crews to assist emergency
personnel responding to hazmat spills and to require crews
to keep up-to-date listings of where the hazmat-containing
cars are on trains, the agency added.

     NTSB also hailed the Chemical Manufacturers Association
for requiring its members to have a chemical-risk management
program to evaluate risks of spills and implement ways to
reduce the chances of hazmat leaks. CMA's actions followed a
1981 NTSB study that found 2,121 railroad accidents
involving hazmat resulted in the evacuation of 100,000
people.

     In that study, the board also examined 45 railroad
accidents. "In at least 21 of the 45 cases investigated for
the study, the safety board found that local emergency
response incident commanders did not have a hazardous-
materials emergency-response plan to follow, and in 19 of
the cases, incident commanders and railroad personnel had
not been in contact with each other to develop a plan of
action in the event of a train accident involving hazardous
materials," NTSB stated.

     For more information, contact: NTSB, Public Affairs
Office, Washington, DC 20594; (202) 382-0660.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

CLINTON NOMINATES GEORGIAN
FOR TRANSPORT SAFETY BOARD


     President Clinton last month nominated George Black, a
Georgia county transportation director, for the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).

     Black, director of Gwinnett County's transportation
department since 1988, has investigated more than 1,500
highway crashes. As director, he has overseen the design,
construction, maintenance and operation of the county's
roads and its airport.

     "Mr. Black's qualifications and experience as a civil
engineer will provide the NTSB with the technical expertise
necessary to evaluate complex highway, bridge-design and
maintenance issues," read a White House statement. Black's
nomination awaits Senate confirmation.

* * *

Transportation Research Board's 75th Annual Meeting is
scheduled for Jan. 7-11 in Washington. Contact:
Transportation Research Board, 2101 Constitution Ave.,
Washington, DC 20418; (202) 334-2934.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch14.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

U.S. HAZMAT REGS PREEMPT
NEW YORK RULES, RSPA SAYS


     The U.S. Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) preempt
New York state rules that ban the repackaging of hazardous
wastes, require a statement on the manifest of waste
transfers between vehicles and mandate secondary containment
in defined containers for the storage or transfer of hazmat,
the Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA)
stated last month.

     RSPA, which enforces HMR, concluded the federal rules
trump New York's after weighing the Chemical Waste
Transportation Institute's (CWTI's) challenge to the state
regulation. In a petition to RSPA, CWTI said the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations (NYCRR) are not "substantively
the same as" the federal regulations and are therefore
invalid under the federal Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act.

     In its decision, RSPA agreed with CWTI's argument that
the NYCRR goes beyond HMR by imposing an absolute
prohibition on repackaging hazardous waste. HMR, unlike the
New York rule, allows for some repackaging, such as the
consolidation of some loads from cargo tanks to tank cars,
RSPA said.

State Went Too Far

     New York also went too far in requiring all hazardous
waste transfers to be listed on manifests, RSPA found.
Federal rules require only that the transporter's company
name and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
identification number appear on the manifest.

     Finally, RSPA objected to New York's requirement that
hazmat be transferred between vehicles only in containers
with impervious bases and drainage and capacity limits. HMR
contains general requirements that the containers be impact-
resistant for the minimum and maximum temperatures
encountered during transportation.

     Before RSPA would consider its challenge to New York,
CWTI had to survive a challenge from New York. The state
urged RSPA to ignore CWTI's petition, saying the group
lacked standing to oppose the state regulation because none
of its members has been hurt by the controversial rule.

     New York, joined by Pennsylvania and Montana, said CWTI
is primarily concerned with hazmat transportation, and the
state regulations in question concern toxins that are merely
waiting to be transported. CWTI countered that many of its
members have refused to engage in certain hazmat-related
activities in New York, lest they be fined heavily for
running afoul of the state rules.

     RSPA, ruling in favor of CWTI, said hazmat awaiting
transportation is still governed by the HMR provisions
governing shipments. The New York rules and HMR, therefore,
affect CWTI members, allowing the group to challenge the
state regulations, RSPA said.

     "Where loading, unloading or storage occurs incidental
to the movement of property in commerce, that activity is
within the scope of federal law governing the transportation
of hazardous material and the HMR," RSPA said. "Requirements
affecting transportation facilities, and transporters'
activities at those facilities, are subject to federal
preemption." For more information, contact Frazer Hilder of
RSPA's chief-counsel office, (202) 366-4400. RSPA's decision
is published in the Dec. 6 Federal Register, p. 62527.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>