
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-183</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015920 text/html 40738
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:23 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:46 GMT
Content-length: 40551
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet <BR>
January 9, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PHYSICIANS SUE N.Y. HEALTH DEPARTMENT OVER HMO CONTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(568 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>EEOC, ERISA PLANS STRUGGLE OVER ADA INTERPRETATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(855 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT MCOS' ABILITY TO DENY PAYMENT FOR&nbsp;ER VISITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(182 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AWP, PATIENT CHOICE BILLS ANTICIPATED IN OHIO, MICH., IDAHO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(720 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>PENDING ANY WILLING PROVIDER LEGISLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(7 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>CAPITALCARE TOLD TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF AIDS PATIENT'S&nbsp;CLAIM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(885 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>ERISA KEEPS A HOLD ON FEDERAL REFORM EFFORTS, REPORT SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>FLA. COMP LAWYERS PUSH FOR PATIENT CHOICE AMENDMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(593 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>GAO:  ARIZ. POSTS SAVINGS WITH MEDICAID MANAGED CARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(592 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>AMENDMENTS POSE THREAT TO 'TARGETED' HEALTH REFORM BILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(624 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>ORE. MCOS PREPARING TO FIGHT PLAN TO BAN CAPITATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(466 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

PHYSICIANS SUE N.Y. HEALTH DEPARTMENT OVER HMO CONTRACTS

A group of physicians, claiming that the New York State
Department of Health failed to review an HMO contract, has
sued the department in an effort to force it to conduct the
required reviews.

The 1,000-member League of Physicians and Surgeons, a New
York City-based advocacy group, said in the suit that the
state agency should not have approved the contract offered
to physicians by ChoiceCare, a Melville, N.Y.-based HMO,
because of a physician "gag rule" and a lack of appeal
rights in the contract.

However, the underlying message in the lawsuit was that the
agency must begin following the rules and review all
contracts presented to it, as required by state law, says
league executive director Yvonne Archer.

"The Department of Health is supposed to approve each new
generation of a contract and evaluate it for any negative
effect" on physicians and/or patients, Archer says.  "That
never seems to get done, so we decided to force the issue.
This puts them on notice that they'd better do what they're
supposed to do."

The group particularly objected in its lawsuit to what it
termed a "gag rule" in the contract, which Archer says
prohibits physicians from discussing the health plan with
patients.  The group also objected to what it termed a lack
of appeal rights for physicians in the contract.

"The gag rule is to keep patients in the dark so they don't
switch plans," said Archer in an interview with Managed Care
Law Outlook.  "What we're talking about is doctors' ability
to freely express to patients any concerns" they might have
about the managed care organization in question, Archer
says.

The league is seeking a judicial order that would force the
health department to review contracts and would require
ChoiceCare to remove or modify the clause that Archer terms
a gag rule.

Health department officials declined comment on the lawsuit.

However, ChoiceCare Senior Vice President of Marketing John
Kaegi says the clause is not a gag rule at all.  "It
protects the doctors as well as us," he says.

The clause, about one paragraph long, states that ChoiceCare
and its contracting physicians agree to protect the rights
of confidentiality of both parties, along with plan members
and patients, Kaegi says.

After the suit was filed, "We considered removing it, but it
wasn't necessary," Kaegi said in an interview.  "Everybody
who's looked at the thing says there's no way it can be
interpreted as a gag order."

Instead of removing the phrase, the managed care
organization decided to provide additional education to
physicians about its meaning, in the form of verbal guidance
from plan representatives in the field, Kaegi says.  On the
subject of appeal rights, Kaegi says the health plan has
"two very distinct appeals processes," one for providers and
one for members.  However, those procedures are spelled out
in an addendum to the physician contract, which the league
"apparently didn't have" when it filed the lawsuit, Kaegi
says.

Kaegi says ChoiceCare has no objection to health department
review of contracts.  "We would encourage the Department of
Health to consider very carefully all language in all
contracts," he says.  "Certainly, the situation of their not
reviewing all contracts is not our doing."

For more information on the lawsuit against the New York
Department of Health, call Archer at (212)768-0605 and Kaegi
at (516)694-4000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

EEOC, ERISA PLANS STRUGGLE OVER ADA INTERPRETATION

Federal officials' unpredictable interpretations of the
Americans with Disabilities Act are frustrating self-insured
employers' efforts to design healthcare benefits packages,
some industry observers say.  And the federal agency
crafting the final rules isn't likely to clear up the
confusion any time soon.

"We don't have any easy answers," Peggy Mastroianni,
division director with the federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission office of legal counsel, told
attendees at the ERISA Industry Committee quarterly meeting
in December.  "We're just starting to develop final guidance
in this area."  She offered no date for when those final
rules will come out.

However, Stephanie Kanwit, vice president for health claims
and litigation at Aetna Life and Casualty Co., blasts the
EEOC for its "attempt to micromanage the American healthcare
system."

Employers are suffering because the rules are not
predictable and provide a powerful disincentive to providing
healthcare benefits, she says.

"In the words of the statute, Congress believed that people
with disabilities are a discrete and insular minority.
That's not what the EEOC is doing," Kanwit says.  EEOC's
interpretation of the ADA ignores legislative history and
ignores legal interpretations of similar anti-discrimination
statutes, she says.

"I feel [the EEOC's] interpretation is counter-productive to
the goals of the agency," she says.

"I have to assume that Congress knew what it was doing when
it passed the ADA," Kanwit says.  "I have to assume that it
does not automatically void ERISA.  The two can co-exist,
but not in the way the EEOC believes."

In the ADA, Congress failed to make clear whether the new
law applied to employer-sponsored health plans, Mastroianni
says.  "What we have tried to do is to provide rules for
evaluating benefits when trying to cut costs," she says.

The EEOC issued interim guidance in 1993 that indicated the
ADA would apply if a coverage limitation applied to a
specific disability.  For example, Mastroianni says, a
blanket pre-existing condition exclusion is not disability-
based, nor are general exclusions of experimental drugs or
limits on pharmaceuticals or X-rays.

In general, less-favorable treatment of mental
health/nervous conditions also is not disability-based
because it involves a wide variety of dissimilar conditions,
she says.

Coverage limits or exclusions that do not affect people with
or without disabilities, or people with a wide variety of
dissimilar conditions, could become subject to the ADA, she
says.

"What is the consequence of a disability-based distinction?"
she asks.  "If it is [disability-based], the employer has to
explain why it is not a subterfuge to evade the purpose of
the ADA.  In cases like this, the burden ought to be on the
employer."

Case law leaves few clues for ERISA plans to follow,
employers find

There has been very little relevant case law on the issue of
disability-based discrimination within health plans,
Mastroianni says, adding, "The law in this area is still
developing."

Employers are having a tough time determining how the ADA
affects their benefits packages, says Kevin Anderson,
director of healthcare initiatives with General Motors Corp.
"With the passage of the ADA, the question is:  What is a
disability under the ADA, and what does it apply to?"
Anderson says.

"Our plan does include limitations on mental health and
substance abuse -- limited in terms of the number of visits
reimbursed," Anderson says, adding that some interpretations
of the ADA would place General Motors in non-compliance with
the law.

Another example in GM's benefits package involves speech
therapy, Anderson says.  The benefit applies only to
children younger than age six, and he says the same question
applies:  Does the ADA impact that benefit?

A third example, Anderson says, is language denying coverage
for experimental procedures, including bone marrow
transplants for women suffering from breast cancer or
patients with AIDS.  In a recent court case, Henderson v.
Bodine Aluminum, the federal 8th Circuit Court of Appeals,
St. Louis, ordered an employer to cover an experimental
breast cancer treatment after the plaintiff alleged that the
denial violated the ADA by denying benefits for breast
cancer but not for other forms of cancer.  The appeals court
returned the case to the district court for a full hearing.

Mastroianni says her office didn't necessarily agree with
the decision in Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum.

"If it's okay to have a general exclusion of experimental
treatments, then why do we have cases like this?" she asks.
"We're looking at it differently.  If we see in a case that
the standards for [coverage of] high-dosage chemotherapy in
breast cancer are different than for other [cancers], the
question then becomes whether exclusions for experimental
treatment are being applied in a discriminatory way."

"Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum is terrible law," Kanwit adds,
noting that in the case, Karen Henderson ultimately was
included in the clinical trial for the experimental
treatment, but ended up in the placebo group, not in the
group receiving the actual treatment.

For additional information on the ADA and ERISA plans,
contact the ERISA Industry Committee at (202)789-1400.

y  Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum, No. 95-2469 (8th Cir. June
16, 1995)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT MCOS' ABILITY TO DENY PAYMENT FOR
ER VISITS

Pennsylvania managed care plans would have to foot the bill
for an enrollee's out-of-network emergency room care if a
"reasonable person" would believe the symptoms indicated an
emergency, under legislation recently introduced by two
Keystone State lawmakers.

Acting in response to consumer and provider complaints about
MCOs refusing to reimburse enrollees for certain emergency
room services, state Sens. Roy Afflerbach (D-Lehigh-
Northampton) and Jim Gerlach (R-Chester County) introduced
companion legislation Jan. 4 that the two say will better
regulate and define Pennsylvania MCOs' responsibilities.

Gerlach's S.B. 1356 contains the same language as
legislation introduced in the House by Rep. John A. Lawless
(R-Audubon).  Both apply a "reasonable person" standard to
enrollees who seek emergency care.  Regardless of the final
diagnosis, if it is determined that a reasonable person
experiencing the symptoms described by an enrollee seeking
care would believe it to be an emergency, the patient would
be reimbursed.

The bills will be assigned to committees after state
lawmakers return to work Jan. 22.  For details, call Sen.
Afflerbach's office at (717)787-1349 and Sen. Gerlach's
office at (717)787-1398.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

AWP, PATIENT CHOICE BILLS ANTICIPATED IN OHIO, MICH., IDAHO

Any willing provider legislation and its newer cousins,
freedom of choice and patient protection acts, already have
been introduced in at least 21 states, and it's likely that
the proposals will spark spirited fights between bill
proponents and managed care forces in at least a few of
those states, industry officials say.

It's difficult to say where the AWP "hot spots" might be,
says Herb Schultz, director of state advocacy for the Group
Health Association of America/American Managed Care and
Review Association.  The group is tracking 48 bills,
including carryover legislation from 1995.

"We're at the beginning of it," he says.  "In the next
couple of months we'll see where the trend is.  We expect,
like last year, to see any willing provider, freedom of
choice and other anti-managed care bills in many states."

Schultz adds that the last couple of years have shown that
managed care forces are capable of defeating those bills
when they crop up.  "I'm confident we will be able, as an
industry, to bring information to state legislators that
they need to see on this legislation," he says.

Last year, any willing provider-type bills were introduced
in more than 20 states, Schultz says.  However, only two of
those became law:  In Texas, legislators approved a
pharmacy-only any willing provider bill but vetoed a highly
regulatory patient protection bill, and in Arkansas, a broad
any willing provider bill was enacted.  Several insurers are
challenging the Arkansas law on the grounds that it violates
federal law.

Managed care foes moving away from AWP approach, trying
patient protection tack

The trend appears to be moving away from any willing
provider bills toward broader patient protection measures,
industry analysts say.

More states are considering patient protection act-style
legislation than "pure" any willing provider bills, says Guy
D'Andrea, director of state services for GHAA/AMCRA.

"Patient protection act-type legislation touches on a
variety of subject areas beyond provider participation," he
says.  "It usually focuses more on the process by which
plans make decisions on provider participation, often
stopping short of requiring participation."

However, "there's sometimes a very fine line between patient
protection acts and any willing provider legislation,"
D'Andrea says.

In addition, any willing provider bills that are introduced
often have a broader focus than they might have a few years
ago, D'Andrea says.  "In the past, they focused on
pharmacy," he says.  "Now, it's more common to see an any
willing provider bill that just says 'any willing provider'
[without specifying types of providers].  Obviously, the
more providers you bring under the umbrella, the bigger the
impact on managed care."

Although it's difficult to determine where any willing
provider-type legislation might make progress this year,
managed care forces in several states already have geared up
to fight it:

y  The Association of HMOs in Michigan met last fall with
state Rep. John Jamian (R), who is interested in drafting
patient protection act legislation.  According to the group,
Jamian assured managed care representatives that he did not
want to write an anti-managed care bill, and said the
legislation would not be a vehicle for an any willing
provider proposal.

However, the lawmaker did express concern about
authorization for out-of-panel providers within managed care
organizations, the HMO group said.

The legislation still is being written, according to a
spokeswoman for the group.

y  In Ohio, businesses, insurers, consumer and labor
organizations have formed a coalition to defeat any willing
provider legislation (Managed Care Law Outlook, November
1995).

The group, which calls itself the Coalition for Managed
Care, will oppose legislative initiatives before the Ohio
General Assembly this year.

Several committees already are considering AWP bills,
according to the group.

y  In Idaho, the Idaho Medical Society has distributed a
draft of a proposed patient protection act to industry
leaders for comments.  The draft does not include AWP
language, but does have a requirement that all managed care
entities, except those exempt from federal income tax under
IRS code section 501(c)(3) or (4), offer enrollees a point-
of-service option.

For additional information, contact D'Andrea and Schultz at
(202)778-3200.  Contact the Association of HMOs in Michigan
at (517)371-3181.  Contact the Idaho Medical Association at
(208)344-7888.  Contact the Ohio Coalition for Managed Care
at (800)360-2065.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

PENDING ANY WILLING PROVIDER LEGISLATION

(See original issue)

Source:  GHAA/AMCRA




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

CAPITALCARE TOLD TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF AIDS PATIENT'S
CLAIM

Managed care organizations need to follow the rules spelled
out in ERISA when making coverage decisions on patients'
claims.  That's the message from a U.S. court of appeals'
decision in Bernstein v. CapitalCare, a legal expert says.

The Dec. 4 decision, from the U.S. Court of Appeals of the
4th Circuit, Richmond, Va., said that CapitalCare, an HMO
subsidiary of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of the National
Capital Area, Washington, D.C., had failed to take all
medical evidence into account when denying coverage for out-
of-area hospital care for Jeffrey Bernstein, an AIDS patient
from Washington, D.C.  The court also found that CapitalCare
had not followed procedures spelled out in ERISA for the
denial of coverage.

The court remanded the case to the U.S. District Court for
the Eastern District of Virginia, Alexandria, with
instructions for CapitalCare to reconsider coverage for
Bernstein's care, this time considering all medical
evidence.  However, the court left it up to CapitalCare
whether to cover the hospital care in question.

The case involved medical care Bernstein, who was an
enrollee in CapitalCare, received in New York in May 1992.

Bernstein was diagnosed as HIV-positive in 1986.  In
February 1992, while in New York, Bernstein was committed to
a psychiatric facility and treated for dementia.  Upon
discharge, Bernstein stayed at his brother Philip's home for
a short time before returning with his brother to his home -
- and to CapitalCare's service area -- in Washington.  He
then went back to New York with his brother.

Several days later, Bernstein began exhibiting stroke-like
symptoms and was taken to the emergency room in Manhattan's
New York Hospital.  He was admitted to the hospital the next
day, and hospital records indicated his hospitalization was
for CNS lymphoma, a form of brain cancer.  He was
transferred to a healthcare facility in Virginia in July
1992 and died a day after arriving.

CapitalCare denied coverage for Bernstein's second
hospitalization, citing his location outside the MCO's
service area and its policy of not providing benefits when
the need for care could have been foreseen.

Bernstein's brother immediately protested the coverage
denial and later took the case to the district court, which
found that "it was reasonably foreseen that [Bernstein]
would need acute medical attention."  The court also found
that it wasn't necessary for the patient to know the
specific illness for which he might be hospitalized.  The
court granted summary judgment to CapitalCare.

The appeals court, however, found that CapitalCare denied
care without following the requirements outlined in ERISA.
In addition, the court said, that denial decision preceded
the arrival of some of Bernstein's medical and hospital
records, meaning that clinicians at CapitalCare could not
have taken that information into account when denying
coverage.

"The initial issue in this appeal is whether the
administrative record before CapitalCare at the time of the
benefit determination contained sufficient evidence to allow
the district court adequately to assess the reasonableness
of the plan's decision," the decision says.  "This threshold
inquiry ensures the plan beneficiary that he or she receives
procedural fairness under the plan and that the plan
administrator's decisions are principled and deliberate."

Unfortunately, the information in the CapitalCare
administrative record did not meet that standard, the court
said.

"The administrative record before CapitalCare at the time it
denied benefits for Jeffrey's hospitalization fails to
adequately document the administrator's decisional process,"
the decision said.  "Indeed, CapitalCare's administrative
record contained very little evidence at all."

The court noted that, at the time of the initial denial, the
administrative record contained only four items, including
phone logs detailing calls from Bernstein's brother during
the illness and information about Bernstein's stay at the
psychiatric facility.

"These documents provide little support for CapitalCare's
initial determination that Jeffrey's need for care was
reasonably foreseeable," the court said.  "Furthermore, no
one at CapitalCare had spoken to Jeffrey's physicians in New
York to ascertain the complete circumstances of his
hospitalization."

CapitalCare maintains that it reviewed the denial after
receiving Bernstein's medical records from New York;
however, the appeals court said that the administrative
record contains no documentation of this review.  The
appeals court returned the case to the district court with
instructions to tell CapitalCare to take another look at its
denial.

The case provides notice to managed care organizations that
they must follow the procedures spelled out in ERISA before
denying coverage, says attorney Charles Steele of Foley &
Lardner in Washington.

However, Steele notes that the court "didn't get into some
of the meatier issues, such as the rights of people with
AIDS to move."

The appeals court did say that "One may presume that at some
point in the progression of an AIDS patient's disease, the
need for hospitalization or acute medical care, because of
some AIDS-related complication, would become foreseeable."

But the court concluded that "such complex medical
determinations are peculiarly within the ken of medical
professionals, not federal judges.  Under a deferential
standard of review, the district court's role is limited to
determining whether those findings are supported by
substantial evidence."

For more information, call Steele at (202)672-5300 or
Richard Carter, of Huggins Carter & Coleman, at (703)684-
3444.

y  Bernstein v. CapitalCare, No. 94-2448 (4th Cir. 1994)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

ERISA KEEPS A HOLD ON FEDERAL REFORM EFFORTS, REPORT SAYS

The Employee Retirement Income Security Act will continue to
be an important influence on private-sector health plans as
legislative initiatives, the healthcare market and legal
doctrine evolve, concludes a new report.

The report, by the Washington, D.C.-based Employee Benefit
Research Institute, says that ERISA, which greatly
influenced debate on President Clinton's healthcare reform
proposals, also is at the center of congressional proposals
for health insurance reform.

State versus federal regulation also is a central point of
contention in the debate over Medicare reform, the report
says.

"The health market has changed fundamentally since ERISA was
enacted in 1974, and the regulatory role of Washington
versus the states is now being reexamined," says EBRI
president Dallas Salisbury, who adds, "The outcome will
affect the health insurance of over 160 million
individuals."

The report includes three sections:  an overview of ERISA
and health regulation by Peter Schmidt of Arnold and Porter;
a section on multi-employer plans by Judy Mazo of the Segal
Company; and a section on ERISA and state health reform
written by Kala Ladenheim of the Intergovernmental Health
Policy Project.

The report examines the following issues:
y  ERISA's broad pre-emptive effect;
y  The changing relationship between three categories of
state health initiatives -- insurance mandates, medical
high-risk pools and uncompensated care pools; and
y  ERISA's effect on the rise in the number of self-funded
plans.

Copies of the study are available for $25.  Call (410)516-
6946.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

FLA. COMP LAWYERS PUSH FOR PATIENT CHOICE AMENDMENT

If a group of workers' compensation lawyers in Florida has
its way, state residents will have the right to select the
healthcare provider of their choice for all care, not just
workers' comp.

Meanwhile, another constitutional issue is erupting in
Florida:  a single-payer effort spearheaded by a group
called the Floridians for Health Security.

The workers' comp lawyers group is pushing a proposed state
constitutional amendment that would guarantee state
residents the right to select the healthcare provider of
their choice.

The group, known as the Florida Workers' Advocates, has
received ballot approval from the state Division of
Elections and has begun collecting signatures to place the
amendment on the ballot via the citizen initiative process.

If the group collects the necessary signatures, the
initiative will be placed on the Florida ballot in 1996.  If
approved, it would affect all managed care in the state --
not just workers' comp managed care.

The amendment reads:  "An individual's absolute right to
select his or her healthcare providers shall not be denied
or limited by law or contract."

Opponents of the initiative -- which include businesses and
insurers -- say it would destroy the state's expanding
managed care industry and would drive insurance rates up.

"We have the highest healthcare costs on the planet, and
this just makes it worse," says Jodi Chase, general counsel
for Associated Industries of Florida.

"This is an attempt by workers' comp lawyers to make more
money," she adds.

Managed care companies and businesses are gearing up to
fight the proposal, and could end up spending millions doing
so if the initiative is included on the ballot in November.

Florida Workers' Advocates first needs to gather 42,945
signatures from registered voters in three congressional
districts.

If that occurs, the measure comes before the attorney
general and the state supreme court.  If they approve it,
the group then must collect and have verified an additional
429,428 signatures from registered voters in at least 12
congressional districts to place the initiative on the 1996
ballot.

Florida is in the process of becoming the first major state
where managed care is mandatory in the workers' comp system.
As a result, the market is heating up as the January 1997
deadline for workers' comp managed care approaches.

If the proposed amendment is approved, some observers say,
it could eliminate the savings that otherwise would be
gained in workers' comp and in the Florida group health
market, which also is undergoing large growth in managed
care.

Although it's not clear what chance the Florida Workers'
Advocates have to place their initiative on the ballot,
attorney Glen Wieland, president of the group, says a poll
shows that Florida voters would approve it overwhelmingly.

According to the poll, which surveyed 500 registered Florida
voters, 73% favor the amendment, 14% oppose it and 10% are
undecided.

The poll was conducted in mid-November by Hill Research
Consultants, a Houston-based public opinion research firm
that has been involved in three successful referendum
efforts in Florida.

The single payer initiative, which according to Florida
Association of HMOs industry analyst Richard Dorff "has much
less impetus than the any willing provider initiative,"
would create a statewide single payer system in Florida.

The ballot initiative would "provide all persons the right
to comprehensive healthcare services from the healthcare
provider of their choice in a single-payer healthcare
system."  It also contains any willing provider language.

Call Wieland at (407)841-7698.  Contact Dorff at (904)386-
2904.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

GAO:  ARIZ. POSTS SAVINGS WITH MEDICAID MANAGED CARE

Arizona's Medicaid cost-containment program has saved the
federal government and the state millions over the past
several years, showing that it's possible to control costs
by fostering competition and monitoring plan performance, a
new government report shows.

The General Accounting Office report, "Arizona Medicaid:
Competition Among Managed Care Plans Lowers Program Costs,"
found that the state succeeded in containing costs by
developing a competitive Medicaid healthcare market in which
health plans that submit capitation rates higher than their
competitors' rates risk losing Medicaid contracts.

"While other states' per capita costs for Medicaid have
continued to grow, Arizona's capitation rates declined by
11% in 1994," the report says.  "Reviews have also shown
that, since its inception, the per capita growth rate for
Arizona's program has been less than the national per capita
growth rate for states with traditional Medicaid programs."

Arizona's Medicaid program has been different from the
start.  The state never participated in the traditional fee-
for-service Medicaid program, implementing instead in 1982 a
program that mandates managed care for all beneficiaries and
capitates health plans.

The program, Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System,
features a competitive contract award process to purchase
healthcare services from private- or county-operated
healthcare plans.  The capitation rate is set after a
bidding process in which health plans submit separate bids
for each county they want to serve.

Health plan contracts stipulate specific provider networks,
which the state says ensures provider availability in both
urban and rural locations.  The state also monitors the
medical and financial performance of contracting plans.

The program has worked to control costs, the GAO report
found.  It saved the federal government $37 million and the
state $15 million in acute care costs in 1991, according to
the latest study available on Arizona's cost-containment
performance as compared to similar states with traditional
Medicaid programs.

AHCCCS capitation rates fell, on average, by 11% from 1994
to 1995, even though average spending per Medicaid
beneficiary was projected to rise nationally during the same
period.  The cost of serving beneficiaries in the AHCCCS
program already was below the cost that would have been
incurred in a traditional Medicaid program.

The GAO report concludes that a major factor in cost-
containment was the competitive bidding process.  "Plans are
not assured of winning a contract; consequently, they have
an incentive to submit the lowest bid for which they can
provide the required beneficiary services and still earn a
profit," the GAO report says.

Twenty-one plans submitted 95 bids to provide Medicaid
services in Arizona's 15 counties for the 1995-1997 contract
period.  AHCCCS awarded 42 contracts to 14 of the 21
bidders, including both commercial and non-commercial health
plans, according to the report.

Health plans serving Arizona Medicaid beneficiaries are
exposed to greater risk than under previous contracts.

AHCCCS health plans earned a combined $44 million in profits
in 1993, which represented about 5.4% of revenue, the report
says.  However, the focus on cost and cost-containment "does
not appear to harm access to appropriate care," the report
says.

"Several indicators suggest that beneficiary satisfaction is
high," the GAO says.  That may be because the program places
more weight on access and quality factors than it does on
capitation rates, requires networks to meet certain
standards for primary care coverage and routinely monitors
health plans' financial and operational performance, the
report says.

Additionally, AHCCCS is set to implement a new quality
management system emphasizing outcome-based clinical
measures, the report says.

Contact the GAO at (202)512-6000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

AMENDMENTS POSE THREAT TO 'TARGETED' HEALTH REFORM BILL

Bipartisan congressional legislation that would make health
insurance more accessible and portable has fairly broad
support and could come to the Senate floor soon, an industry
analyst says.  But that bill also could be sunk by several
possible amendments, including one prohibiting lifetime caps
on benefits, the analyst says.

The bill, S. 1028, was introduced by Senate Labor Committee
chair Nancy Kassebaum (R-Kan.) and Ranking Member Edward
Kennedy (D-Mass.) and is co-sponsored by 24 senators.

The proposal would:
y  Limit the use of pre-existing condition exclusions.  For
people who change jobs, otherwise applicable pre-existing
condition exclusions would be reduced by one month for each
month of prior qualifying coverage.
y  Provide insurance market reforms such as guaranteed
availability and renewability.
y  Provide limited federal pre-emption for fully-insured
purchasing cooperatives.
y  Clarify certain COBRA continuation coverage requirements.

The legislation has a number of holds on it, and "the odds
are against it coming to the floor under unanimous consent,"
said ERISA Industry Committee legislative analyst Anthony
Knettel at the group's quarterly meeting in December.  "But
there has been discussion about Kennedy offering it as an
amendment to another bill.  It could come up at any time in
that way.

"There are some substantial obstacles to the bill coming up
on the Senate floor," Knettel says, adding, however, "It's
being taken seriously."  The problem isn't so much the
proposal itself, Knettel says.  "What has caused a lot of
the controversy are possible amendments to S. 1028."

The most likely amendment is one that would prohibit
lifetime caps on benefits, Knettel says.  That would have a
huge impact on employer-sponsored benefit plans, he warns.

"Even if the amendment is relatively narrow in scope, the
consequences for employer-sponsored plans are potentially
significant, depending on the caps used by particular
plans," Knettel's group wrote in a paper on the subject.
Since some employers can only afford to offer coverage if it
has a low lifetime cap -- for example, about $250,000 --
"the effect would be devastating for some," according to the
analysis.

"Prohibiting the use of lifetime caps will force some
employers to drop coverage entirely, while others will be
forced to use higher cost-sharing and/or a narrower scope of
covered benefits to offset the increased plan costs," the
group said.  "The most likely effect of the amendment will
be to extend coverage for a relative few and to reduce or
eliminate coverage for many more."

Another likely amendment would require parity in the
treatment of mental illness.  The most likely language would
require parity for "serious mental illnesses," according to
the ERISA Industry Committee.  "That appears to mean, at a
minimum, drawing a distinction between 'serious' mental
illnesses like schizophrenia or bipolar disorder and
situations like marriage counseling that are not treatment
of a specific mental illness."

"It would require health plans to treat mental health
services in a comparable or equal way" to other services
offered in benefits packages, Knettel says.  For example, if
a plan placed limits on inpatient days for mental health
treatment, but did not have limits on other treatment,
"there is some question whether this amendment would require
you to equalize that."

Knettel adds:  "The impact of this kind of amendment could
be enormous in terms of bringing the scope of mental health
coverage up to everything else, or bringing everything else
down."

The amendments eliminating lifetime caps and requiring
parity are the most likely to be offered, Knettel says,
although other proposals might also be proffered.

Another possible amendment would require health plans to
extend hospital maternity stays, likely to 48 hours for a
vaginal delivery and 96 hours for a Caesarean delivery.

Contact Knettel at (202)789-1400.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

ORE. MCOS PREPARING TO FIGHT PLAN TO BAN CAPITATION

Predicting steep healthcare cost increases, Oregon HMO
administrators, employers and primary care physicians are
gearing up to stop a ballot initiative that would
effectively end capitation in the Beaver State.

The proposed referendum, which would ban capitation payments
to providers, has garnered nearly one-third of the 76,000
signatures it needs to be placed on the November ballot,
according to Tom Mann, the initiative's campaign director.

The language of the bill -- written by Salem ophthalmologist
Gordon Miller -- establishes five acceptable methods of
reimbursement for providers:  payment for work performed;
hourly wage; prearranged salary/benefits; bonuses based on
work performed; and reimbursement for expenses.  All other
forms of reimbursement, including any newly developed
payment strategies, would be banned.

Should the bill pass, HMO administrators predict premiums
will increase significantly.

The bill would likely precipitate a 10% to 15% increase in
premium rates, says Providence Good Health Plans Executive
Director Jack Friedman.  The state would see an even larger
rise in the cost of serving its Medicare beneficiaries,
where increases in Medicare supplemental and risk plan costs
could go higher than 20%, he predicts.

Oregon Blue Cross/Blue Shield Vice President of Corporate
Development Barney Speight expresses similar concern for the
state's recently restructured Medicaid program, which has
moved 80% to 90% of its eligibles into managed care.

But while Miller agrees that there may be an initial jump in
premium costs, he says the cost of comprehensive medical
care will remain largely unaffected by changes in pay
structure.

The Oregon Medical Association hasn't taken sides yet.  But
because of the diversity of its membership, says OMA
Executive Director Robert Dernedde, it's unlikely that the
association would support the initiative.

Miller contends that capitation arrangements are immoral,
saying they cause physicians to withhold care out of
financial interest.  "If you ever say anything different to
a patient because of financial status, you have compromised
your medical ethics," says Miller, who adds that in a
capitated market, all doctors will have to meet the contract
costs of the least ethical physician.

"I've always been very deeply disturbed by those
allegations," Speight says.  "[They] paint doctors totally
as economic entities."

Proponents of the initiative are fairly confident that the
measure will receive enough signatures to make it on the
November ballot, and even those most staunchly opposed to
the legislation seem to agree.

That sets the stage for a sizable conflict come November,
when a wide array of bill opponents could come out against
the legislation.

"I believe there will be an opposition campaign," says
Speight, who adds that employer groups and primary care
physicians would probably be part of a multi-disciplinary
movement against the measure.

Call Tom Mann at (503)370-2318 and Providence Good Health
Plans at (503)215-7500.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>