
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B31-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B010-43</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec33.html 205.156.212.5 19970114214142 text/html 20742
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:39:29 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:45 GMT
Content-length: 20555
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec33.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
October 5, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FRONT PAGE NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>     *Welcome to the first issue of OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT, the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SURVIVING AN ECONOMIC DOWNTURN:  HOW A LONG-TERM OPEN SYSTEMS&nbsp;STRATEGY CAN ENHANCE YOUR COMPETITIVE EDGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1113 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PRODUCTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>OSI PRODUCTS:  SUPPLY IS GROWING, BUT IS DEMAND KEEPING PACE?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(740 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BACK PAGE NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SHOPPING FOR OSI PRODUCTS:  FIVE WAYS TO ENSURE YOU GET WHAT YOU&nbsp;PAID FOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(997 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT via NewsNet
October 5, 1990

     *Welcome to the first issue of OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT, the

     *Welcome to the first issue of OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT, the
latest addition to the Phillips Publishing, Inc. family of
newsletters.
     In the past few years there has been much progress in the
development of products and services that automate virtually
every aspect of business operations.  Though this has had a
dramatic influence on corporate America, the full strategic
benefits of business automation have not been realized because
corporate users have found it difficult to share information
across hardware and software manufactured by different vendors.
As executives recognize that current investments in systems and
networks are a strategic asset and not just an overhead cost,
corporate leaders are realizing that systems must talk to each
other in an "open" data communications environment.
     Every other week, OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT will report on the
user strategies that will transform operations as open systems
are deployed, and keep you abreast of the vendor offerings that
will underpin your open system architecture.  Phillips
Publishing, Inc. is uniquely positioned to bring you this
information because our experienced team of editors has been
providing hard-hitting, analytical coverage of competitive
communications strategies for more than a decade.  Now here's the
news:



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT via NewsNet
October 5, 1990

SURVIVING AN ECONOMIC DOWNTURN:  HOW A LONG-TERM OPEN SYSTEMS
STRATEGY CAN ENHANCE YOUR COMPETITIVE EDGE

     As the crisis in the Persian Gulf continues to escalate, gas
prices soar ever skyward and the stock market plummets, business
is beginning to take a harder look at the bottom line.  Though
every sector of an organization will feel a downsizing squeeze,
it is perhaps the department least understood by senior
management that gets cut the fastest: information technology
(IT).
     While most IT managers are struggling to maintain existing
systems, experts are saying a long-term plan to migrate to open
systems will provide businesses with the strategic information
tools they need to meet the competitive challenges of the coming
decade.
     "The [open systems] market is going to explode in my
estimation because you are going to be able to put [systems] in
faster and easier and better and less expensively, and you won't
have to maintain them as much," said Mike Kaminski,
communications/MAP program manager for General Motors.
     Unfortunately, most businesses continue to take a short-
term, bottom-line approach to information technology, especially
in today's economic climate.
     "The economy is tight.  Everybody is trying to downsize
layers of management," said Rick Barron, principal computer
specialist for McDonnell Douglas Corp.  "And one of our barriers
[to open systems] is short-term vs. long-term focus, which is
getting worse instead of better--exactly the opposite of what the
management book tells us is the right way to act."
     Barron likens building an open systems environment to
building a new road:  "We all know that modifying an existing
highway is a lot more painful than building a new one."
     "When you build a new one you don't think about it while
it's being built and all of the sudden, it's there.  When you're
making the change to an existing highway, it really disrupts what
you're doing," Barron explains.  "Right now, the business
community cannot afford any disruption to try to get to something
that's going to solve their problems 5 years from now."
     Even if companies don't see the need for open systems, they
need to think strategically for the future.  As Barron explains,
"You could be driving down the highway and not have traffic jams
so you say the road's not broke.  Well if you think strategically
and say, here's where the new housing developments are, here's
where the new shopping centers are...[etc.], 3 years from now,
there's going to be 3 times as much traffic.  This road is broke
strategically."

Market growth to necessitate move to open systems

     The demand for computers in business today is growing as
fast as the need for new highways.  And just as local politicians
are running their campaigns on growth strategy platforms, so are
vendors taking a stand on open systems.
     "The number of computers is doubling every year, the price
is declining every year, and the power is doubling every 2
years," says Steve Kelly, Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)
marketing manager for Digital Equipment Corp. (DEC).  "If you
look at the magnitude and the growth, the only thing that can
support this long-term network infrastructure without a
bottleneck is OSI."
     Though vendors and users may agree that open systems is a
good solution, some vendors have been wary of going hog wild on
OSI product offerings because users have been slow to buy.
"'There's no open systems,' that's what the customers are saying.
And the vendors are saying, 'I got 'em...but nobody's buying 'em.
And they're both right," says GM's Kaminski.
     It seems that neither vendors nor users want to take the
initial risks.  "Would you buy the first telephone?" asks Rick
Barron.  "Would you buy the second telephone?  You've got to get
to a [point] where there's a critical enough mass [and] you
become a follower."
     How do you stop the chicken-and-egg cycle?  "We've got to
work to make sure we purchase things we ask for," says GM's
Kaminski.  "This is a partnership.  No longer can we afford to
have...users dictating in great detail saying this is what we
want and not buy it."
     But even when an IT manager decides to go the open systems
route, the burden of convincing upper management still rests on
him.  "I think what we'll see is people recognizing the business
opportunities of putting a standard network in place," says Phil
Wimpenny, program development manager for Unisys OSI products.
"If there isn't that recognition at the senior level...that this
is a benefit, then it becomes just a cost.  Those that don't back
it are going to find things are much tougher when all their
competitors can deliver faster."

Birth of an IT salesman:  How not to become the Willie Loman of
open systems

     So, how do you sell senior management on open systems?  "You
sell problems, you don't sell solutions," says Barron.  "First
off, the IT folks have to get the chip off their shoulder in
thinking they are the most important people in the world.
Everybody's going for the CEO's ear and everybody's got their own
perspective about what their contribution to the bottom line is.
     "So you can't go in and tell him you've got this great new
solution.  He doesn't care.  What you've got to do is point out
to him the problem:  'wouldn't you like to reduce this time from
5 days to 1 day?'  And you don't tell him you're doing it through
open systems.  What you say is, hey, I need $100,000 and what I
will do with that $100,000 is give you a scheduling system that
does this, a manufacturing control system that does this, allow
you to talk internationally to so and so, etc."
     Barron also suggests the Barbie doll strategy.
"Manufacturers can give away Barbie dolls because they make money
on all the accessories," Barron explains.  The idea behind this
marketing technique is to give a customer something he may not
want, but once he has it, he's hooked.
     "Electronic mail is a great example," says Barron.  "Most of
our users did not want to go to E-mail and didn't understand how
it could change the way they do business.  You give it to them,
and now you can't take that stuff away."
     Finally, a good technique is to find a highly visible area
of the company that has increased productivity or cut costs
through IT, and have the head of that department tell senior
management what IT did for him.  Then it's up to the CEO to go to
IT and ask how they can help the rest of the company.
     "We've got to deliver results," says Barron.  "Find your
focus and go in with small pockets and pilots to get there, and
force the pressure down from the top rather than take it to the
top."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT via NewsNet
October 5, 1990

OSI PRODUCTS:  SUPPLY IS GROWING, BUT IS DEMAND KEEPING PACE?

     The experts tell us that open systems is the next major wave
in computing, but when industry veterans hear this, a wry smile
seems to naturally form on their faces.  They will lean back in
their chairs, scratch their heads and chuckle to themselves.
"I've been talking about Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) since
the '70s," they will say.  And often, it's true.
     "It's a lack of products," they will postulate, as an
explanation of why the rest of the world has taken so long to
jump on the OSI bandwagon.  But judging by the proliferation of
vendors expected to display their wares at next week's Interop
conference and exhibition in San Jose, Calif.--over 175 at last
count--product availability is not the only problem.
     Virtually all major computer vendors have at least one OSI
product on the market today, or at the very least, an OSI
strategy.  It appears that the recent Aug. 15 deadline for
government procurement specifications to include Government OSI
Profile (GOSIP)-compliance as a requirement has had a distinct
impact on the speed with which vendors have brought OSI products
to market.
     In fact, most vendors' OSI strategies seem to almost mirror
the federal government's movement to GOSIP.  For example, GOSIP
Version 1 specifies X.400 electronic messaging and File Transfer
Access Management (FTAM) at the application layer.  Ten out of
the 10 vendors surveyed by OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT (see chart, pp. 4-
5) have X.400 products; 8 out of 10 have FTAM products.
     Other application layer products are few and far between,
with Virtual Terminal (VT), which is included in GOSIP Version 2,
heading the list.

Driving OSI home

     While GOSIP is clearly a driving force for vendors to
develop products, many users are still wary of vendors'
commitment to OSI.  They wonder what the real strategy is when
vendors declare a strong commitment to OSI, yet invest more
resources in developing their own proprietary systems.  Clearly,
users have some reason to be concerned: only 3 vendors in the
OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT survey were willing to disclose what
percentage of their R&D budget is dedicated to OSI product
development.
     Vendors, on the other hand, have to wrestle with a market of
users claiming it wants OSI, but, in reality, may be too short-
term minded to make the leap.  "There's a marketplace that's
opening up, but we're still in the earlier stages," observes Phil
Wimpenny, program development manager for Unisys OSI products.
     According to Wimpenny, senior management recognition of the
advantages of using information technology as a competitive
advantage rather than an overhead expense will drive user
acceptance of OSI.

A buyer's guide to OSI products

     Once you have made the commitment to migrate to OSI, there
are a few important things to keep in mind.  First, so-called
"OSI applications" are a myth.  X.400, for example, is not
electronic mail.  OSI products at the application layer, like
other OSI products, are really just protocols for transporting
information in a certain way.
     This is why, for example, Hewlett-Packard sells its HP Open
Mail application that uses X.400 separately from HP X.400.  HP
Open Mail provides the user interface for writing the letter, so
to speak.  It sits on HP X.400, which delivers the mail.
     Other vendors, such as Data General, will bundle their
proprietary electronic mail application (as the user interface)
with their X.400 product.  It is the user interface--the actual
application--that provides a means for vendors to differentiate
their products.
     It's also important to note that OSI is fairly difficult to
install.  When asked what was the average installation time for
their products, vendors responses varied widely--from 1 hour to 1
week.  It is probably fair to assume that the only way an OSI
product could be installed in 1 hour is if it is not connected to
a network.  Because OSI requires configuring all other products
on the network, and because most systems managers lack OSI
expertise, expect installation to be difficult.  Sometimes
vendors can help.  Wang, for example, offers an installation
service for core products free of charge in some cases.
     In general, it's a good idea to develop an overall OSI
strategy before buying.  While in theory it is possible to mix
and match different protocols from different vendors, today it
isn't practical.  Some vendors, in particular, are notorious for
hooking each layer together so tightly, that so much tweaking is
required to achieve true plug-and-play computing it isn't worth
it.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT via NewsNet
October 5, 1990

SHOPPING FOR OSI PRODUCTS:  FIVE WAYS TO ENSURE YOU GET WHAT YOU
PAID FOR

     True or false?  Interoperability testing tells you if a
product is going to work with other vendors' products in your
environment.  Conformance testing tells you a product complies
with international standards.  Interoperability testing is better
than conformance testing because it's more like a "real world"
situation.  If you said true to any of the above, read on.
     None of the above statements are 100% true.  They can be
true, but more often than many users realize, they are not.

What testing can do for you

     Buying an Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) product is like
buying a VCR.  You want it to do what it's supposed to do (play
and record videotapes), to fit in with what you already have
(your TV set) and to work with other products that conform to the
standard (VHS tapes).
     Testing is supposed to guarantee those 3 things.  And it
does--if properly understood.  But when interpreted improperly,
testing is no more valuable than a lifetime warranty on a beta
VCR in a town that only sells VHS videos.
     Below are 5 guidelines for interpreting testing to make sure
that the hot product you thought you bought doesn't cool off
before you get it installed:

1) Understand fully what conformance testing is and what it can
do for you.

     Conformance testing is more than a rubber stamp of approval
that a product meets international standards.  Conformance
testing also shows how a product handles errors and performs
under unexpected situations:  what a product does when it is fed
bad data or how it recovers after a power surge.
     "When you build an implementation, you're crazy if you build
it so it knowingly produces errors.  You want to build it so it
works correctly," explains Howard Berkowitz, principal consulting
engineer for the Corporation for Open Systems (COS).  "Now, you
take that thing out and you want to run it against somebody
else's implementation that works correctly.  For the correct
behavior, everything's fine.  [But what happens when] someone
walks in between the 2 and cuts the cable connecting them?"
     In some ways, it can be said that conformance testing
simulates more of a "real world" situation than interoperability
testing because it tests 3 kinds of behavior:  the valid, the
invalid and the inopportune, all of which occur in the real
world.
     "The invalid says what I just sent you is garbage,"
Berkowitz explains.  "And the inopportune is where I sent
something that's a reasonable message, but it's out of context."
Because the majority of code in most OSI products is dedicated to
error handling, Berkowitz notes, interoperability testing alone
will not exercise 60-90% of what those products can do.

2) Keep vendors accountable.

     Lots of vendors will say they have conducted some kind of
testing, but it's unclear what that really means.  Sometimes
vendors may say their product has undergone conformance testing,
but it was not done at an accredited test center, or the product
did not complete testing successfully.
     Says Nancy Pierce, manager of the COS Test Center, "Having
undergone conformance testing and having completed conformance
testing are 2 very different things.  You can undergo conformance
testing and come up with a lot of failures."
     Difficult as it may be to believe, some vendors will
advertise having undergone conformance testing, even though their
products failed.
     In addition, vendors may buy conformance test software and
run it in their own labs.  But their labs may not be accredited,
either through the National Institute of Science and Technology's
(NIST) National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program
(NVLAP) or as a COS Test Center.  While the products may still
prove conformant even if they aren't tested in an accredited lab,
accredited labs will guarantee conformance if the products pass
the tests.

3) Get proof.

     The proof is in the certification in the OSI market.  What
that means today is a COS Mark.  In the near future, it will also
mean Government OSI Profile (GOSIP) registration, as soon as labs
begin to receive NVLAP accreditation and products can be tested
for GOSIP conformance and interoperability.
     The COS Mark currently requires only conformance testing,
and according to Pierce, the COS Strategy Forum rejected the idea
of making interoperability testing part of the COS Mark
requirements at its last meeting in September.
     However, the COS Mark does include an Interoperability
Analysis Service (IAS) which guarantees that if a "Marked"
product cannot interoperate with another "Marked" product, and
the vendors cannot resolve the problem, COS will intervene on
behalf of the user.

4) Find out exactly the environment the interoperability test was
conducted in.

     "Interoperability testing is important, but users need to be
aware that interoperability testing varies depending on the
environment in which the testing occurred," Pierce cautions.
"[For example,] they could be testing interoperability over an
X.25 network, and the user has an 802.3 network.  It could be
version A of a product and the user has version B."
     Users need to understand their own operating environment
fully, and then compare it to the environment in which the
interoperability test was conducted.

5) Safeguard yourself.

     Finally, write into your procurement specifications that the
vendor has to guarantee to resolve any interoperability or
conformance problems, suggests Chris Moore, product marketing
manager for Touch Communications.
     Even if a product is certified, registered and stamped with
every seal of approval known to man, problems are bound to arise.
     According to Pierce, "It's really hard to generalize about
whether or not there will be interoperability problems, but the
likelihood is pretty good that there will be some problems.  They
may be very minor.  And those problems may be very easy to fix,
but the chances that there will be some interoperability problems
when you're initially bringing a network up are pretty high."
     In the open systems marketplace, with its promise of greater
freedom of choice, users are in the driver's seat.  Vendors
should be more willing than ever to offer some sort of guarantee.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>