
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B04-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B037-182</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it116.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024401 text/html 32264
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:42:06 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:46 GMT
Content-length: 32077
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it116.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ECOCENTRAL: CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMY via NewsNet <BR>
June 6, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>     GUATEMALA</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>GUATEMALA: NEW LAW LIMITING UNION RIGHTS FOR&nbsp;CIVIL SERVANTS PROVOKES HUGE LABOR PROTESTS (Part 1)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1085 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>GUATEMALA: NEW LAW LIMITING UNION RIGHTS FOR&nbsp;CIVIL SERVANTS PROVOKES HUGE LABOR PROTESTS (Part 2)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(942 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>      HONDURAS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>HONDURAS: U.S. IMPOSES EMBARGO ON HONDURAN SHRIMP IMPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(577 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>      NICARAGUA</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NICARAGUA: AGRICULTURAL SECTOR CONFRONTS A CREDIT CRISIS (Part 1)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(912 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NICARAGUA: AGRICULTURAL SECTOR CONFRONTS A CREDIT CRISIS (Part 2)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1013 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ECOCENTRAL: CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMY via NewsNet
June 6, 1996

GUATEMALA: NEW LAW LIMITING UNION RIGHTS FOR
CIVIL SERVANTS PROVOKES HUGE LABOR PROTESTS (Part 1)

     On May 23, Guatemala's governing Partido de Avanzada
Nacional (PAN) used its legislative majority to approve a new
law that eliminates the right to strike for most public
employees.  The law, which is part of a broad government
effort to modernize the state, has provoked bitter opposition
from public and private-sector unions.  Among other things,
labor leaders say the law is aimed at paving the way for
privatization of state enterprises by impeding the ability of
civil servants to resist the sale of government firms.
     When Guatemala's current Constitution took effect in
1986, the country's labor movement strongly supported some of
the clauses contained in the new Magna Carta, especially its
recognition of the right of civil servants to organize unions
and to strike, which was an important break from past
constitutions that prohibited such rights among public
employees.  Even so, the Constitution places significant
limits on the right to strike to ensure that essential public
services are never interrupted by labor disputes.
     The country's labor code states that workers in public
health services, sanitation, the energy sector, and water
services cannot strike unless they first make arrangements for
those services to continue without interruption.  And, for any
civil-servant strike to be deemed "legal," the union in a
given state ministry or institute must first petition the
courts for a "strike permit."  Without such a permit, any
decision to walk off the job is considered illegal and
adequate justification for dismissal or other punitive action.
     Nevertheless, since 1986 there have been only a few
instances in which public-sector unions have successfully
petitioned the courts for a strike permit.  In most cases, the
legal process takes many months--sometimes years--before a
judgement is forthcoming, forcing the unions to carry out de
facto strikes to push their demands.  As a result, essential
services, such as those provided by hospitals and health
clinics, have frequently been shut down during strikes,
generating ongoing debate about the country's labor laws.
     Since President Alvaro Arzu took office in January, the
debate has gained momentum, in part because of a series of
public-sector labor disputes that exploded this year.  In
January, for example, workers at two huge state hospitals in
Guatemala City--San Juan de Dios and Roosevelt--shut down
outpatient services to press for wage hikes, and they
threatened to mount a nationwide general strike if the
government did not open negotiations with them (see Chronicle
of Latin American Economic Affairs, 02/29/96).
     Beginning in mid-March, the country's 3,700-member
Sindicato de Trabajadores del Organismo Judicial (STOJ)
paralyzed the country's entire judicial system for three weeks
to press for wage hikes and approval of a new collective
bargaining agreement that the union had been negotiating with
the Supreme Court (Corte Suprema de Justicia, CSJ) since March
1995.  The STOJ had petitioned the courts for a strike permit,
but given the slow progress of the request, plus the CSJ's
refusal to accept a wage hike in negotiations, the union
decided to forfeit legal permission and press forward with the
walkout.
     During the three weeks that it lasted, the strike gripped
public attention since it completely shut down the courts
throughout the country, leading to huge conflicts in some
towns and villages where criminals were caught by police but
then set free because the judiciary was inoperative.  In about
a dozen cases, local mobs took justice into their own hands.
A total of six men were lynched, and in four of the cases,
angry citizens burned the bodies of the victims after killing
them.
     Given the public backlash against the strike, the CSJ
hardened its position and successfully petitioned the courts
to declare the strike illegal.  Under threat of dismissal,
STOJ members finally returned to work on April 8 without any
of their demands being met.
     The conflict in the judiciary, however, emboldened the
Arzu administration to push forward with legislation to
further restrict union rights among civil servants.  On April
9, the day after the STOJ went back to work, the governing
party introduced a bill in Congress that would make it illegal
to even partially shut down public services in some ministries
and institutes under any circumstances, and to make legal
action against civil servants who strike without a permit much
faster and easier.
     In particular, the bill prohibits strikes in about a
dozen public sectors, including health, sanitation,
telecommunications, energy generation and distribution,
aeronautics, postal and telegraph services, the judiciary, the
security forces, urban and rural transportation, and water
distribution.  It also allows the executive to extend the
strike prohibition by decree to include other public
ministries and institutes if the government deems that a labor
walkout will seriously affect the national economy or if it
represents a grave risk to the public.  And, in those cases
where a union does strike without a legal permit, the bill
gives authorities the right to fire the striking workers
without need for court approval.
     The government says that the bill is part of a much
broader government plan to modernize the state.  According to
Vice President Luis Flores Asturias, in addition to the labor
bill, the Arzu administration is preparing a series of
complementary public-sector reforms to reduce bureaucracy and
increase government efficiency.  The reforms include a plan to
significantly cut back the civil servant work force.
     The government is now negotiating a loan with the World
Bank to finance a "voluntary retirement" plan whereby public-
sector employees would be given incentives to leave their
jobs.  The goal, according to Flores, is to reconcentrate the
responsibility for public services in the hands of a much
leaner and more technically qualified work force.  By reducing
the payroll, the government could offer better wages for those
who remain, thereby attracting better trained professionals
who would be more efficient at their jobs.
     "What we want is a smaller number of employees who will
be paid larger salaries that match their qualifications, both
technical and academic," said Flores.  "The modernization
program is still in the planning stages.  In the coming months
we will send proposals to Congress for approval with the goal
of implementing the full program at the beginning of next
year."
     Nevertheless, although reaction to other components of
the modernization plan remains to be seen, the labor-reform
bill has generated fierce disagreement since it was introduced
in Congress, not just within the country's labor movement, but
among most of the opposition parties in the legislature.  In
part, the criticism stems from the authoritarian approach
taken by PAN, which controls 43 of the 80 seats in the
unicameral Congress.  (Cont.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ECOCENTRAL: CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMY via NewsNet
June 6, 1996

GUATEMALA: NEW LAW LIMITING UNION RIGHTS FOR
CIVIL SERVANTS PROVOKES HUGE LABOR PROTESTS (Part 2)

     PAN has used its legislative majority to limit all debate
on the bill, discarding suggestions by the opposition that
labor leaders be consulted, or that the Constitutional Court
first be given an opportunity to rule on whether the bill
would violate the Magna Carta.  As a result, on May 23 PAN
unilaterally approved the bill against the unanimous
opposition of the remaining 37 congressional representatives,
generating harsh criticism from opposition parties.
     "A party dictatorship has been implanted in Congress
where laws are simply approved by PAN representatives without
even the slightest interest in listening to the opinion of
legislators from the other parties," said Aristides Villatoro
of the Frente Republicano Guatemalteco (FRG), the second
largest party in Congress.
     In fact, the president of Congress, PAN leader Carlos
Garcia Regas, prohibited the public from being present in the
legislature when the bill came up for a vote.  Garcia hoped
that measure would block union leaders and activists from
filling the legislative auditorium in protest.
     In Guatemala, a bill must be passed in three consecutive
votes in Congress to become law.  On May 21, when the bill
came up for a second vote, Garcia Regas ordered the doors of
Congress shut to the public.
     In retaliation, about 300 labor leaders from the
Federacion Nacional de Trabajadores del Estado (FENASTEG) and
the Unidad de Accion Sindical y Popular (UASP) forced their
way into the building and held a sit-in in the voting chamber.
The activists refused to leave until 1,000 police officers and
army soldiers surrounded Congress and threatened to forcibly
remove them.
     When the bill received final approval in a third-round
vote on May 23, Congress remained under heavy guard by the
army and police, including four armored cars sent by the
military's Guardia de Honor, one of the largest bases in the
capital.
     According to labor leaders, the approval of the law has
encouraged the country's unions to take a much more aggressive
stance vis-a-vis the Arzu administration.  FENASTEG and the
UASP are planning massive demonstrations during the month of
June to protest the government's anti-union policies.
     "This law is part of a broad government offensive to roll
back the basic freedom of workers to organize unions, to
negotiate collectively, and to strike," said UASP leader
Sergio Guzman.
     Moreover, the unions believe that, in addition to
restricting union freedoms in general, the labor reform is
specifically aimed at paving the way for the privatization of
state firms and institutes in Guatemala by eliminating the
ability of public-sector unions to fight back.
     "This is the first step toward privatization in
Guatemala," said Guzman.  "The government is attempting to
clear the path for powerful private groups to take control of
state services, all of which tends toward the imposition of a
neoliberal model in Guatemala."
     Until now, adamant union opposition had prevented
consecutive governments from privatizing strategic state firms
in Guatemala, such as the telephone company Empresa
Guatemalteca de Telecomunicaciones (GUATEL) and the electric
firms Instituto Nacional de Electrificacion (INDE) and Empresa
Electrica de Guatemala (EEGSA).  In late April, however, the
Arzu administration announced plans to move forward with the
"demonopolization" of GUATEL, and possibly INDE and EEGSA as
well (see Chronicle, 05/16/96).
     That, in turn, has radicalized union opposition.  At this
year's May Day demonstration, union leaders made opposition to
privatization a central theme of the march in the capital,
attended by about 10,000 workers.  During the rally, the
GUATEL union burned a huge artificial loaf of bread in effigy
of the governing PAN, which means "bread" in Spanish.
According to the union, the act was also a symbolic
demonstration that workers will not allow the governing party
nor the private sector to "gobble up" public patrimony.
     Perhaps more important, Guatemalan unions are now, for
the first time, seeking to forge an alliance with unions in
other Central American countries to create a regional movement
against privatization.  The week prior to May Day, the
telecommunications and electricity-sector unions from
Guatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua met in San Salvador,
where they formed the Federacion Centroamericana de
Trabajadores de las Telecomunicaciones y de la Energia
Electrica (FESTEN).
     FESTEN is aimed at forging a "common front" against plans
by regional governments to sell off telecommunications and
electricity institutes, which is a stated goal of nearly all
the isthmian administrations.  FESTEN member unions will
organize simultaneous actions in their individual countries,
including strikes, demonstrations, educational campaigns, and
lobbying of diplomatic entities.  The unions from those three
nations will also seek to incorporate telecommunications and
energy-sector unions from Costa Rica, Panama, and Honduras.
     "FESTEN's creation is necessary because the problem of
privatization is exactly the same in all the Central American
countries," said Orlando Aguillon, secretary general of the
Salvadoran electricity workers union Asociacion de
Trabajadores de la Comision Ejecutiva del Rio Lempa (ATCEL).
     According to Nicaraguan labor leader Ronald Membreno, the
goal is not to halt privatization programs outright since such
an objective is unrealistic.  Rather, FESTEN hopes to
influence the process to make the outcome more favorable to
workers and lower-income groups.
     "We are aware that we will not be able to reverse the
privatization process in Central America since it is a plan
that is being imposed on local governments by international
lending institutions," said Membreno.  "But we can
energetically oppose the process to reduce the negative
effects of privatization as much as possible."  [Sources:
Reuter, 03/19/96; Agencia Centroamericana de Noticias-Spanish
news service EFE, 03/19/96, 03/20/96, 04/09/96; Prensa Libre
(Guatemala), 04/09/96, 04/15/96, 04/17/96, 04/22/96, 05/02/96,
05/06/96, 05/09/96; Siglo Veintiuno (Guatemala), 05/02/96,
05/05/96, 05/07/96, 05/14/96; Agence France-Presse, 05/21/96,
05/22/96, 05/23/96, 05/29/96; Inter Press Service, 03/19/96,
04/26/96, 05/22/96, 05/25/96, 05/30/96; Inforpress
Centroamericana (Guatemala), 04/11/96, 04/25/96, 05/09/96,
05/23/96, 05/30/96]



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ECOCENTRAL: CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMY via NewsNet
June 6, 1996

HONDURAS: U.S. IMPOSES EMBARGO ON HONDURAN SHRIMP IMPORTS

     On May 1, the US ordered its market closed to shrimp
imports from 49 countries, including Honduras.
Environmentalists say that shrimp from these countries are
caught in nets that simultaneously capture and kill sea
turtles, an endangered species.  Honduran officials, however,
expect the embargo to be lifted within a few weeks, after an
inspection team from the US certifies that Honduran shrimp
boats are equipped with turtle-safe nets.
     In 1993, owners of shrimp fleets in Caribbean Basin
countries agreed to switch to the use of nets equipped with
metallic turtle-excluder devices (TED), which allow turtles
entangled in the net to escape.  But environmental
organizations complained to the US State Department that there
was little or no compliance.
     Following announcement of the embargo, Honduran vice
minister of economy Edwin Araque admitted in a press
conference that the Honduran shrimp industry had indeed failed
to equip its boats with turtle-safe nets.  As a result, the
economy is threatened with an enormous loss of hard currency
from shrimp exports.  Shrimp is the most profitable
nontraditional export and third among all Honduran exports,
earning about US$120 million per year in foreign exchange.
     The embargo is only against shrimp caught at sea, which
will affect the Honduran catch from the Islas de la Bahia
region along the northern Caribbean coast.
     However, shrimp cultivated in tanks in the Gulf of
Fonseca on the Pacific coast, which account for 75% of
Honduran shrimp exports, will continue to be admitted to the
US market, but their origin must be certified.  Araque
estimated the loss in hard currency at US$40 million per year
if the embargo is not lifted.
     The embargo went into effect on May 1, but the US quickly
granted a reprieve until June 15.  During that time, a
commission will be sent to Honduras to verify that the shrimp
boats are being equipped with the required nets.
     The Honduran government has taken immediate steps to
avoid implementation of the embargo.  On May 9, the department
of fish and aquiculture (Direccion General de Pesca y
Acuicultura, DIGEPESCA) issued an order prohibiting the use of
the old nets.
     "By next week, no product from the [Caribbean] zone can
leave the country if it does not have a certificate showing
that it uses dragnets with excluder devices," said Marco Polo
Micheletti, vice minister of natural resources.
     The navy and merchant marine will enforce the order, and
violators will loose their licenses, said Micheletti.
     The ministry expects the cost of the new nets to be
absorbed by the shrimp industry.  The bill for equipping the
entire shrimp fleet of 125 boats would be about US$600,000,
far less than the US$40 million loss the embargo would cause,
said Micheletti.
     The US has issued embargo warnings against 50 nations in
all, but has so far excluded 11 Latin American countries that
have taken steps to require the use of the new nets.  Belize,
Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Venezuela, and Trinidad and Tobago have all
been certified by the US as being in compliance with the
turtle-safe requirement.
     In a related incident, local press reports in Tegucigalpa
say that US diplomatic representatives in Honduras suspect
that shrimp boats are being used by drug traffickers to
smuggle cocaine into the US.  The attorney general's office
has asked the US to supply information on the matter.
(Sources: Agencia Centroamericana de Noticias--Spanish News
Service, 03/25/96, 05/04/96; La Prensa, 05/03/96, 05/08/96;
Tiempo, 05/07/96, 05/10/96; Inter Press Service, 01/09/96,
05/24/96)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ECOCENTRAL: CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMY via NewsNet
June 6, 1996

NICARAGUA: AGRICULTURAL SECTOR CONFRONTS A CREDIT CRISIS (Part 1)

     While coffee and a few nontraditional crops are bringing
good prices on the world market, Nicaragua's agricultural
sector is in crisis, largely because of insufficient credit.
Growers blame government policies, which they say withhold
assistance to agriculture while favoring selected industries.
The government argues that the problem is not one of credit,
but of overdue debt.
     Nicaraguan agriculture has shown positive growth for the
past two years, both in profitability and amount of land under
cultivation.  This growth is largely due to high prices for
some commodities and an increase in crop diversification.
Coffee output in 1995, for example, grew by 32% over the 1994
level.  Growers of nontraditional crops have been steadily
putting more land under cultivation in tropical fruits,
cotton, and flowers.  The area devoted to the production of
melons for export to the US and Europe increased by more than
9% between 1994 and 1995.
     However, even growers of nontraditional crops, which are
aimed primarily at the export market, do not have adequate
capital to expand and keep up with changing technology.
Rodolfo Delgado, director of the Nicaraguan investment fund,
Financiera Nicaraguense de Inversiones (FNI), said that the
most profitable products--such as tobacco, peanuts, and
sesame--need US$89.6 million in credit for the 1996-1997
growing season, but only US$60 million is available.
According to Delgado, the credit shortage last year prevented
80% of the sesame growers from planting.  FNI is looking to
European lenders to fill the gap.
     Not surprisingly, the credit shortage has become a
serious point of contention between growers and the
government.  Associations representing farmers, ranchers, and
other agricultural segments accuse the government of
strangling their livelihood through adverse policies.  For
example, during the 1996-1997 season, the government's
development bank (Banco Nacional de Desarrollo, BANADES) will
make only US$30.4 million in agricultural loans.  Any
additional amount, according to Central Bank President Jose
Taboada, will have to come from funds recovered from overdue
debt.
     But according to Amilcar Navarro, head of the farmers and
cattle ranchers organization (Union Nacional de Agricultores
y Ganaderos, UNAG), the credit demand for the season is more
than US$164 million.  He said that 80% of those who want
credit will not get it and that the private banks are too
conservative to extend credit to small producers during the
present economic crisis.
     Furthermore, the cost of credit is prohibitively high for
a majority of the producers and nearly impossible for those
with overdue debt.  Interest and other bank charges are
problems, as well as the controlled monthly devaluation of the
currency against the US dollar, since loans are calculated in
dollar terms.  These factors have pushed the real cost of
borrowing as high as 40% on commercial bank loans and somewhat
less for state bank loans.  Some growers turn to exporters and
other intermediaries for credit but at usurious interest
rates.
     The western department of Chinandega has been hard hit by
the crisis.  Growers there continue to cultivate sugar cane
and other traditional crops but have also tried planting
nontraditionals such as peanuts, soy, sorghum, and cotton.
These crops may offer a greater return on investment than the
traditional crops, but producers need credit to make the
changeover.
     Some relief came in mid-March, when the regional Banco de
America Central (BAC) offered to finance cultivation of 1,400
hectares of sugar cane in Chinandega.  The aid would be in the
form of short-term credits at 14% interest, which is ten
percentage points below interest rates charged by the state
banks.
     But the BAC loans will not help the poorest and most
indebted campesinos.  Nor will financing 1,400 ha go far to
reactivate agriculture in Chinandega, since nearly 280,000 ha
need assistance, according to UNAG.
     Writing in the Sandinista newspaper Barricada, Navarro
said that government policy was slowly killing the
agricultural sector.  Navarro said that the government
collection agency Cobranzas de Nicaragua (COBANICSA),
nicknamed the Cobra, "is designed to do away with agriculture
in our country."
     Although the Cobra is supposed to foreclose on the larger
producers, who owe the most money, it is also a threat to the
smaller growers.  Critics of the Cobra say that foreclosures
will eventually lead to severe social unrest and violence,
without either reducing the debt or rejuvenating the
agricultural sector.
     "What good is the Cobra if there is no credit?" asked
Navarro.  "Furthermore, what good is credit if it is a
suicidal act to take it when you can't pay it back?  What good
is it to lower interest rates if trade policy allows imports
to compete advantageously against our products?  And what good
is it to regulate imports if fiscal policy is loading us up
with taxes?"
     The UNAG demanded in March that the government provide
sufficient credits for the 1996-1997 growing season.
According to Juan Betancourth, president of UNAG in
Chinandega, 12,000 small and medium-size growers in the
department have been unable to get credit from BANADES.  Small
amounts of financial aid from nongovernmental organizations
have been the main sources of financing.  As a result of the
credit shortage some 269,000 ha of cultivable land are idle
and 60,000 campesinos are finding it difficult or impossible
to meet their basic needs, says Betancourth.
     Besides the financial hurdles campesinos face,
Betancourth notes that many do not have legal title to their
land.  Without titles, banks will not lend money even when it
is available.  Therefore, the organization has also demanded
that the government legalize ownership of 14,000 ha for which
it has not yet granted title.  (Cont.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ECOCENTRAL: CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMY via NewsNet
June 6, 1996

NICARAGUA: AGRICULTURAL SECTOR CONFRONTS A CREDIT CRISIS (Part 2)

     On the national level, growers and ranchers associations
petitioned the National Assembly in March to pass two bills
that they believe will reactivate the depressed agricultural
sector.  One proposal, submitted by an alliance of ranchers,
merchants, and manufacturers, is intended to revive the
economy in general.  The text of the proposal describes the
productive elements of the economy as "in complete
abandonment."
     The law would mandate a declaration that the
"rehabilitation" of agriculture and industry is "of national
interest."  The state banks would then be required to
negotiate favorable terms of repayment for those in both
sectors who carry overdue debt of less than US$365,000.  The
proposal contemplates the refinancing of these debts and
suspension of any seizure of the debtors' property.
     The other proposal, submitted by the coffee growers
association Union Nicaraguense de Cafetaleros (UNICAFE), is
intended to improve market prices for coffee and increase
producer profit.
     "Producers have been forced by conditions of poverty to
sell their coffee at a disadvantageous price," reads the
proposal.
     Most Nicaraguan coffee is grown by small and medium-sized
producers who do not have enough clout to protect their
interests in dealing with importers of machinery and supplies,
coffee exporters, banks, tax collectors, and other
intermediaries in the coffee production and marketing chain.
     The law would set up a national coffee council (Consejo
Nicaraguense del Cafe), made up of Central Bank and other
government officials plus representatives from UNICAFE and the
coffee exporters.  The council would negotiate equitable
business terms among all participants in the industry. In
addition, the law would establish a fund to stabilize prices
(Fondo de Estabilizacion y Fomento), capitalized by a tax on
coffee sales.
     The credit crunch is not the only problem facing the
smaller agricultural producers.  The movement toward free
trade means drastic reductions in tariff protection for
agriculture.  At the same time, growers are burdened with new
or higher taxes on inputs such as machinery and fertilizers.
In addition, government efforts to favor one or another
domestic industry to make the Nicaraguan economy competitive
in the global marketplace have provoked other concerns in the
agricultural sector.
     Cattle ranchers complain that these policies have helped
reduce their herds to dangerously low levels.  The cost of
inputs has risen year by year, but export prices have varied
little in the last 20 years, according to Lorenzo Arguello of
the ranchers organization Comision Nacional Ganadera
(CONAGAN).
     Ranchers and meatpackers have protested government
policies that favor tanneries by holding down the price of
domestically produced hides and by collecting a 25% custom
duty on imported leather.  Alfredo Marin, president of the
meatpackers association (Asociacion de Mataderos), said that
it was unjust to sacrifice these two productive sectors, which
generate 100,000 jobs, to indulge 30 tanneries, which employ
only 500.
     CONAGAN leaders say that while ranchers are struggling
with insufficient credit to overcome the obstacles of high
costs and low prices, the government is negotiating for beef
imports from Argentina.
     CONAGAN is also lobbying in the Assembly against a bill
intended to foster economic stability, investments, and
employment.  The organization argues that the bill would do
none of these things.  Among other provisions, it would
rapidly lower import duties but would offer no assistance to
agriculture to make it more productive and competitive.
     Another drag on the cattle industry is a 2% tax that
ranchers must pay on their tangible assets and inventory.
Cattle ranchers argue that they have low profit margins
compared to the fixed costs of their assets and that such
taxes are the "coup de grace" for the industry.  Instead,
CONAGAN is asking the Assembly's committee on economic policy
to offer real economic incentives to ranching.
     In contrast to the pessimism among these producer
associations, government officials are uniformly optimistic
about the economy and see the basic problem in agriculture as
its inefficiency and lack of global competitiveness.
     Cabinet officials and government economists are
predicting a strong 5% growth in GDP for 1996, and along with
it continued growth in agricultural output.  As for credit,
they say that domestic savings is on the upswing, growing 17%
faster this year than in 1995.  As a result, there is ample
credit available--some US$608 million--says Mario Flores,
general manager of the Central Bank.  The problem is not a
lack of funds but rather the borrowers' "culture of not
paying," he said.
     "It's the quality of the borrowers, problems of
productivity, poor management, and low profitability of the
projects," said Flores.
     When asked what he thought of proposals to restructure
the debt, Flores said that if adopted, such proposals would
break the Nicaraguan banks.
     The government's policy is to avoid a collapse of the
Central Bank brought on by bad debt.  Some 30,000 producers
are in arrears in their payments and the total overdue debt to
state banks is now US$182.5 million.  Until debtors liquidate
their obligations, they will not be eligible for additional
state bank credit, said Central Bank president Taboada.  Bank
policy for the future will be to loan only to small and
medium-size producers.  It is the big growers who have the
biggest state-bank debts. About 200 of them account for 80% of
the nation's overdue agricultural debt owed to the state
banks.  However, by most accounts few of the 30,000 debtors
will be eligible for additional state credit during the
current growing season.
     To Flores and Taboada, the credit crunch, if not the
general crisis on the farm, is caused by mismanagement or
outright fraudulent use of credit.  But the president of the
UNAG chapter in Masaya department, Jose Martinez, pointed out
that the government was also a debtor begging for debt relief.
     "President Violeta de Chamorro's government received a
pardon of 80% of its foreign debt with the Paris Club," said
Martinez.  "So, the growers are proposing that the interest on
the debt they have with the state banks be reduced and the
term extended to 15 years."  (Sources: La Prensa, 03/21/96,
03/23/96, 03/24/96, 04/18/96, 04/20/96; La Tribuna de
Nicaragua, 03/16/96, 03/18/96, 03/21/96, 03/22/96, 03/31/96,
04/12/96, 04/13/96, 04/15/96, 04/16/96, 04/17/96, 04/20/96;
Barricada, 03/21/96, 03/27/96, 03/28/96, 04/01/96, 04/08/96,
04/18/96, 04/20/96, 04/22/96)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>