
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B040-198</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te50.html 205.156.212.5 19970122051941 text/html 27847
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:17:45 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:59 GMT
Content-length: 27660
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te50.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>'NET LOOMS OVER $10B FRAME RELAY MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1258 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>POOR BUYOUT RESPONSE WON'T HURT AT&T'S STRATEGY, ANALYSTS SAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(365 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>COMMISSION GIVES GO AHEAD TO $4 BILLION INVESTMENT IN SPRINT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(514 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>AN INSIDERS LOOK: NETWORKMCI SEEKS TO BROADEN HORIZON'S PAST&nbsp;LONG-DISTANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1114 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NETWORK SYSTEMS ACQUIRES PHILIPS' EUROPEAN PUBLIC NETWORK ASSETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>AT&T AND BIRLA GROUP WIN TWO CELLULAR LICENSES IN INDIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>SPRINT NAMES FRANZ AS HEAD OF DIVERSIFIED BRANDS GROUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>AT&T BEGINS LOCAL PUSH IN NEW JERSEY, MARYLAND AND GEORGIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(105 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>LCI ESTABLISHES WESTERN OFFICE IN CALIFORNIA AFTER ACQUISITION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>MCI TO PROVIDE BUSINESS SERVICE IN EASTERN EUROPE, BALTIC STATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>MCI OFFERS CUSTOMERS TIPS TO PREVENT COMPUTER FRAUD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

'NET LOOMS OVER $10B FRAME RELAY MARKET

The Internet is making a move to de-throne frame relay and
private networks as the premiere venues for data communications.
But fear not.  All is not lost yet for frame relay.  Unresolved
security and efficiency issues are keeping the Internet protocol
(IP) networks from competing directly with private networks.  So
by responding rapidly to customer dynamics and keeping an eye on
quality, there still is time for the long-distance carriers to
score some cash in this $10 billion market.

"The Internet would be more of a complement or an augmentation
to frame relay," Carolyn Tommie, a product manager with AT&T's
Interspan frame relay service, told The Report On AT&T.

Industry players see no signs of the frame relay business
slowing down.  The industry saw triple-digit growth last year
and is expected to grow 100 percent next year.

"There has been an absolute explosion in this business as
businesses reorganize and applications are pushed out from the
desktop to the local area network [LAN]," Bart Westberg,
director of advanced data services at Sprint, told RATT.

One of the things that makes frame relay so attractive to data
customers, and thus such a hot business, is the cost/performance
ratio.  Since with frame relay, data travels in short bursts
over the network as opposed to in a steady stream, the customer
pays only for the time he uses the network.  Westberg told RATT
that especially for "many-to-many connectivity," the price
performance of the service is a big selling point.

But a wolf is at the door.  A study by Forrester Research in
Cambridge, Mass., reports the Internet's cost advantage could be
just the arrow that pierces AT&T's heel in frame relay.  The
study says the Internet's cost advantage and flexibility will
leave private networks without any advantage by 2000.

However, Sprint's Westberg is confident that cost isn't the only
issue customers consider.  Although frame relay is cost-
effective, customers value quality of service above price when
choosing a carrier, he said.

"You've got to focus on the performance of the service,
technical service and network reliability.  You are dealing with
informed buyers, technical buyers," Westberg told RATT.

AT&T's Tommie agrees and adds that disaster recovery is an
advantage that frame relay has over the Internet.

"As customers switch mission-critical data, the carrier must be
able to back the service up in a number of ways.  You have to
give the customers more than one precautionary option," she told
RATT.  These options don't currently exist on the Internet, she
added.

Furthermore, Tom Pincince, an analyst with Forrester Research,
said Internet security is simply a red herring, and that public
networks can be just as secure as private networks.

William Callahan, a senior manager of broadband data marketing
at MCI, told RATT Internet security issues are on the verge of
being resolved.  He predicted that with the continuation of
firewall activity, the Internet will be as secure as frame relay
networks by the end of next year.

"But right now, [security] is why many businesses don't feel
comfortable with the Internet.  Thye are more comfortable with
frame relay," Callahan said.

Secure, yes, but perhaps not yet as efficient.  And that
efficiency problem could keep the IP networks at bay while the
long-distance carriers plot their next move, Pincince told RATT.

"Business users must be assured that mail sent is mail received
and that the multibillion dollar funds transfer does not get
pushed aside by the teenager downloading sports scores from
ESPN's Web site," he said.

That next move for interexchange carriers, Pincince advised,
should be to offer frame relay and Internet access in unison,
and perhaps eventually to wean customers off of frame relay.  At
least for the next few years, businesses should use both private
and public networks for data communications.

That challenge opens the door for a cohesive strategy of frame
relay and IP offerings.  Companies can send the bulk of their
data over the IP network and use the private, frame relay
network for sensitive information.

"Afterall, people use both the Postal Service and Federal
Express," Pincince told RATT.

AT&T now offers an Internet-connectivity option with Interspan
service.  It also provides its customers access to AT&T
WorldNet, which is a more comprehensive Internet offering than
that offered with Interspan.  Tommie said including Internet
access in conjunction with frame relay is vital because it
creates synergy between the two protocols.

"The Internet also has bursty use.  Someone may use the Internet
to pull down a large file.  Then another person in the company
may use it later for e-mail, but there never is a steady stream
of Internet use for the same function," Tommie said.

Sprint also is tying Internet backbone into its frame relay
offering.

"The underlying technology of the Internet is PCIC.  You have to
have a network to access the Internet.  ATM could be that
backbone [and we would try to provide it.]  It all depends on
how you position your service to meet your customers' demands.
It is not really a direct cannibalization of your business,"
Westberg told RATT.

Perhaps the company best suited for the evolution of frame
relay, and to challenge AT&T in data, is MCI, according to
Forrester's Pincince.  He said MCI has agility and a good
network backbone, and is not bogged down by a huge customer
base.  As a result, MCI will be able to get all of its customer
up to speed on new services faster than big fat AT&T, Pincince
said.

MCI's Callahan said that company has packaged Internet gateway
services together with frame relay since April.

"That gives our customers the ability to go back and forth
between the two. The two can peacefully co-exist," Callahan told
RATT.

Still, even as the Internet threatens frame relay today,
tomorrow could be a very different story and the two could still
play very well together.

"What will be the Internet of five years from now?  Five years
from now, corporations may rely on the Internet more for e-mail
than anything else," Mike Grubb, group manager of data services
at Sprint told RATT.  "And new applications and customer
requirements will drive frame relay service.  One type of
service is more suitable to the Internet and others to frame
relay."

Another way the carriers can slow the industry's progression is
to expand their customer base.  The market for frame relay
services doesn't have to end with Fortune 500 companies.
Although Sprint's main marketing thrust is aimed at mid- to
upper-tier companies, smaller companies also can be an
attractive customer.

"Anytime you've got multiple sites that you need to connect,
frame relay is a viable alternative.  Smaller companies are
getting into connectivity and pulling [Sprint's] focus down
somewhat," Westberg told RATT.

AT&T's Tommie said that company's customer breadth also is
across the board. Interspan has customers with as few as two
ports and as many as 1,000.

"Don't assume that [frame relay] should be targeted at large
companies only," Tommie said.

But carriers have to keep their eye on the ball to keep this
customer base happy than the average voice customer, Sprint's
Grubb told RATT.

"Voice technology is understood [by the customer] and not
evolving that much.  But data technology is a fast moving target
with ATM and ISDN and other technologies coming along.  The
demand for the technology is growing at least as fast as the
technology," Grubb said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

POOR BUYOUT RESPONSE WON'T HURT AT&T'S STRATEGY, ANALYSTS SAY

At first glance, the response to AT&T's management-buyout offer
seems weak - only 2,600 of the estimated 78,000 managers have
accepted to date.  But shed no tears for AT&T.  Analysts say the
company still will look good when it becomes a pure service
organization and begins to plot its invasion of the Bell
companies' local territory.

"Things are going as planned.  There are no surprises here.
AT&T likes to do things in a way that doesn't disrupt the system
that much," Brian Adamik, an analyst with the Yankee Group in
Boston, told The Report On AT&T.

Adamik said AT&T still will need to downsize in order to
transform itself into a purely service organization, but he is
unsure how deep the cutbacks will go.

He suggested that perhaps instead of layoffs AT&T will undergo a
redeployment of management from its headquarters out "into the
field," especially in light of its recent announcement to
aggressively pursue local markets.

"[AT&T will have to] de-centralize the business and put the
decisions out in the field.  Especially in product development,"
Adamik said.

An AT&T spokesman told RATT the company originally projected
about 4 percent of employees would take the offering.  The
number of people who had accepted by press time was just about
on target for AT&T, the spokesman said.

"It's not as attractive an offer as some would have liked,"
Yankee Group analyst Rob Rich told RATT.  Rich said he expects
the number to increase slightly before the end of the month.

The buyout will not eliminate the need for layoffs, however.
AT&T spokesman Burke Stinson told RATT it was meant only to ease
the company into telling some managers, beginning this month,
that they no longer have an assignment.

Rich said AT&T wasn't wiping as many costs off the books as it
would like, and that factor will cost the company some money.
But by the time the new company starts, the balance sheets
should look good so AT&T should be able to get low-interest
financing as a result, he said.

The deadline for accepting the buyout package was Friday; AT&T
should have the final numbers Tuesday.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

COMMISSION GIVES GO AHEAD TO $4 BILLION INVESTMENT IN SPRINT

After much ado, Sprint finally got the nod from the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) for its 20 percent sale to
France Telecom (FT) and Deutsche Telekom (DT).   Analysts say
this green light finally will put Sprint on equal footing with
AT&T and MCI on an international playing field - a field where
it currently lacks a presence.

"Sprint has been the weak sister among the big three [as far as
the international markets].  It had less facilities and
operations than AT&T and MCI," David Yedwab, an analyst with
Parsippany, N.J.-based consultancy Eastern Management told The
Report On AT&T last week.

Yedwab said MCI's partnership with British Telecom gave it a
strong international presence and AT&T's various partnerships
around the globe position it well on an international basis
also.  Sprint had been lacking such a strategic position, he
said, but not any more.

"This will put Sprint directly in the contest," Yedwab added.

The next step for Sprint and MCI is to see which can establish a
Pacific Rim presence to rival AT&T's, Yedwab said.

But let's not forget about the $4 billion plus change Sprint
stands to receive as part of this deal.  Yedwab said that cash
will go a long way toward Sprint's PCS investment - perhaps
giving the company a big boost over AT&T in the personal
communications field.  It also will help Sprint's investment in
a broadband network, an area in which Yedwab said Sprint is
falling behind AT&T and MCI.

Although the French and German telecom markets failed the FCC's
new test of market openness, the commission approved the $4.2
billion investment.

The FCC said that, in this case, it would give greater weight to
other factors, particularly how the cash infusion would enhance
the number-three long distance company's competitive position in
the United States.  Sprint has made major investments in the
States in personal communications service (PCS), a service seen
as a strong competitor to cellular.

The other factor is that French and German leaders have
committed to the FCC in writing that they will open their
telecom markets to competition in 1998.  If they fail to do so,
the FCC stands ready to revoke its approval of the deal, several
commissioners warned.

But the FCC also imposed several caveats, including banning
Sprint from increasing its capacity on its routes between the
United States and France and Germany.  That restriction is one
of several that exceed those imposed by a consent decree Sprint
has signed with the Department of Justice (DoJ).  It will go
away when switched voice resale and an alternative telecom
infrastructure are available in France and Germany.

A Sprint spokesman told The Report On AT&T it would have to
review the language in the FCC order with its partners before
commenting on the conditions.  Unfortunately, the recent
government shutdown has stalled the release of the language, and
the spokesman didn't expect to see anything from the FCC until
after the New Year.

The deal still must be cleared by the European Community as
well.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

AN INSIDERS LOOK: NETWORKMCI SEEKS TO BROADEN HORIZON'S PAST
LONG-DISTANCE

This special report - the first in a new Report On AT&T series
of insider looks at key MCI operations - gives you the valuable
strategic information on the telecom company's plans in such
areas as network services, long-distance, electronic commerce
and wireless strategies.  In future issues of RATT, you'll get
these in-depth reports on other MCI operations as well as
reports on the goings-on at AT&T and Sprint.  If you've got an
area of particular interest, please give Executive Editor Kim
Sunderland a call at 703/739-6543, or send her an e-mail on the
Internet at ksunderl@cappubs.com.

NetworkMCI Services: 1994-1995

MCI's strategic centerpiece, its ubiquitous networkMCI, seeks to
define the continuing evolution of MCI from a long-distance
company into a broad-based purveyor of services targeted to a
market where telecom, computing, entertainment and information
services are converging into an estimated $1 trillion business
opportunity.  Beyond that, networkMCI is more than a strategic
vision; it also is a developmental plan that features the
introduction of services in incremental steps to gain a leading
position as an overall provider of communications and
information services.

* MCI on the Internet *

The Internet is central to MCI's plan.  In 1995 there were an
estimated 25 million active Internet e-mail users, between 7
million and 10 million users with full Internet access and 4
million people who use the World Wide Web, an Internet
navigational tool.  The Wall Street Journal estimated that
commerce on the Internet, actually a supernetwork comprising
40,000 independent but connected networks, could reach the $100
million level as early as late 1995.

MCI has long been involved with the development of the Internet,
the network aspects of which are addressed in Chapter Six of
this report.  In terms of providing access to and service via
the Internet, MCI has introduced two service offerings since
mid-1994 which enhance Internet connectivity, as well as PC-
based applications:  the internetMCI software package and
marketplaceMCI.  In turn, both of these are wrapped within
networkMCI Business, a composite information and communications
package.  In addition, in 1994 MCI introduced internetMCI Access
Service which targets the larger education, government, and
business communities with a range of Internet access services,
as well as expanded e-mail service which allows Internet users
to utilize MCI Mail.

* networkMCI Business *

networkMCI Business is a Windows-based communications and
information software package targeted to the small and medium-
sized business community.  Originally introduced in October
1994, the latest version 3.0 was debuted at the COMDEX trade
show in Atlanta in April 1995.  In conjunction with the 1994
launch of the product, MCI reported incremental expenses of $70
million that contributed to an increase in operating expenses in
1994.  Although the software package is touted as an integrated
information and communications package, it is in reality a group
of separate applications linked only by Windows.

Introduced commercially in late September 1995, the package
features infoMCI, conferenceMCI, marketplaceMCI, faxMCI, e-
mailMCI, networkMCI paging and internetMCI.  The package is the
result of collaboration with numerous firms:  internetMCI was
developed in cooperation with Netscape Communications, FTP
Software and RSA Data Security; e-mailMCI is a licensed
application from ConnectSoft; networkMCI Paging is provided via
a reselling agreement with SkyTel; and faxMCI is a licensed
version of Delrina's WinFax PRO.  Other collaborators include
PictureTel Corp., Databeam Corp, FYI Online and Image Technology
Inc.

MCI indicated that the latest version of the package would be
provided free of charge to existing customers and run at the
price of $100 for new customers.  Further, the company indicated
the new offering would be accompanied by a drop in the monthly
subscription rate of $65 ($50 for Vnet, Vision or Preferred
customers) to $45 ($35 for Vnet, Vision and Preferred
customers).  Some of the standard components of the networkMCI
Business software package are also offered independently.

internetMCI - a "load and go" Internet access and navigation
software package which is also offered independently for $39.95
plus monthly access charges.  The offering provides local and
toll-free dial-up and graphical user interface (GUI) point-and-
click navigation.

marketplaceMCI - a multimedia on-line catalog and business
purchasing service providing businesses a new way to distribute
product information and facilitate on-line sales.  Brought
online in March 1995, marketplaceMCI opened with 14
"storefronts" to comprise an electronic mall:  Dun & Bradstreet
Information Services, Hammacher Schlemmer & Co., Office Max
Inc.; Intercontinental Florists, Danmark International, PC Zone
and Mac Zone, Reiter's Scientific & Professional Books, QUALCOMM
Inc., Reveal Computer Products, Covey, Proxima Inc., Doneckers,
FTP Software Inc. and National Wildlife Galleries Inc.  MCI
indicated that several more companies will open shops in the
electronic mall including: Aetna Life and Casualty, Amtrak,
Borders Inc., Dell Computers, Healthrider, Sara Lee, Tiger
Direct and Timberland.  The site is made possible by RSA Data
Security Inc.'s public-key cryptography which encrypts all
transactions involving sensitive information such as credit-card
numbers.  MCI has also taken measures to ensure the security of
the merchant web-site contents.

infoMCI - delivers to the customer news stories twice a day, as
well as instant news flashes on breaking stories.  The
information delivered is based upon a customer-defined profile.
The customer can select one industry category from a list of 25,
and specify key terms within an industry or company.  The
announced offering will also include business retrospective
search capabilities, weekly industry summaries, and special
business news reports.

conferenceMCI  - employing the yet-to-be-adopted T.120 document
and conferencing "standard", this tool allows people in
disparate locations to share documents including spreadsheets
and art for collaborative efforts.  conferenceMCI allows for the
connection of up to 24 locations, as well as simultaneous voice
and document conferencing.  Optional video conferencing is
available, but requires either the purchase or lease of needed
desktop video equipment.

e-mailMCI - provides users access to e-mail and gateways to
numerous other e-mail services.

faxMCI - provides the ability to send and receive faxes via the
PC from any Windows application.

* internetMCI Access Service *

internetMCI Access Service was introduced in mid-1994 and geared
to the education, government and business communities.  MCI
offers a variety of access services, including dedicated access
at 9.6 Kbps, 14.4 Kbps or 28.8 Kbps and switched access at the
same speeds; direct connect, a private line-like connection at
speeds from 9.6 Kbps to 45 Mbps; and frame relay.  In addition,
MCI announced that by the end of 1995 it planned to make
available high-speed access via Hyperstream ATM and Hyperstream
SMDS.
This article, written by Research Analyst John Coakley, is
excerpted from the Telecom Publishing Group's full-length
report, Inside MCI.  To purchase the entire report, contact John
Korcak at 800/655-5597.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

NETWORK SYSTEMS ACQUIRES PHILIPS' EUROPEAN PUBLIC NETWORK ASSETS

AT&T Network Systems recently signed the final purchase
agreement with Philips Electronics N.V. whereby AT&T will
acquire a portion of the public network assets held by Philips'
Communications Services Division.  Network Systems bought the
assets related to four Philips units:  Cellular Infrastructure,
Managed Transport Networks, Microwave Transmission and Access
and Transmission.

Financial terms and conditions were not disclosed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

AT&T AND BIRLA GROUP WIN TWO CELLULAR LICENSES IN INDIA

AT&T and its partner in India, the Aditya V. Birla Group,
recently got the go-ahead to build infrastructure and to provide
cellular service in two regions in that country.

The regions AT&T won are Gujarat and Mahahashtra.  The licenses
are considered two of the more lucrative in India, with 43
million potential subscribers and 74 million potential
subscribers, respectively.

The companies, operating under the name Birla Communications
Ltd, bid on the licenses last June and received confirmation of
the award in early November.  Last month the partners signed a
final licensing agreement and plunked down a $90 million, first
year, licensing payment to the government.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

SPRINT NAMES FRANZ AS HEAD OF DIVERSIFIED BRANDS GROUP

Sprint recently chose R. Michael Franz as president of its
Diversified Brands group.  As president of the group, Franz will
oversee the present and future agreements and sales efforts with
companies that resell Sprint services to businesses and
consumers.

Franz, who came to Sprint from Murata Business Systems, assumes
the helm Jan. 8 and will report directly to Gary Forsee,
president and COO of Sprint's long-distance division.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

AT&T BEGINS LOCAL PUSH IN NEW JERSEY, MARYLAND AND GEORGIA

AT&T filed an application with New Jersey regulators recently,
asking for the green light to offer local service to consumers
and businesses in that state.  The New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities last month began discussing opening the market for
local service.  AT&T, in the filing, outlined the general terms
and conditions under which the carrier plans to offer local
service in the Garden State, including reselling services from
the incumbent RBOC, Bell Atlantic.

The petition also called for number portability and intraLATA
presubscription in local competition.  The New Jersey request
comes at the same time as similar petitions in Maryland and
Georgia.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

LCI ESTABLISHES WESTERN OFFICE IN CALIFORNIA AFTER ACQUISITION

On the heels of acquiring T.M. Sepulveda, a regional long-
distance carrier based in Los Angeles and establishing a
headquarters in Costa Mesa, Calif., LCI opened another direct
sales office in suburban San Francisco.  Last fall, LCI filed an
application with the California Public Utilities Commission to
offer local service in that state.  The Commission has ruled
that carriers will be able to resell local phone service along
with long-distance service, under their names by March 1, 1996




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

MCI TO PROVIDE BUSINESS SERVICE IN EASTERN EUROPE, BALTIC STATES

MCI announced recently it will provide private line service to
multinational companies in the United States doing business in
the Newly Independent States (NIS), including Russia and the
Baltics.

The Skyline Direct Satellite Service includes everything from
design, installation of the Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT)
antenna and system maintenance for companies that need
international private lines from 64 kilobits/second up to 2
megabits/ second.  The system can accommodate voice, data, fax
and video, either independently or in combination.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON AT&T via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

MCI OFFERS CUSTOMERS TIPS TO PREVENT COMPUTER FRAUD

MCI officials said that to help prevent hackers from
compromising networks, businesses should make sure that their
systems sit behind firewalls, change passwords frequently and
use a "call-back" procedure to verify distribution of any
sensitive information over the phone.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>