
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-92</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033405 text/html 49837
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:05 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:56 GMT
Content-length: 49650
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la31.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet <BR>
December 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>U.S. WINS MAJOR COURT VICTORY ON 'WILLFUL BLINDNESS'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1194 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>JUSTICE ISSUES LAUNDERING GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(660 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>WORLD'S SECURITIES REGULATORS MAP LAUNDERING STRATEGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(656 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>WHISTLEBLOWER GETS $13 MILLION IN GE LAUNDRING CASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(577 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BUSH TAX VETO WEAKENS CID MONEY LAUNDERING EFFORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(638 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MISSING CTRS COST BANK $65,000 PENALTY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>FED IMPOSES $200,000 CIVIL PENALTY ON PAKISTANI BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(559 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CONGRESS INVITES PUBLIC HELP WITH CASH REWARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>TREASURY NOW HAS ITS OWN FORFEITURE FUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(283 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>U.S. DOLLARS MOTIVATE STATES TO JOIN LAUNDERING EFFORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CARRIBBEAN STATES MEET, ISSUE LAUNDERING DECLARATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(883 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>TREASURY ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS UNDER BSA IMMINENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(507 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS BY THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT UNDER THE BANK&nbsp;SECRECY ACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

U.S. WINS MAJOR COURT VICTORY ON 'WILLFUL BLINDNESS'

 The seesaw case involving the 1989 sale of a home in Lake Norman,
North Carolina continues its rise through the federal courts.
Possible next stop: the U.S. Supreme Court. The issue: the limits
of money laundering prosecutions based on "willful blindness."

 The U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals has given a major boost
to federal money laundering prosecutions in a case prosecuted by
Charlotte U.S. Attorney Thomas J. Ashcraft.

 It has fortified the legal notion that willful blindness, under
the right circumstances, can serve as a substitute for provable
actual knowledge on the part of the accused in a money laundering
case.

 According to the court, the case against Ellen Campbell, a young
North Carolina realtor, had the right stuff. In March 1991, she
became the first realtor in the country to be convicted of money
laundering. The jury found her guilty under the two federal money
laundering criminal laws (Title 18, USC Secs. 1956(a)(1)(B)(i) and
1957).

 Later that year, federal district Judge Graham C. Mullen
overturned the jury's guilty verdict and acquitted Campbell based
on a post-trial motion by the defense (Money Laundering Alert,
November 1991).

 The evidence showed that she included unreported cash in the sale
of a home to a drug dealer, Mark Lawing. He drove flashy cars,
lived a carefree life and had expensive tastes. The government
presented no evidence that Campbell knew he was a drug dealer
(Money Laundering Alert, April 1991).

 Lawing bought the home at a price of $182,500. He signed a
contract to purchase, but his poor credit rating prevented him from
obtaining a mortgage. His parents secured a mortgage for $122,500,
and he told Campbell he would pay the sellers the balance "under
the table." She consented.

 That is the way the deal was done. At the closing Lawing arrived
at Campbell's real estate office carrying a paper bag containing
$60,000, which he turned over to the sellers. Campbell did not
include that sum in the closing statement. Afterwards, she accepted
a $200 gratuity from Lawing in addition to her portion of the
commission on the sale.

 Lawing had earlier pleaded guilty to federal money laundering and
drug charges. He helped the government by testifying against
Campbell.

 She took the witness stand at trial and testified that Lawing had
told her he owned a lucrative body shop. The jury concluded that
she knew the cash involved in the closing was "the proceeds of some
form of unlawful activity" and that she was "willfully blind" to
the facts surrounding Lawing and his money.

 In his instructions to the jury, Judge Mullen said:

- "(K)nowledge may be satisfied by inference drawn from proof that
(Campbell) deliberately closed her eyes to what would otherwise
have been obvious to her. A finding beyond a reasonable doubt of a
conscious purpose to avoid enlightenment would permit an inference
of knowledge...."

- "(That) does not authorize you to find that (Campbell) acted
knowingly because she should have known what was occurring ..., or
that (with) hindsight she should have known ... or because she was
negligent in failing to recognize what was occurring or even
because she was reckless or foolish in failing to recognize what
was occurring....(T)he government must prove ... that (Campbell)...
deliberately contrived to avoid learning all of the facts."

 In his post-trial ruling, the trial judge said that "in order for
a party other than the drug dealer to have an intent to conceal the
illegal source of the dealer's money, the party must first know the
dealer's occupation."

 The evidence was not enough for conviction, he added. What it
showed was that Lawing was "a spendthrift playboy" who testified he
never told Campbell his true occupation, the court said. "More than
just image must be shown," he wrote.

 The Fourth Circuit disagreed in an opinion dated September 28,
written by Chief Judge Sam Ervin III, son of his famous late
father, Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina.

 "The central issue ... is whether there was sufficient evidence
for the jury to find that Campbell possessed the knowledge that (1)
Lawing's funds were the proceeds of illegal activity, and (2) the
transaction was designed to disguise the nature of those proceeds,"
said the court.

 The court honed in on what it found to be the fatal trial court
error. The trial judge had told the jury that the government's
burden was to show "a purpose of concealment" and "knowledge of the
drug dealers activities" on the part of the accused.

 That misstates the government's burden, said the Fourth Circuit
Court of Appeals. "The government must only show that the defendant
possesses the knowledge that the transaction was designed to
conceal illegal proceeds," said the court.

 It is a critical decision where the "defendant is a person other
than the individual who is the source of the tainted money," it
said.

 What really matters in cases like Campbell's is not her
motivation. That is "irrelevant," said the court.

 Her motive "without question," the court said, was to close the
deal and collect her commission "without regard to the source of
the money" or the sale's effect "in concealing a portion of the
purchase price."

 The money laundering law only requires the U.S. to show that
Campbell knew "the property involved in a financial transaction
represents the proceeds of some form of illegal activity," the
court said.

 The money laundering law requires that the transaction to be
"designed in whole or in part ... to conceal or disguise the
nature, the location, the source, the ownership, or the control of
the proceeds of specified unlawful activity" (Title 18, USC Sec.
1956(a)(1)(B)).

 "The omission of $60,000 from all documentation regarding the
sales price ... clearly satisfies this standard -- concealing both
the nature and the location of Lawing's illegally derived funds,"
the court asserted in a footnote.

 The "knowledge component" of the money laundering law boils down
to a single inquiry, said the court: "Did Campbell know that
Lawing's funds were derived from an illegal source?"

 The trial court should have left that question to the jury to
decide, said the appellate panel.

 It was correct for the trial court to exclude evidence that Lawing
was a "known" drug dealer, but it incorrectly underrated the
importance of Campbell's realtor colleague who testified that
Campbell had told her the cash "may have been drug money."

 By discounting that testimony because it conflicted with the
colleague's prior grand jury statements, the trial court improperly
invaded the exclusive province of the jury. "It should have been
left to the jury to decide," said the court. Lawing's lifestyle was
not irrelevant, either, the court pointed out.

 All those factors were "sufficient to create a question for the
deliberately closed her eyes to
what would otherwise have been obvious to her,'" the court
reasoned.

 A "reasonable jury" could have easily found Campbell guilty on
those facts, concluded the court. It reversed the judgment of
acquittal entered by the trial judge. Under the rules by which the
issues were heard, Campbell will now get a new trial (U.S. v.
Campbell, Case No. 91-5695, 4th Cir. Ct. App).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

JUSTICE ISSUES LAUNDERING GUIDELINES

 For the first time in the six-year history of the federal money
laundering law, which carries some of the heaviest penalties in the
U.S. Code, the nation's 94 U.S. Attorneys will have central
guidelines to follow when they seek to prosecute certain defendants
for laundering.

 The Justice Department, saying it wanted "to ensure consistency in
certain type of prosecutions" in an area of the law that "is
developing very fast," issued new rules of the game for money
laundering prosecutions. They cover prosecutions under the
forfeiture laws (Title 18, USC Secs. 1956 and 1957 and Title 18,
USC Secs. 981 and 982).

 "We must use these powerful tools carefully," say the Department's
new guidelines. In addition to receiving central clearance on
certain money laundering prosecutions, the nation's federal
prosecutors will now also be required to report key statistics on
their use of the laundering laws to Justice.

 The guidelines require the prior approval of the Department in
four categories of cases:

- where a case is based "solely" on the extraterritorial reach of
the money laundering laws

- where the sole purpose of the subject financial transaction was
to evade taxes

- where the financial transaction involves attorney's fees and an
attorney is sought to be prosecuted

- where a financial institution, as defined in the BSA regulations,
is to be named as a defendant or as an unindicted co-conspirator
(31 CFR 103.11).

 The money laundering section of the Criminal Division will serve
as the focal point for the approval process. Federal prosecutors
are required to send copies of the proposed indictment along with
a "prosecutive memorandum."

 The definition of "financial institution" used in the guidelines
does not include many businesses defined as such by the BSA, such
car dealers, jewelers, real estate agents, and insurance companies.

 The guidelines explicitly state they do not apply to non-bank
financial institutions, such as check cashers or currency exchange
houses which are not branches of a larger institution.

 The new rules apply only to prosecutions under the money
laundering laws. They do not apply to those for failure to file or
the fraudulent filing of currency transaction reports under the
Bank Secrecy Act.

 And, they have no effect on BSA prosecutions and forfeitures for
structuring (Title 31, USC Secs. 5324) or on civil forfeitures
linked to money laundering cases (Title 18, USC Sec. 981).

 In addition to the cases requiring Washington approval before they
can be filed, the guidelines also require federal prosecutors to
seek "consultation" with the money laundering section in these
cases:

- where they seek forfeiture of a business on the theory that it
facilitated money laundering

- where a civil penalty is sought to be imposed under the money
laundering laws as part of a criminal prosecution for laundering
(Title 18, USC Sec. 1956(b))

- where the "specified unlawful activity" alleged in a laundering
charge is a financial or fraud crime "so closely connected" that
there is "no clear delineation" between that crime and the money
laundering offense.

 The Department warns prosecutors that where the same financial
transaction is the basis for the specified unlawful activity and
the laundering charge, no money laundering charge should be
brought.

 The guidelines were issued by Assistant Attorney for the Criminal
Division Robert S. Mueller. They are called "bluesheets" and will
be contained in the U.S. Attorneys' Manual (USAM 9-105.000).

 Hardly any area of federal jurisprudence is presently as dynamic
and volatile as the money laundering field. The new prosecution
guidelines were long in coming. They are not binding. If a
prosecutor does not comply with them, the defendant cannot
complain.

 The major criticism of the guidelines will focus on the topics
they do not address. But, they are a beginning toward bringing
uniformity to an important area of the law previously molded by 94
distinct points of view.

--Sarah N. Welling is on Money Laundering Alert's Editorial Board
of Advisors and a Professor of Law at the University of Kentucky at
Lexington.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

WORLD'S SECURITIES REGULATORS MAP LAUNDERING STRATEGY

 A sleeping potential giant in the world money laundering effort
has begun to awake. At its annual meeting in London last month, the
International Organization of Securities Commissions revealed the
results of the work of a working committee on money laundering.

 That is a unit formed by IOSCO to analyze the impact of money
laundering on the securities and futures industries and to
recommend ways to deal with it.

 Recognizing that other financial sectors, notably banking, have
increased their defenses against money laundering, IOSCO said it is
important to "ensure that securities and futures markets do not
become a comparatively more attractive alternative for money
launderers."

 The difficulty in dealing with laundering in the securities field
is that, usually, little currency is involved in the transactions
which are commonplace in the industry. It is an industry that runs
by computer blips and paper. Its exposure to money laundering comes
after the launderers have disposed of their cash through other
means.

 The IOSCO report is the first treatment of the money laundering
problem by the world's securities commissioners. IOSCO was formed
in 1986. It is the only global association of governmental bodies
which regulate the securities and futures markets. The Montreal-
based organization has 101 members from 63 countries.

 In its year-long study, the IOSCO committee worked closely with
the Financial Action Task Force, an organization formed in 1989 by
the Group of Seven major industrialized nations which now has 28
member countries.

 In 1990, the FATF issued 40 recommendations representing a global
blueprint for dealing with money laundering. They have become the
guideposts for action by countries and regional bodies around the
world (Money Laundering Alert, May 1990).

 The IOSCO working group said its objectives are to act as a
clearinghouse for information for securities and futures regulators
on money laundering and to reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens on
legitimate businesses while preventing illicit proceeds from
entering the markets.

 The IOSCO report said money laundering can occur in the securities
industry in customer accounts which are used only to hold funds and
not for trading. In those cases, banking channels with more
stringent money laundering controls are skirted.

 Other indications of money laundering are what are known as "wash
trading" transactions. Those involve the entry of matching buys and
sells in particular securities which create the illusion of
trading. Wash trading through multiple accounts generating
offsetting profits and losses and transfers of positions between
accounts that do not appear to be commonly controlled are other
indicators of money laundering.

 The report makes seven recommendations to the securities industry:

- Customer identification procedures should prohibit anonymous
accounts or those in names that clearly appear fictitious and
should require that the identity of new customers be verified.

- Recordkeeping requirements should aim to verify the movement of
funds in securities transactions and document them fully. Records
should be kept for least five years.

- Detection and reporting of suspicious transactions, particularly
where complex and unusual transactions and strange trading patterns
exist, should be an industry standard.

- To prevent control of securities firms by criminal elements, due
diligence procedures should be used to examine the principals of
trading firms. There should be a free exchange of public and non-
public information through international sharing agreements.

- Model compliance and audit programs to guard against money
laundering should be established in all securities and futures
firms.

- The use of cash and its equivalents should be discouraged. That
includes transferrable bearer shares or debt instruments.

- Securities regulators should cooperate with law enforcement
agencies resulting in the free and prompt exchange of information.

 If recognition of a problem is the first step toward its cure,
IOSCO has begun the process of confronting the money laundering
problem that no one denies exists in the gigantic securities and
futures industries. Now begins the task of implemention.

--Richard M. Lucas is a consultant for the Philip Manuel Resource
Group, a CPA and a former Special Agent with the IRS.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

WHISTLEBLOWER GETS $13 MILLION IN GE LAUNDRING CASE

 Crime doesn't pay, the saying goes, but exposing crime in the U.S.
these days can pay handsomely. Ask Chester L. Walsh. He is now
richer by $13.4 million for having blown the whistle on his former
employer, the General Electric Company, which earlier this year was
found guilty of a multi-million dollar corruption scheme.

 Walsh, a GE employee for 25 years, smuggled documents out of
Israel which helped prove that Rami Dotan, an Israeli Air Force
General, received about $11 million in payoffs from GE for his help
in assuring that GE kept lucrative F-16 aircraft sales contracts
with Israel. The contracts were financed largely with U.S. funds
(Money Laundering Alert, August 1992).

 Walsh was manager of the company's Israel aircraft sales
operations for four years. In 1987, certain events made him
suspicious. He began noting and recording conversations with GE
employees who were involved in the corrupt scheme. He also hired a
California lawyer.

 Walsh received the largest sum ever paid to a whistleblower. He
filed what is known as a qui tam proceeding. He, with the aid of a
California group called Taxpayers Against Fraud, sued the
government in November 1990 under the False Claims Act, the so-
called "whistleblower statute."

 That law dates back to 1863 and permits individuals to file suit
in federal court alleging fraud against the government. It also
permits a whistleblower to receive up to 25% of the amount
recovered by the government in civil damages. Walsh received 22.5%
(Title 31, USC Sec. 3730(b)(1)).

 Walsh's attorney, John Phillips, says the case is a "total slap in
the face to GE and the Justice Department." They had argued that
Walsh did not deserve payment because he had purposely delayed
reporting the wrongdoing in order to increase his potential award.

 GE says that if Walsh had "dealt honestly" with the company, the
fraud could have been detected and reported much earlier and could
have saved the government millions of dollars.

 In his ruling, Cincinnati federal Judge Carl B. Rubin said the
opposite was true and that the government would in fact make a
"profit" of at least $4 million.

 Phillips described GE's claims as "absurd." He said his client had
to maintain silence in order to protect himself and that the
treatment of whistleblowers by GE gave Walsh reason to fear for his
job and personal safety.

 "This is not the type of suit you file lightly," Phillips said.
"You must have full evidence."

 While working in Israel, Walsh had gone to another GE employee
with his concerns. When too many questions were raised, that
employee was transferred out of the country.

 Judge Rubin concluded that without Walsh it would have been
"difficult, if not impossible" to sustain a case against GE. He
also said that Walsh's actions as an individual were not important
and that the important issue is the concept of whistleblowers.

 "No one likes snitches, but they can be valuable," Rubin said.
"This is not the first case where this Court has noted the
antagonism of the Justice Department to a whistleblower. The reason
continues to be unknown, but the attitude is clear."

 Walsh recently described the court ruling as "the end of a long
and stressful five years."  Now retired in Florida, he plans to
give half the award to Taxpayers Against Fraud which assists
claimants under the whistleblower statute (Case Nos. CR 1-92-87 and
Civ. C-1-90-792, So. Dis. Oh.).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

BUSH TAX VETO WEAKENS CID MONEY LAUNDERING EFFORT

 The day after the November 3rd election, President Bush vetoed a
$27 billion tax bill partly in deference to his campaign promise of
"no new taxes." While his action spared some U.S. taxpayers of a
larger tax bite, it also grievously hurt the capabilities of the
IRS's Criminal Investigation Division in the money laundering
effort.

 The CID is a key player in that effort. Its ability to develop
cases through artful undercover investigations gains the admiration
of most. Undercover investigations usually require start-up money.
With any luck, profits from doing business with the bad guys,
undercover, pay or defray the government's costs.

 It is a bonanza for the taxpayer: the bad guys supply the cash
which fuels the mechanism designed to cause their demise. They pay
for their own indictment. Sometimes they supply enough cash, in
commissions charged by the federal agents posing as money
launderers, to support the next undercover job.

 All major federal investigative agencies, except the CID, have
standing authority to "churn" those profits. That means they can
plow the profits back into the operation or use them for another
undercover job without having to dip into their agency's budget.

 In the case of the CID, the budget is controlled at the local
level by the IRS District Directors who are not attached to the CID
and who usually have no law enforcement experience.

 If the CID cannot churn the profits, they have to be put into the
general treasury of the U.S., probably never to be seen again for
law enforcement purposes. Instead, the CID must seek funds from the
budget allocated annually to each of the 63 IRS districts.

 Churning undercover profits, federal agents say, is a good
investment because it spares the taxpayer of having to fund much of
the effort against the criminals in society. Moreover, they say,
undercover operations that don't have to beg, borrow, and steal, in
order to function, will reap much greater rewards for the taxpayer.

 Why? Because a more credible undercover facade lands bigger fish
and locates more assets the government can later seize.

 The veto by President Bush terminated the CID's ability to churn
its undercover profits. They are not insignificant, ranging to 2,
4, or 6 percent of the dirty money which the undercover agents
"launder" for the criminals.

 The result of the veto: CID undercover operations will be scaled
back, and the profits which criminals unwittingly pay to government
agents go into the "black hole" of the general treasury.

 The other CID tool which was emasculated by the veto was the IRS
ability to freely disseminate data from IRS Form 8300 to other
federal agencies. That form reports cash receipts of more than
$10,000 received by trades and businesses, such as car and boat
dealers, realtors, lawyers and other businesses. It can provide
missing pieces to a financial jigsaw puzzle agents are grappling
with.

 Because it is authorized by the tax code and thus considered a tax
return, Form 8300 is treated differently than IRS Form 4789, which
is authorized by the Bank Secrecy Act (Title 26, USC Sec. 6050I and
Title 31, USC Sec. 5313).

 The inability to share freely the data from Form 8300 creates an
uneven playing field for the government and strips away the logic
of the federal cash reporting regimen. Ideally, cash paid to a
trade or business is reported on Form 8300 and subsequently
reported on Form 4789 which is filed by the financial institution
where the business banks. That provides a paper trail for cash
which is otherwise untraceable. It helps agencies, such as the FBI,
the Customs Service, and the DEA, follow that cash flow. Presently
they can't.

 Until the new Congress, which convenes next month, acts to remedy
those problems, the CID will operate with one hand tied behind its
back.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

MISSING CTRS COST BANK $65,000 PENALTY

 The Treasury Department announced this month that it imposed a
$65,000 civil penalty under the Bank Secrecy Act against a small
Arizona bank for failure to file IRS Form 4789, the Currency
Transaction Report, on several occasions. It is the fifth, and
possibly final, BSA penalty in 1992.

 Caliber Bank, based in Phoenix, committed the violations during
the period from November 1989 to February 1992. They were
discovered when BankAmerica Corporation, which owns Caliber,
performed an internal compliance audit of the bank.

 Neither Treasury nor Caliber Bank officials responded to questions
about the number of CTR violations that were discovered. Treasury
said it took into account the bank's voluntary disclosure of the
infractions in assessing the penalty.

 Treasury said another factor that mitigated the penalty was the
improvement in the bank's compliance programs instituted by the new
management.

 The BSA requires financial institutions to file Form 4789 when a
cash transaction of more than $10,000 is conducted by a customer.
The forms assist the government in tracking money laundering, tax
evasion and other criminal activities (Title 31, USC Sec. 5313).

 Treasury's Office of Financial Enforcement has been criticized
severely this year by the House Ways and Means Oversight
Subcommittee and the General Accounting Office for its slow penalty
process (Money Laundering Alert, April and July 1992). Of the five
civil penalties this year, two have been levied in the past three
months.

 Founded in April 1985, Caliber Bank has gone through many changes
in its short history. It was created by Valley Capital Corporation,
which is Nevada-based. Last spring, Caliber was acquired by
BankAmerica Corporation. Since then, Caliber has grown from nine
branches to 40.

 BankAmerica has agreed to sell the forty Caliber branches to a
California investment group named Independent Bancorp in which
Peter Ueberroth, the former major league baseball commissioner, and
Anthony M. Frank, former Postmaster General, are principals. The
application for the merger is pending with the Federal Reserve
Board.

 The Caliber BSA violations occurred under prior management. No
criminal charges were brought against the bank or its employees.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

FED IMPOSES $200,000 CIVIL PENALTY ON PAKISTANI BANK

 Last February, large advertisements in several major newspapers,
placed by the State Bank of Pakistan, offered "bearer certificates
in foreign currency" under conditions of total secrecy. The ad said
there would be "no questions asked about source of funds!" and no
identity would be disclosed.

 The Pakistani offering was short-lived. Five days after the ads
appeared, the bank, which is the country's central bank, canceled
the sale of the bonds in the U.S. and postponed sales elsewhere
after several U.S. officials expressed shock at the brazen money
laundering solicitation.

 In March, by letter responding to questions from Senator John
Kerry (D. Mass.), Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan
said the Fed had sent examiners to three Pakistani-owned banks
operating in the U.S., the National Bank of Pakistan, Habib Bank
and United Bank.

 Greenspan said the U.S. had received assurances from the banks
that the bearer certificates would not be issued in the U.S. He
said the Fed had consulted with the Securities and Exchange
Commission to determine compliance with U.S. securities laws. He
said the Fed was continuing to "evaluate the implications of the
advertisement and the information it contains."

 The results of the Federal Reserve's examination of the three
Pakistani banks are now known. On September 28, the Fed announced
a comprehensive cease and desist order directed at the Chicago
branch of the National Bank of Pakistan.

 The Fed also imposed a $200,000 civil penalty against the bank for
its failure to comply with various recordkeeping and reporting
provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. Details of those violations
were not disclosed.

 The cease and desist order requires the bank to undertake a number
of "affirmative actions" to assure compliance with the BSA. Prior
to the order, the bank was required to submit to the Fed, the FDIC,
and the Illinois banking commissioner a detailed BSA compliance
program designed to ensure that the Chicago branch of the bank
complies with "all the provisions of the BSA."

 The Chicago branch was put on notice that it must exercise special
care to control and monitor "the flow of funds to and from the
(branch) to persons and entities" in and out of the U.S. An
innovative aspect of the order mandates the creation by the branch
of a "know your customer" policy with the ability to:

- identify and confirm the identity of each customer

- "predict with relative certainty the types of transactions that
each of the customers ... is likely to transact"

- monitor customer transactions to see if they are "inconsistent
with the customer's regular and ordinary practices"

- investigate and, where necessary, prohibit transactions where
customer identity cannot be confirmed or where a transaction is
inconsistent with the customer's "normal practices and no
satisfactory explanation exists."

 The Fed's order also prohibits two unnamed employees of the
Chicago branch from any duties involving cash transactions or BSA
compliance and requires the employment of an individual, acceptable
to federal authorities, to supervise BSA compliance.

 The bank will be obligated to furnish quarterly reports to the Fed
and the FDIC detailing compliance with the terms of the cease and
desist order.

 The Pakistani-owned bank may not be finished with all of its
regulatory problems. The Fed's order says other federal or state
agencies are not prevented from taking any other action which they
deem appropriate.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

CONGRESS INVITES PUBLIC HELP WITH CASH REWARDS

 Congress thought of most things that could assist the federal
effort when it passed the comprehensive new money laundering law
which took effect on October 29.

 On the theory that tongues are loosened with incentives of cash
rewards, Congress authorized the Justice Department to pay "awards
for information or assistance directly relating to violation" of
the money laundering, cash reporting, and structuring laws.

 Under the new law, Justice is permitted to pay such awards from
its bulging Asset Forfeiture Fund. Previously, it was permitted to
pay awards from the fund only in matters that pertain to violations
of the "criminal drug laws of the U.S." (Title 28, USC Sec.
524(c)(1)(B)).

 The new award for public assistance is not the first in the money
laundering field. The Bank Secrecy Act contains a provision giving
the Treasury Department authority to "pay a reward to an individual
who provides original information" leading to a criminal fine,
civil penalty, or forfeiture of more than $50,000, connected to a
BSA violation.

 That reward cannot exceed 25 percent of the government's recovery,
or $150,000, "whichever is less."  Since the enactment of that
provision, no reward is believed to have been paid. It is not known
who, if anyone, has applied (Title 31, USC Secs. 5323).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

TREASURY NOW HAS ITS OWN FORFEITURE FUND

 There has always been a rivalry between the law enforcement
agencies of the Treasury Department (IRS, Customs Service and
Secret Service) and those in the Justice Department (FBI and DEA).
The turf and resources battles are often fought behind closed doors
in Washington, but sometimes they spill out and affect the
performance of the agencies in the field.

 Neither side likes to be outgunned by the other. If one gets a new
widget, the other says it cannot function without it. The result,
in some cases, is duplication of resources often running into the
tens of millions of dollars.

 The latest example may be the recent creation by Congress of a
Treasury Department Forfeiture Fund which will mirror the
forfeiture fund already operating in the Justice Department. Each
fund will contain the property, including cash, forfeited by
constituent agencies of each department. The Justice Forfeiture
Fund, now about six years old, administers more than $1 billion in
forfeited property at any given time.

 The Treasury Forfeiture Fund was created as part of the recently
enacted Treasury Department appropriations bill (H.R.5488). The law
permits Treasury to utilize the fund for a variety of purposes
including the hiring of outside contractors to administer forfeited
properties, payment of mortgages and liens on the property,
"equitable sharing" payments to state and local enforcement
agencies and foreign governments which assist in Treasury cases,
payment of awards for assistance in Treasury forfeitures, and
purchase of evidence used in money laundering cases and forfeiture
actions.

 The U.S. now has two principal forfeiture funds containing more
money than the annual budgets of several states. How wisely they
are administered will be on the agenda of the new administration.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

U.S. DOLLARS MOTIVATE STATES TO JOIN LAUNDERING EFFORT

 Recognizing that money laundering can be fought by federal and
state combatants shoulder-to-shoulder compatibly, the federal
government is offering $600,000 in grants to state Attorneys
General and local prosecutors to beef up their effort.

 The available grants were announced on November 9 in the Federal
Register, the official repository of all federal offerings and
notices (57 Fed. Reg. 217, p. 53352).

 A "statewide prosecutorial authority" to deal with money
laundering and other financial crimes is what the grants seek to
foment. There are some strings attached. They will be issued by the
Bureau of Justice Assistance, an element of the Justice Department.

 The announcement says an eligible grantee must be in a state that
has:

- a money laundering statute

- a "financial reporting statute" similar to the Bank Secrecy Act
(Title 31, USC Secs. 5311-5328)

- a reporting statute for "non-bank financial institutions,"
especially where "currency exchange businesses" border on Mexico or
Canada.

 To further cement ties to the federal effort, the grant says the
prevailing parties must be in a state that has signed a "memorandum
of understanding" with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.
All but ne of the states have already done so.

 FinCEN, which is housed in the Treasury Department, receives and
analyzes millions of pieces of data contained in the various forms
the public at large is required to file with the government.

 If a state does not quite have the indicated laws and agreements,
the grant announcement says a saving grace will be the present
consideration of such reforms by the state legislature.

 Eligible state legal offices will improve their chances for the
federal grants if they reside in states which:

- have statewide grand jury laws

- use "post-seizure analysis teams" in their offices

- are the "designated FinCEN coordinator for the state."

 A vow to cooperate with the FinCEN coordinator is required of
those who do not hold that title.

 Several states are preparing their constituent agencies to apply
for the grants. Some, such as Texas, are considering legislation
that would meet the grant conditions. Others, such as Illinois,
have recently met the standards in large measure.

 Spawning a flock of states to do effective battle in the money
laundering war may create innovations and will increase the number
of public officials making requests for the books and records of
financial institutions.

 The formal grant announcement of the Bureau of Justice Assistance
will be available, it is expected, in the middle of January. There
will be 120 days to file grant requests. The winners will probably
be selected 30 days later. As many as 20 applications are expected.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

CARRIBBEAN STATES MEET, ISSUE LAUNDERING DECLARATION

 In many nations the pace of legislative and regulatory activity on
money laundering has quickened. One reason: the imminent deadline
within the European Community for implementing the EC's money
laundering directive.

 Legislative bodies throughout the continent are exploring laws to
comply with the terms of the directive (Money Laundering Alert, May
1991). The Cortes in Spain and Germany's Bundestag are two
examples.

 Here are some important developments.

With prodding from big nations, Caribbean nations say they will
step up effort

 No global solution to the world's money laundering problem is
possible without the active participation of the Caribbean nations.
Everyone knows that. Many of them are premier laundering centers.

 Their proximity to the world's largest cocaine producers and
exporters, in South America's Andean region, and the largest
generator of drug dollars, the U.S., makes the region a convenient
bank for many international criminals, including drug dealers.

 That is why five large nations, who are involved in their own
money laundering control efforts, spearheaded a gathering last
month in Jamaica of 17 Caribbean nations. The U.S., U.K., France,
Canada, and the Netherlands were the catalysts.

 The two-day meeting started November 5 in Kingston some 29 months
after an initial Caribbean meeting in Aruba June 1990.

 At the conclusion, the nations issued a "Kingston Declaration on
Money Laundering." The Declaration expressed solidarity with the
1988 United Nations Convention on Illicit Trafficking on Narcotic
Drugs which has money laundering provisions. Not all Caribbean
nations have yet ratified it.

 The declaration also agreed to implement the 40 recommendations
issued by the G-7 FATF in 1990 and the 19 additional ones issued at
the 1990 Aruba meeting (Money Laundering Alert, August 1990).

 The declaration also accepted the offer of Trinidad and Tobago to
host next year's meeting and to provide facilities for a
secretariat of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force.

 The secretariat will be led by a steering group comprised of CFATF
members and the larger nations. The steering group will have
representatives from each group of Caribbean nations such as the
Dutch and Spanish language member nations.

 The secretariat will coordinate self-assessment procedures, help
evaluate members' progress, act as a clearing house for training
and technical assistance, and serve as liaison with non-member
countries and international organizations. It will report annually.

 The declaration recommended laws:

- defining money laundering based on the model laws issued by the
Organization of American States last May (Money Laundering Alert,
June 1992)

- concerning the seizure and forfeiture of drug proceeds and linked
assets. They should enable the identification, tracing and
evaluation of property subject to seizure, and permit freezing
orders.

- allowing judicial challenges to seizure orders by an
administrative body

- permitting forfeiture in all cases following conviction

- permitting courts to decide that "all property obtained during a
prescribed period of time by a person convicted of drug trafficking
has been derived from such criminal activity."

 The Caribbean nations also agreed to enter into mutual assistance
agreements with each other to assist in money laundering cases.

 They also agreed that money laundering should be an extraditable
offense subject to simplified procedures and that forfeited assets
should be shared among cooperating nations.

 The declaration's terms would:

- permit continuation of numbered accounts at financial
institutions with the understanding that account information would
be made available to "competent authorities" upon request and
insist on strong legal requirements on customer identification

- insist that in large currency transactions, customer
identification procedures and recordkeeping are "mandatory"

- amend bank secrecy laws to allow the reporting of suspicious
transactions by financial institutions, but make it optional
whether a statute is required

 The Caribbean money laundering effort seems to react only to the
prodding of the larger nations. If the gathering in Kingston does
not produce results, the money laundering control efforts of the
larger nations will be for naught.

Bank of England expresses worry of use of wire transfers as
laundering tools

 A very active player in the world money laundering control effort,
the Bank of England last month voiced concern about the
susceptibility of international funds payments systems to money
laundering.

 "The increasing efficiency and integration of the world's
financial system creates an environment that organized criminals
are only too ready to exploit," said the British central bank in
its Quarterly Bulletin.

 U.K. bankers are taking their suspicious transaction reporting
duties seriously. About 12,000 such reports will be filed this year
compared to 4,087 last year. Yet, only two financial institution
employees have been prosecuted under the nation's money laundering
law.

 The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telcommunications,
a major clearing system known as SWIFT, has told its users to
include the names and addresses of senders and recipients of
electronic funds transfers.

 In London in late October, the government proposed legislation
that would greatly expand the reach of the nation's present money
laundering law. If the proposed law is enacted, money laundering
from all offenses, not just drug trafficking, will be subject to
criminal charges.

 The proposed law will also facilitate forfeiture of a drug
trafficker's assets. A greater danger awaits those in financial
institutions who do not report suspicious transactions. Suspicious
transaction reporting is the heart of the British money laundering
control system. Penalties will be greater and prosecution will be
facilitated against those who do not report those situations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

TREASURY ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS UNDER BSA IMMINENT

 Here are some recent developments:

Treasury expected to issue two Administrative Rulings

- Two long-awaited Administrative Rulings from the Treasury
Department on certain fine points of Bank Secrecy Act compliance
are expected before the change of administrations in January.

 One deals with the relaxed identification rules applicable to
elderly customers. The other is expected to deal with the treatment
of multiple transactions on IRS Form 4789, the Currency Transaction
Report. The form asks in Line 3(d) to indicate whether a "multiple
transaction" was the reason the identification details about the
person "who conducted this transaction" are not stated on the form.

 Treasury's Administrative Rulings are a means by which affected
financial institutions are guided on BSA compliance questions. They
have been nonexistent in the last few years. From the date of the
first one on June 22, 1988 to the eighth one on December 21, 1989,
less than 18 months passed. In the intervening 36 months, Treasury
has issued none.

 In addition to Administrative Rulings, Treasury also provides
guidance to inquiring institutions through "private rulings," which
are written responses by the Office of Financial Enforcement.

 The letters explain appropriate conduct under the BSA or construe
its provisions. The private rulings flow from Treasury in a steady,
albeit slow, stream to institutions across the country. Inquiries
can be directed to: Office of Financial Enforcement, U.S. Treasury
Department, 1500 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W., Washington, DC 20202.
(CHECK) Its telephone number is (202) 622-0400.

Santa Claus robber can help himself by proving his money laundering

 The money laundering issue appears to be one for all seasons.
Jeffrey Stenner, a Connecticut restauranteur, dressed up as Santa
Claus on December 20, 1988 and robbed an armored truck of more than
$695,000 while it was making its rounds at a bank. He pleaded
guilty to that charge and the government agreed to drop another
armored truck robbery charge involving the theft of $1.1 million.

 Federal district Judge Alan H. Nevas does not believe Stenner's
story that all the money was spent and that no cash hoard awaits
him after he completes the sentence the judge is about to impose.

 The U.S. Probation Office has suggested to the judge that the
sentence be increased from the term indicated by the federal
sentencing guidelines (78 to 97 months) if Stenner has hidden part
of his loot.

 "I am convinced that there is a cash hoard out there that awaits
Mr. Stenner when he is released from jail....He'd be out in seven
years....That's a nice tidy sum to support him for the rest of his
life," said the judge at the sentencing hearing last month.

 The solution: See if Stenner can prove how he laundered and spent
the $1.7 million he stole. IRS agents working the case cannot
account for nearly a million dollars of the total.

 Judge Nevas rescheduled the sentencing until later this month to
see if Stenner was an artful money launderer. If so, his sentence
may be less than what the judge is inclined to impose.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS BY THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT UNDER THE BANK
SECRECY ACT


             Administrative Rulings by the Treasury
             Department under the Bank Secrecy Act-

Column 1

Ruling Number
88-1
88-2
88-3
88-4
88-5
89-1
89-2
89-5--

Column 2

Date Issued
June 22, 1988
June 22, 1988
June 22, 1988
August 2, 1988
August 2, 1988
January 12, 1989
June 21, 1989
December 21, 1989


Column 3

Subject
Reporting structured or suspicious transactions

Filing of Customs Service Form 4790 by banks when they know money
was transported into the U.S. by its customer.

Duty to report on IRS Form 4789 "cash-back" transactions of exempt
customers exceeding $10,000.

Bank's duty to note on its exemption list the identities of
multiple establishments which coondust transactions in exempt
account.

Duty of bank to report on Form 4789 cash received indirectly from
a customer through an armored car service hired by the bank.

Exemptions from currency transaction reporting to banks for groups
of existing accounts of the same customer.

Aggregating currency transactions of exempt customers who have
established separate accounts for multiple establishments they own.


Meeting the requirement of Form 4789 that information be furnished
about the person "on whose behalf" a transaction is being
conducted.

-  Source: 31 CFR, Part 103, Appendix
-- Administrative Ruling numbers 89-3 and 89-4 were not used. They
were reserved by the Treasury Department for rulings that were
never issued.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>