
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B11-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B029-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/tx12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122043750 text/html 60147
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:46 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:53 GMT
Content-length: 59960
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/tx12.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
TAX NOTES TODAY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 2, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>                        Today's Tax Highlights</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>                              96 TNT 1-H&nbsp;               SUMMARIES OF TODAY'S IMPORTANT TAX NEWS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(6848 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>                          Table of Contents</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>                              96 TNT 1-C&nbsp;                     CONTENTS OF TAX NOTES TODAY&nbsp;                     FOR TUESDAY JANUARY 2, 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2463 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
TAX NOTES TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

                              96 TNT 1-H
               SUMMARIES OF TODAY'S IMPORTANT TAX NEWS.

             TAX ANALYSTS ANNOUNCES NEW CITATION SYSTEMS.

     Starting January 1, 1996, Tax Analysts adopted a new citation
system to identify full text documents. A single, uniform number now
identifies each new document that we add to our print, electronic,
microfiche, fax, and CD-ROM publications. You can use that number to
obtain documents in whatever publishing medium you find most
convenient.

     No matter where a document appears or how you choose to order
it, the identifying number is now the same.

     The new citation format consists of the abbreviation "Doc"
followed by the last two digits of the current year, plus a serial
number. For example, the 141st document received by Tax Analysts in
1996 is identified in this way:

                             Doc 96-141

     Pre-1996 documents will continue to be identified by means of
our earlier citation systems. In other words, citations already
assigned to documents will not change.

     We believe that our customers will find our new citation system
to be substantially simpler and more convenient than the multiple
systems that we have used in the past.

Pinpoint Citations

     Along with the unified full text citation system, Tax Analysts
now provides pinpoint citations by means of bracketed paragraph
numbers in full text documents appearing in our print and electronic
publications. The new system enables you to specify the precise
portions of a full text document to which you wish to make reference.

     The new pinpoint citation system is available in substantially
all full text documents produced by Tax Analysts in print and
electronic form, including court decisions, IRS announcements and
rulings, congressional reports, and the like.

     The new paragraph numbering system does not apply to documents
that already have their own numbering system, such as statutes and
IRS regulations.

     The new paragraph numbering system is based on precedents
developed in British Columbia and recently adopted by the Supreme
Court of Canada. Paragraph numbering has been discussed extensively
in the United States as a means of providing pinpoint citations in
electronic texts, but it appears that Tax Analysts's adoption of
paragraph numbering is the first broadscale use of paragraphing to
provide pinpoint text citations.

     To cite to a specific paragraph in a Tax Analysts's document,
simply place a comma after the document citation and then add the
relevant paragraph number. For example:

                           Doc 96-141, 28

     Ranges of paragraphs or a series of individual paragraphs may be
cited as follows:

                          Doc 96-141, 28-33

                                 or

                       Doc 96-141, 28, 37, 54

     Tax Analysts' citation system and its guidelines for paragraph
numbering are not copyrighted. The memorandums discussing these
issues, together with the related computer programs, are available to
interested members of the public, and to other publishers, on
request. They will be made available in January 1996 on the Internet.

     If you have questions about our new full text document citation
system or need assistance, call Customer Service at (800) 955-3444.

           BUDGET NEGOTIATORS SET TO MEET THROUGH WEEKEND.

     Congressional and White House negotiators left the Capitol
December 29 promising to meet through the weekend if necessary to
hammer out a budget deal.

     "I expect us to make further progress," President Clinton told
reporters. "We will begin to deal with some of the difficult issues
today involving how we can balance the budget and protect Medicare,
Medicaid, education and the environment," said Clinton, who did not
mention taxes.

     House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., said, "There are reasons to
be cautiously optimistic. I would hope that over the next two or
three days we could basically get this done and have everything up
and running and everyone paid for while the staff work[s] out the
technical details."

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-2

                AIRLINE EXCISE TAXES SLATED TO EXPIRE.

     The 10 percent excise tax on airline tickets was scheduled to
expire at midnight December 31 unless Congress and the president
approved legislation to extend it. That was considered an unlikely
prospect, although high-level budget meetings were scheduled to
continue through the weekend.

     Under the Airport and Airway Trust Fund Program, excise taxes
are imposed on domestic passenger tickets, domestic freight waybills,
international departures, and noncommercial aviation fuel.

     The budget reconciliation bill Congress passed in November would
extend these excise taxes through September 30, 1996. Contingent on
this extension, the reconciliation bill also would extend through
next September 30 airlines' exemption from the 4.3-cent-per-gallon
tax on aviation fuel.

    IRS AND NATIONAL ARCHIVES AT LOGGERHEADS ON ACCESS TO RECORDS.

     Writing a history of the IRS from the advent of the modern
income tax (1913) to today would be difficult. The National Archives
does not have much information, and the IRS is not likely to provide
any. Unlike most government agencies, the IRS does not turn many of
its records over to the Archives. This has been its practice since
the 1920s. Since 1976, with the tightening of the confidentiality
rules under Internal Revenue Code section 6103, the IRS has been even
less willing to turn over records to the nation's document preserver.

     Even an employee authorized to use internal records would have
difficulty researching a complete history of the agency -- because
the IRS does not have its own centralized recordkeeping or filing
system.

     Recently, the IRS's first and only historian, Shelly Davis,
resigned in protest over the way the IRS was mishandling its records
and the agency's refusal to send documents to the National Archives
as required by law. (See The Wall Street Journal, Dec. 15, 1995, p.
A1.)

     And late last year, the National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA) issued a report evaluating the IRS's records
management. NARA found that the IRS is neglecting federal laws
regarding record retention.

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-4

     IRS RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM PANNED BY NATIONAL ARCHIVES.

     The IRS's records management program has serious shortcomings
that must be fixed if the agency is to be in compliance with federal
law, according to a recent report by the National Archives. The
evaluation of IRS practices found that the agency does not send to
the Archives the kinds of records routinely transferred to it by
other federal agencies -- which is a nice way of saying the IRS is
not doing what the law says it has to do.

     An important concern is the Archives' inability to appraise
documents for archival retention because of disclosure restrictions
claimed by the IRS under Internal Revenue Code section 6103, which
restricts the disclosure of tax return information.

     The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is
authorized to conduct inspections or surveys of the records, records
management programs and practices of federal agencies, and recommend
improvements.

     Authority to save or dispose of a government record must come
from NARA. This is done through records control schedules, which
direct what happens to a record or class of records. The schedules
are prepared by the federal agency, but the final disposition of a
record or class of records must be approved by NARA. An agency cannot
legally take unilateral actions on records dispositions.

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-5

YEAR IN REVIEW: FOR THE SERVICE, 'PIVOTAL' YEAR CONTAINS ITS SHARE OF
                              SETBACKS.

     By all accounts, 1995 was a trying year for the Service. In many
high-profile areas -- computer modernization, the budget, electronic
filing, and compliance programs -- IRS setbacks seemed to outnumber
the victories, at least as far as Congress was concerned.

     After years of favorable treatment from congressional
appropriators, the IRS found the new GOP Congress resistant to
administration funding requests. Lawmakers, frustrated by what they
saw as a spending vacuum caused by Tax Systems Modernization (TSM),
became increasingly critical of whether TSM funds were being used
effectively.

     The net budget result: $200 million less in funding than the
agency received in fiscal 1995, and nearly $1 billion less than
requested by President Clinton. Before the IRS budget was signed in
late November, the agency had endured a several-day shutdown and
announced an indefinite suspension of the Taxpayer Compliance
Measurement Program (TCMP). Along with the TCMP, casualties included
the elimination of a couple thousand IRS jobs, forcing officials to
make some tough choices, not all of which were well-received.

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-6

                TWO MEN CHARGED IN RENO BOMBING PLOT.

     Two Nevada men were charged last week with attempting to bomb an
IRS building in Reno in December.

     Ellis Hurst, 52, and Joseph Bailie, 40, both of Gardnerville,
Nev., appeared before U.S. Federal Magistrate Phyllis Atkins and were
charged with attempted destruction of a government building and use
of a destructive device in a crime of violence. (For prior coverage,
see Doc 96-435 (2 pages), 95 TNT 253-4, or H&D, Dec. 29, 1995, p.
5141.)

     The men are accused of attempting to set off a bomb December 18
in a parking lot adjacent to the IRS building in Reno. Authorities
found that the fuse of the bomb had been lit, but that the bomb did
not explode.

     Reuters reported last week that the men had a dispute with the
IRS. "Hurst related both he and Bailie had had difficulties with the
Internal Revenue Service in the past," said Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms Special Agent Richard Stoltz.

     The BATF said the the material removed from the device was a
mixture of fertilizer and fuel. Authorities said that had it
exploded, it would have injured or killed many people.

     Assistant U.S. Attorney Ron Rachow said the men face a 30-year
mandatory minimum sentence for use of the explosive device. He said
he would seek grand jury indictments.

     IRS senior spokesman Frank Keith said the agency's field offices
all have disaster recovery plans in place in case of a bombing, an
act of God, or some other violent episode.

     The disaster recovery plan was most recently used last spring
when an off-site building at the Martinsburg Computing Center in West
Virginia caught fire in the middle of the night. Because of the
contingency plan, IRS employees were able to get telephone service
restored and computers working by the next morning.

 IRS ISSUES PROPOSED RULES ON DISTRIBUTIONS OF MARKETABLE SECURITIES
                          BY A PARTNERSHIP.

     The Service has issued proposed regulations (PS-2-95) relating
to the treatment of a distribution of marketable securities by a
partnership. The regs reflect the amendment made to section 731(c) by
the Uruguay Round Agreements Act of 1994 (P.L. 103-465) regarding the
treatment of marketable securities as money for purposes of sections
731(a)(1) and 737.

     In general, the term "marketable securities" includes any
financial instruments that are actively traded. Further, section
731(c)(2)(B)(v) provides that an interest in an entity is a
marketable security if substantially all of the entity's assets
consist of marketable securities or money. The proposed regulations
provide that substantially all of the assets of an entity consist of
marketable securities or money only if 90 percent or more of the
entity's assets at the time of the distribution consist of such
assets.

     In addition, the proposed regs provide that an interest in an
entity is a marketable security to the extent that the value of the
interest is attributable to marketable securities or money that
constitute less than 90 percent but 20 percent or more of the
entity's assets. The 20 percent threshold means that an interest in
an entity holding only a small amount of marketable securities won't
be treated as a marketable security.

     The proposed regulations also provide that a marketable security
will continue to be treated as a marketable security even if the
partnership or its partners are restricted by agreement or otherwise
from selling or exchanging the security. According to the Service,
that provision is intended to prevent a partnership from avoiding
section 731(c) by temporarily restricting the transferability of the
distributed security.

     Consistent with section 731(c)(3)(A), the proposed regs contain
three exceptions to section 731(c). First, they provide that if the
marketable security was contributed to the partnership by the
distributee partner, section 731(c) doesn't apply to the distribution
of that security.

     Second, the regs provide that section 731(c) doesn't apply to
the distribution of a marketable security to the extent that the
security was acquired by the partnership in a nonrecognition
transaction in exchange for property other than marketable securities
or cash and (i) the security is actively traded as of the date of
distribution and (ii) the security is distributed by the partnership
within five years of either the date the security was acquired by the
partnership or, if later, the date the security became actively
traded.

     The proposed regulations further provide that section 731(c)
doesn't apply to the distribution of a marketable security if (i) the
security wasn't actively traded on the date acquired by the
partnership and the entity to which the security relates has no
outstanding actively traded securities at the time the security was
acquired by the partnership; (ii) the security is actively traded as
of the date of distribution; and (iii) the security was held by the
partnership for at least six months before it became actively traded
and the security was distributed by the partnership within five years
of the date on which it became actively traded.

     Section 731(c) doesn't apply to the distribution of marketable
securities by an investment partnership to an eligible partner. The
regs contain provisions relating to that exception. The proposed
regulations also provide rules for coordinating section 731(c) with
sections 704(c)(1)(B) and 737. Finally, the regs contain an anti-
abuse rule stating that the provisions of section 731(c) and the
regulations must be applied in a manner that's consistent with the
purpose of section 731(c) and the substance of the transaction.

     The regulations are proposed to apply to distributions of
marketable securities by a partnership to a partner on or after
December 29, 1995. A public hearing on the regs has been scheduled
for April 3, 1996, beginning at 10:00 a.m., in the IRS Auditorium in
Washington. Written comments on the proposed regulations and requests
to speak at the hearing (with outlines of oral comments) are due by
March 13, 1996.
(PS-2-95)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-8

           IRS CANCELS HEARING ON PROPOSED SUBPART F REGS.

     The Service has canceled the public hearing on the proposed
regulations (IL-75-92) under sections 952, 954(c), and 960 relating
to the definition of subpart F income and foreign personal holding
company income of a controlled foreign corporation and the allocation
of deficits for purposes of computing the deemed-paid foreign tax
credit. The hearing had been scheduled to take place on January 4,
1996. (For text of the proposed regulations, see 95 TNT 175-7 or H&D,
Sept. 7, 1995, Special Supplement.)
(IL-75-92)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-9

   IRS PROPOSES RULES ON TRANSFERS OF STOCK IN U.S. CORPORATIONS TO
                        FOREIGN CORPORATIONS.

     The Service has issued proposed regulations under section 367
concerning transfers of stock or securities of domestic corporations
by United States persons to foreign corporations pursuant to a
corporate organization, reorganization, or liquidation.
(IL-9-95) (60 F.R. 66771-66772)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-10

 IRS PROPOSES RULES FOR ALLOCATION OF ACCRUED PENSION PLAN BENEFITS.

     The Service has issued proposed regulations (EE-35-95) under
section 411 that provide rules for calculating an employee's accrued
benefit derived from the employee's contributions to a qualified
defined benefit pension plan. The regs reflect changes made by the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 and the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1993, which amended the law to change the
accumulation of employee contributions and the conversion of those
accumulated contributions to employee-derived accrued benefits.

     Before OBRA '89, section 411(c)(2)(B) specified that the
conversion factor to be used to compute the employee-derived accrued
benefit was 10 percent for a straight life annuity beginning at
normal retirement age of 65, and that for other normal retirement
ages, the conversion factor was to be determined in accordance with
regulations. OBRA '89 deleted the 10 percent conversion factor and
replaced it with the requirement that the accumulated contributions
at normal retirement age be expressed as an annual benefit beginning
at normal retirement age using an interest rate that would be used
under the plan under section 417(e)(3).

     To reflect the OBRA '89 amendments, the proposed regulations
define "appropriate conversion factor" for an accrued benefit
expressed in the form of an annual benefit that is nondecreasing for
the life of the participant as the present value of an annuity in the
form of that annual benefit beginning at normal retirement age at a
rate of $1 per year. That amount is to be computed using the interest
rate and mortality table that would be used under the plan under
section 417(e)(3) and reg. section 1.417(e)-1T. To reflect the post-
OBRA '89 conversion factor definition and to conform to common
actuarial practice, the proposed regs would change the "multiplied
by" language in reg. section 1.411(c)-1(c)(1) to "divided by."

     Section 411(c)(2)(C), as amended by OBRA '89, provides that an
interest rate of 120 percent of the applicable federal midterm rate
under section 1274 is to be used for accumulating contributions only
up to the "determination date." For the period from the determination
date to normal retirement age, the interest rate that would be used
under section 417(e)(3) must be used. The proposed regs would amend
existing reg. section 1.411(c)-1(c)(3) to reflect those rates.

     Proposed reg. section 1.411(c)-1(c)(5)(i) defines "determination
date" for purposes of section 411(c)(2)(C)(iii) in a case in which a
participant will receive his or her entire accrued benefit derived
from employee contributions in any one of the following forms: an
annuity that is substantially nonincreasing, substantially
nonincreasing installment payments for a fixed number of years, or a
single sum distribution. In such a case, "determination date" means
the date on which distribution of the benefit begins. For that
purpose, an annuity that is nonincreasing except for automatic
increases to reflect increases in the consumer price index is
considered to be an annuity that is substantially nonincreasing.

     The regulations are proposed to be effective for plan years
beginning on or after January 1, 1997.
(EE-35-95) (60 F.R. 66532-66535)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-11

     FINAL REGS PROVIDE RULES FOR CASH REPORTING BY COURT CLERKS.

     The Service has issued final regulations (T.D. 8652) under
section 6050I(g) on the information reporting requirements for
federal and state court clerks on receipt of more than $10,000 in
cash as bail for any individual charged with a specified criminal
offense. T.D. 8652 adopts with revisions the temporary and proposed
regulations (T.D. 8572; IA-57-94) that were published on December 15,
1994.

     The 1994 regulations provided that a clerk is the clerk's office
or the office, department, division, branch, or unit of the court
that is authorized to receive bail. According to the Service, a
commentator suggested that the regs clarify whether reporting under
section 6050I(g) is required by a clerk if an entity that is not a
part of the court receives bail. In some jurisdictions, for example,
a sheriff receives bail. The final regulations provide that if
someone other than a clerk receives bail on behalf of a clerk, the
clerk is treated as receiving the bail. Therefore, the clerk must
file the information return.

     Under the 1994 regs, a statement must be sent to each payer of
bail reporting certain information, including the aggregate amount of
reportable cash received by the clerk. The final regulations clarify
that the aggregate amount requirement can be satisfied either by
sending a single written statement with an aggregate amount listed or
by furnishing a copy of each Form 8300 relating to that payer of bail.

     The final regulations also clarify that if multiple payments are
made to satisfy bail reportable under section 6050I(g) and the
initial payment doesn't exceed $10,000, the initial payment and
subsequent payments must be aggregated and the information return
must be filed by the 15th day after receipt of the payment that
causes the aggregate amount to exceed $10,000. However, payments made
to satisfy separate bail requirements aren't required to be
aggregated.
(T.D. 8652)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-12

   IRS FINALIZES ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT RULES FOR R&E COSTS.

     The Service has issued final regulations under section 861
concerning the allocation and apportionment of research and
experimental (R&E) expenditures for purposes of determining taxable
income from U.S. and non-U.S. sources. The regulations do not make
major changes in the proposed regulations, and are effective January
1, 1996.

     The proposed regulations contained three principal changes in
to the existing regs. First, allocation of R&E costs to three digit
-- rather than two digit -- SIC code product categories of gross
income would be permitted. Second, the percentage of R&E costs that
may be exclusively apportioned to U.S.-source income under the sales
method of apportionment under reg. section 1.861-8(e)(3)(ii) would be
increased from 30 percent to 50 percent. And third, use of the
optional gross income methods of apportionment would constitute a
binding election to use those methods in subsequent years.

     The Service agreed to a change regarding the optional gross
income methods of apportionment. It was suggested that the final
rules include a 50 percent exclusive place of performance
apportionment under the optional gross income methods to be parallel
with reg. section 1.861-8(e)(3)(ii)(A). The final regs don't go that
far: they include a 25 percent exclusive place of performance
apportionment under the optional gross income methods.

     The regs also change the binding election rules: IRS permission
will not be required to change methods under reg. section 1.861-
8(e)(3)(iii)(C), provided that the taxpayer has used one method for
five years.
(T.D. 8646) (60 F.R. 66502-66510)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-13

   FINAL REGS PROVIDE PAL RULES FOR RENTAL REAL ESTATE ACTIVITIES.

     The Service has issued final regulations (T.D. 8645) under
section 469 providing rules for rental real estate activities of
taxpayers engaged in real property trades or businesses. The
regulations reflect changes to the law made by the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1993. The final regulations adopt the proposed
regs (PS-80-93) published on January 10, 1995, with revisions. (For
the full text, see 95 TNT 6-11.)

     OBRA '93 added section 469(c)(7), which provides that rental
real estate activities of qualifying taxpayers are not subject to the
rule that treats all rental activities as passive. It also provides
that each of a qualifying taxpayer's interests in rental real estate
is treated as a separate activity unless the taxpayer elects to treat
all interest in rental real estate as a single activity.

     The proposed regs provided rules for determining whether a
taxpayer qualifies for treatment under section 469(c)(7). Except for
modifications in response to comments received on the proposed regs,
the final regs generally adopt the rules in the proposed regs.

     Citing the statutory language and legislative history, the
Service said the final regs retain the rule in the proposed regs
prohibiting qualifying taxpayers from grouping rental real estate
activities with other activities in determining whether the taxpayers
materially participate in the rental real estate activities. It said
it invites comments, however, on whether the material participation
tests in reg. section 1.469-5T(a) should be amended to include a
look-back material participation test for taxpayers significantly
involved in the development or construction of their rental real
estate interests.

     The final regs are effective for tax years beginning on or after
January 1, 1995.
(T.D. 8645) (60 F.R. 66496-66502)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-14

     PARTNERSHIP PROPERTY DISTRIBUTION REGULATIONS ARE FINALIZED.

     The Service has issued final regulations (T.D. 8642) under
section 704(c) relating to the recognition of gain or loss on the
distribution of contributed property by a partnership under section
704(c)(1)(B). T.D. 8642 also provides final rules on the recognition
of gain on certain distributions to a contributing partner under
section 737.

     The final regs clarify the proposed rules in a number of
respects, but do not make major changes. The final regs are effective
January 9, 1995. (For text of the proposed regs (PS-76-92), see 95
TNT 5-7 or H&D, Jan. 9, 1995, p. 515.)

     The Service noted that a clarification was sought on the
interaction of the like-kind exception and the disguised sale rules
of section 707(a)(2)(B). The Service says there's "no suggestion in
section 704(c)(2) or the proposed regulations that the like-kind
exception was intended as an exception to the disguised sale
provisions." The final regs confirm that the disguised sale rules can
apply to a distribution, "even if the distribution would otherwise
have qualified for the section 704(c)(2) like-kind exception."

     Despite numerous suggestions for "clarifying or modifying the
anti-abuse rule in the proposed regulations," the final regs adopt
the proposed rule without change.
(T.D. 8642) (60 F.R. 66727-66739)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-15

       FINAL GSTT REGS ELIMINATE CONTROVERSIAL 'SPOUSAL RULE.'

     The Service has issued final generation-skipping transfer tax
regulations (T.D. 8644) under chapter 13 of the code. T.D. 8644
adopts with revisions proposed regulations (PS-73-88; PS-32-90)
published on December 24, 1992. The final regulations are effective
December 27, 1995.

     One notable change concerns the estate tax inclusion period
(ETIP). Proposed reg. section 26.2632-1(c)(2)(ii) provided that an
ETIP existed during the period in which the transferred property
would have been includable in the transferor's gross estate had the
transferor retained an interest held by the transferor's spouse, but
only to the extent the spouse acquired the interest from the
transferor in an inter vivos transfer that was not included in the
transferor's taxable gifts or for which a deduction was allowed under
section 2523. According to the Service, commentators stated that
there was no support in the statute for that spousal rule, and any
such rule would require a legislative change. The final regs
eliminate the spousal rule and Example 5 of reg. section 26.2632-
1(c)(5).

     Some of the other more significant revisions involve various
definitions. Proposed reg. section 26.2612-1(a)(2)(i) provided
generally that for purposes of determining whether a transfer
constitutes a direct skip, the generation assignment of a person who
would otherwise be a skip person is redetermined by disregarding the
intervening generation, if certain individuals have died before the
transfer (for example, a predeceased child of the transferor). That
section has been modified to provide that if an individual who is a
member of the intervening generation dies no later than 90 days after
the transfer, the deceased individual is treated as having
predeceased the transferor, if the governing instrument or applicable
state law provides for that treatment.

     Further, reg. section 26.2612-1(a)(2)(ii) has been added to
provide that if a transferor makes an addition to an existing trust
after the death of an individual described in section 26.2612-
1(a)(2)(i) (that is, an individual in the intervening generation),
the additional property is treated as being held in a separate trust
for purposes of chapter 13.

     Other revisions, modifications, and clarifications to the
proposed regulations concern the transition rules, the uniform
statutory rule against perpetuities, allocation of the GST exemption,
erroneous allocations, the determination of the applicable fraction,
the division of a single trust into separate trusts, and the
application of chapter 13 to nonresident aliens.
(T.D. 8644) (60 F.R. 66898-66926)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-16

      IRS UPDATES RULES FOR FORM 1040 ONLINE ELECTRONIC FILING.

     The Service in Revenue Procedure 96-20 has set forth guidelines
and requirements for those who participate in the 1996 online
electronic filing program for Forms 1040, 1040A, and 1040EZ. Rev.
Proc. 96-20 updates and supersedes Rev. Proc. 95-13, 1995-1 C.B. 514.
The updates include changes in the online filing program for the 1996
filing season, clarification of prior online filing program
statements, and additional guidance derived from other IRS documents
that relate to the online filing program.
(Rev. Proc. 96-20) (1996-4 IRB 1)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-17

         SUSPENDED S CORPORATION LOSSES AREN'T TRANSFERABLE.

     In technical advice, the Service has ruled that a taxpayer may
not deduct losses disallowed and suspended under section 1366(d)(1)
at a time when the taxpayer's former spouse owned the S corporation
stock.

     The husband and wife separately owned shares of the S
corporation's stock. In a year when the corporation had a loss, a
portion of the husband's loss was disallowed at the shareholder level
because the loss exceeded his adjusted basis in the stock.

     The husband subsequently transferred all of his stock in the
corporation to the wife incident to their divorce. As of that date,
the husband had not taken the carried over losses.

     For the tax year at issue, the wife deducted the losses carried
over from the year when the husband owned the stock. On audit, the
losses were disallowed because they were associated with stock owned
by the husband and, the IRS agent asserted, could not be transferred
to the wife.

     Agreeing with the auditing agent, the Service pointed out that
section 1366(d)(2) provides that any loss disallowed by the basis
limitation in section 1366(d)(1) is treated as incurred by the
corporation in the succeeding tax year "with respect to that
shareholder." The use of the words "with respect to that
shareholder," the Service said, requires that losses be personal to a
shareholder and that they not be transferred in any manner.

     The Service further concluded that section 1041 doesn't change
that result, adding that no gain or loss is recognized on the
husband's transfer of the stock to the wife. The transfer is treated
as a gift, it said, and the wife's basis in the stock is the
husband's adjusted basis at the time of the transfer.
(LTR 9552001 (3 pages))

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-18

    COMPANY MUST PAY INTEREST ON BACKUP WITHHOLDING TAX LIABILITY.

     The Service has ruled in technical advice that a corporation is
liable for interest regarding backup withholding tax liability
imposed by section 3406.

     In 1992, the corporation was selected for a Form 1099 compliance
check for the years 1990 and 1991. At the conclusion of the
compliance check, the IRS examiner proposed assessments for backup
withholding tax liability under section 3406 because the corporation
filed Forms 1099 without taxpayer identification numbers. Also,
penalties were assessed under section 6721 for failure to file
correct Forms 1099 and under section 6722 for failure to furnish
correct Forms 1099.

     Most of the backup withholding tax liability asserted against
the corporation was abated under section 3402(d); however, interest,
penalties, and a portion of the backup withholding tax liability were
not abated. No agreement was reached at the examination level or at
IRS Appeals. The IRS district director made a notice and demand for
the assessed taxes and interest.

     The Service noted that the corporation would not be liable for
interest if the interest-free adjustment provisions of section 6205
applied. If the corporation had satisfied that section's requirements
for reporting the tax and making a supplemental return, it could
qualify for an adjustment of its backup withholding tax liability.
However, the Service pointed out, notice and demand for payment of
the tax due was made before the filing of the supplemental return (or
the deemed filing of a supplemental return by signing an agreement to
the adjustment). Consequently, under reg. section 31.6205-1(a)(6),
the interest-free adjustment provisions of section 6205 don't apply.

     Therefore, the Service concluded, regarding the backup
withholding tax that has been abated under section 3402(d), the
corporation is liable for interest for the periods beginning with the
due date of the return for the period in which it was required to
withhold, but failed to do so, until the recipient of the reportable
payment satisfied his federal income tax liability for the period at
issue. Regarding liability for backup withholding tax that hasn't
been abated, the Service said, the corporation is liable for interest
for the periods beginning with the due date of the return for the
period in which it was required to withhold, but didn't, until it
pays the tax, or the recipient pays income tax on the reportable
amount, whichever is earlier.
(LTR 9552003 (6 pages))

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-19

       SELF-UNLOADING FARM VEHICLES ARE SUBJECT TO EXCISE TAX.

     The Service has ruled in technical advice that a self-unloading
automobile truck body manufactured by a company and sold through its
retail division is subject to the section 4051 excise tax.

     The company is in the business of manufacturing agricultural
equipment, including the self-unloading truck body. The body has a V-
shaped bottom that the company says was designed to haul farm cargo
such as seed and harvested potatoes. The body has a variable speed
unloading conveyer belt and a drive system that may be driven by the
transmission's power take-off. The variable speed function is
incorporated into the design of the unloading system to match the
unloading speeds required for each type of load that may be carried
by the body. The company's sales literature states that the body may
be used to haul seed, potatoes, beets, and small grains.

     In ruling that sales of the truck body were taxable, the Service
pointed out that the exemption provided by section 4053(2) doesn't
extend to truck bodies designed for general use, even though the
bodies are used to transport farm cargo. To be exempt, it said, a
body must be primarily designed to haul seed, feed, or fertilizer to
and on farms. The Service found the truck bodies in question to be
functionally similar to those described in Rev. Rul. 75-462, 1975-2
C.B. 419, in that they are not primarily designed to haul seed, feed,
or fertilizer. Rather, as suggested in the company's sales
literature, the bodies in question are designed for general hauling
of farm cargo, in addition to seed, the Service concluded.
(LTR 9552002 (3 pages))

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-20

 FUND-RAISING ORGANIZATION'S OPERATION OF FISHING FACILITY GIVES RISE
                TO UBIT; ROYALTY ARGUMENT IS REJECTED.

     The Service has ruled that amounts a section 501(c)(3) fund-
raising organization receives in operating fishing facilities at a
lake are subject to unrelated business income tax.

     Under an agreement with an other entity, the exempt organization
is licensed, for a fee, to occupy and use a lake and the adjoining
support facilities (a dock), to provide the public with a lake area
specifically for fishing on alternate weekends, year-round. The
exempt sells fishing passes to the public on a first-come, first-
served basis. Activities at the lake are controlled by paid personnel
who operate a ticket office, police the facility, and supervise the
dock and boat ramp. General recreation activities, such as picnicking
and swimming, are prohibited at the lake.

     No apparent charitable activity takes place at the lake. The
fund-raising organization entered the license agreement solely to
generate revenues which, after the payment of expenses, will be
distributed to client social service and welfare agencies.

     The Service concluded that payments the exempt receives from the
general public for use of the lake are income from an unrelated trade
or business regularly carried on. The Service noted that usage of the
lake is similar to any commercial fishing facility. Comparing the
arrangement to greens fees paid to play golf, the Service said the
admission fee is a charge for the provision of personal services.
(LTR 9552019)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-43

    GAO DEEMS 1995 FILING SEASON GOOD -- DESPITE SERIOUS PROBLEMS.

     The General Accounting Office has concluded that the IRS had a
successful 1995 filing season, although the agency still had some
serious difficulties, particularly on the public relations front.

     Although IRS indicators show that most of the 1995 filing season
goals were met, the GAO found, anti-fraud initiatives caused much
adverse publicity, taxpayers continued to have serious problems
reaching the IRS on the telephone, and a new document system designed
to increase productivity failed to do so.

     The GAO praised IRS steps to combat fraud, but said the outcry
over the delay of more than 7 million refunds could have been avoided
had the IRS done a better job of communicating that even taxpayers
with legitimate returns might be subject to a delay.
(GAO/GGD-96-48)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-76

 IRS ISSUES TEMPORARY AND PROPOSED REGS ON TRANSFERS OF STOCK IN U.S.
                CORPORATIONS TO FOREIGN CORPORATIONS.

     The Service has issued temporary and proposed regulations (T.D.
8638; INTL-9-95) under section 367 concerning transfers of stock or
securities of domestic corporations by United States persons to
foreign corporations pursuant to the code's corporate organization,
reorganization, or liquidation provisions. To a large degree, the
regulations simply update and coordinate temporary guidance provided
since the relevant statutory changes were enacted in 1984.

     Temporary and proposed regulations issued in May 1986 included
section 1.367(a)-3T, which relates to transfers of stock or
securities of domestic or foreign corporations by U.S. persons to
foreign corporations. The Service modified those regulations in
Notice 87-85, 1987-2 C.B. 395. Regulations based on Notice 87-85 were
issued in August 1991, and further guidance was provided in Notice
94-46, 1994-1 C.B. 356. The regulations that have been set forth in
T.D. 8638 incorporate and modify the rules announced in Notice 94-46.

     The positions taken in Notice 94-46 have been modified in two
significant ways. First, the regulations shift the ownership
threshold from "50 percent or more" to "more than 50 percent," so
that a U.S. transferor may qualify for an exception to section 367(a)
in situations where U.S. transferors, in the aggregate, receive
exactly 50 percent of the stock of the transferee foreign corporation
in the exchange.

     Second, although the new regulations retain the presumption that
shareholders of the U.S. target company are U.S. persons, generally
it does not retain the cross-ownership presumption or take cross-
ownership into account. The Service explained that the regulations
count cross-ownership "only in the limited circumstance where U.S.
officers, directors, and 5 percent or greater shareholders of the
U.S. target company own, in the aggregate, more than 50 percent of
the total voting power or the total value of the transferee foreign
corporation immediately after the transfer (a control group case)."
In such a case, the Service said, the exchange is taxable to all U.S.
transferors.
(T.D. 8638) (60 F.R. 66739-66746)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-77

  IRS RELEASES 1988 INTERNAL NOTICE OUTLINING PURPOSE OF LITIGATION
                           GUIDELINE MEMOS.

     The Service has released a 1988 internal notice that outlines
the purpose of Litigation Guideline Memorandums (LGMs). The notice
characterizes LGMs as "Law Enforcement Manual directives" not subject
to public release.

     According to the internal notice, N (32)210-1, the purpose of
LGMs is to provide "information and instruction relating to
litigating procedures and methods," along with "standards and
criteria on issues and matters of significant interest to litigating
attorneys in the Office of Chief Counsel."

     The notice states that LGMs "are NOT to be released to the
public" and "are to be printed on blue paper to distinguish them from
nonprotected directives and to avoid inadvertent disclosure."
(N (32)210-1)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-78

          ACTUARIAL EXAM COMMITTEE TO MEET JANUARY 8 AND 9.

     The Service has announced that the Joint Board for the
Enrollment of Actuaries Advisory Committee on Actuarial Examinations
will meet on January 8 and 9, 1996, to discuss topics and questions
for inclusion on future examinations in actuarial mathematics and
methodology. The committee will also review the November 1995
examination in order to make recommendations relative to it,
including the minimum acceptable passing score.

     The committee will meet in the Conference Room of the Office of
Director of Practice, Suite 600, 801 Pennsylvania Ave., NW,
Washington, from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. each day. The portions of the
meeting dealing with future exam questions and the review of the
November exam will be closed to the public.
(60 F.R. 67019-67020)

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-79

          NADER ASKS CEOs TO SUPPORT CORPORATE WELFARE CUTS.

     To usher in the New Year, Ralph Nader is asking CEOs who wrote
President Clinton and Congress calling for a balanced budget
agreement to identify and list federal subsidies and tax expenditures
that benefit their companies they would agree to forgo.

     In a letter he is sending to the 91 CEOs who signed the December
19 letter to budget negotiators, Nader pointed out that the
elimination of five corporate tax expenditures would provide an
additional $46.4 billion in revenue in fiscal year 1996. The consumer
advocate's five tax expenditure targets included accelerated
depreciation on equipment and buildings, reduced rates on the first
$10,000 of corporate taxable income, the exception to the source rule
for inventory property sales, the possessions tax credit, and the
expensing of research and development costs.

     Electronic Citation: See 96 TNT 1-82




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
TAX NOTES TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

                              96 TNT 1-C
                     CONTENTS OF TAX NOTES TODAY
                     FOR TUESDAY JANUARY 2, 1996


                             News Stories

TAX ANALYSTS ANNOUNCES NEW CITATION SYSTEMS. (03 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-605 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-1

BUDGET NEGOTIATORS SET TO MEET THROUGH WEEKEND. (02 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-606 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-2

AIRLINE EXCISE TAXES SLATED TO EXPIRE. (Miscellaneous) (02 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-580 (1 page)) See 96 TNT 1-3

IRS AND NATIONAL ARCHIVES AT LOGGERHEADS ON ACCESS TO RECORDS.
(Miscellaneous) (02 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-581 (10 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-4

IRS RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM PANNED BY NATIONAL ARCHIVES.
(Miscellaneous) (02 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-582 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-5

YEAR IN REVIEW: FOR THE SERVICE, 'PIVOTAL' YEAR CONTAINS ITS SHARE OF
SETBACKS. (Miscellaneous) (02 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-583 (8 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-6

TWO MEN CHARGED IN RENO BOMBING PLOT. (02 JAN 96)
(Doc 96-578 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-7


                       IRS Proposed Regulations

IRS ISSUES PROPOSED RULES ON DISTRIBUTIONS OF MARKETABLE SECURITIES
BY A PARTNERSHIP. (PS-2-95) (Section 731 -- Distribution Gain or
Loss) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-521 (27 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-8

IRS CANCELS HEARING ON PROPOSED SUBPART F REGS. (IL-75-92) (Section
952 -- Subpart F Income Defined) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-604 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-9

IRS PROPOSES RULES ON TRANSFERS OF STOCK IN U.S. CORPORATIONS TO
FOREIGN CORPORATIONS. (IL-9-95) (60 F.R. 66771-66772) (Section 367 --
Foreign Corporations) (22 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-189 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-10

IRS PROPOSES RULES FOR ALLOCATION OF ACCRUED PENSION PLAN BENEFITS.
(EE-35-95) (60 F.R. 66532-66535) (Section 411 -- Minimum Vesting
Standards) (21 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-273 (4 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-11


                        IRS Final Regulations

FINAL REGS PROVIDE RULES FOR CASH REPORTING BY COURT CLERKS. (T.D.
8652) (Section 6050I -- Business Cash Receipts Returns) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-522 (13 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-12

IRS FINALIZES ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT RULES FOR R&E COSTS. (T.D.
8646) (60 F.R. 66502-66510) (Section 861 -- U.S.-Source Income)
(21 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-272 (9 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-13

FINAL REGS PROVIDE PAL RULES FOR RENTAL REAL ESTATE ACTIVITIES. (T.D.
8645) (60 F.R. 66496-66502) (Section 469 -- Passive Loss Limitations)
(21 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-271 (7 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-14

PARTNERSHIP PROPERTY DISTRIBUTION REGULATIONS ARE FINALIZED. (T.D.
8642) (60 F.R. 66727-66739) (Section 704(c) -- Partner's Contributed
Property) (22 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-187 (13 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-15

FINAL GSTT REGS ELIMINATE CONTROVERSIAL 'SPOUSAL RULE.' (T.D. 8644)
(60 F.R. 66898-66926) (Section 2601 -- Generation-Skipping Transfer
Tax) (26 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-359 (29 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-16


                        IRS Revenue Procedures

IRS UPDATES RULES FOR FORM 1040 ONLINE ELECTRONIC FILING. (Rev. Proc.
96-20) (1996-4 IRB 1) (Section 6011(e) -- Electronic Filing)
(29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-520 (36 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-17


                   IRS Technical Advice Memorandums

SUSPENDED S CORPORATION LOSSES AREN'T TRANSFERABLE. (LTR 9552001 (3
pages)) (Section 1366 -- S Corporation Item Pass-Thru) (29 DEC 95)
See 96 TNT 1-18

COMPANY MUST PAY INTEREST ON BACKUP WITHHOLDING TAX LIABILITY. (LTR
9552003 (6 pages)) (Section 6205 -- Special Employment Tax Rules)
(29 DEC 95)
See 96 TNT 1-19

SELF-UNLOADING FARM VEHICLES ARE SUBJECT TO EXCISE TAX. (LTR 9552002
(3 pages)) (Section 4051 -- Heavy Truck and Trailer Tax) (29 DEC 95)
See 96 TNT 1-20


                          IRS Letter Rulings

RELOCATION COMPANY'S PURCHASE OF EMPLOYEE HOME WILL NOT GIVE RISE TO
COMPENSATION INCOME. (LTR 9552040) (Section 82 -- Reimbursed Moving
Expenses) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-481 (3 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-21

STATE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION'S INCOME IS EXCLUDABLE. (LTR
9552045) (Section 115 -- State and Municipal Income) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-486 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-22

PAYMENT TO UTILITY FOR CONSTRUCTION OF PIPELINE INTERCONNECTION WAS
NOT A CONTRIBUTION TO CAPITAL. (LTR 9552008) (Section 118(b) --
Contributions for Construction) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-449 (6 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-23

CONTRACT TERMINATION PAYMENTS ARE DEDUCTIBLE BUSINESS EXPENSES. (LTR
9552014) (Section 162 -- Business Expense Deduction) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-455 (7 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-24

EXPENSE REFLECTING DEPRECIATION OF COSTS DISALLOWED FROM RATE BASE
VIOLATES NORMALIZATION RULES. (LTR 9552007) (Section 167 --
Depreciation Deduction) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-448 (6 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-25

PERMISSION GRANTED TO CURRENTLY DEDUCT LEGAL EXPENSES RELATED TO
PATENTED PRODUCT. (LTR 9552048 (3 pages)) (Section 174 -- Research
Expense Deduction) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-489) See 96 TNT 1-26

TRANSFER OF ASSETS FOR STOCK WILL QUALIFY. (LTR 9552010) (Section 351
-- Transfer to Controlled Firm) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-451 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-27

TRANSFER OF ASSETS FOR STOCK WILL QUALIFY. (LTR 9552011) (Section 351
-- Transfer to Controlled Firm) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-452 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-28

TRANSFER OF ASSETS FOR STOCK WILL QUALIFY. (LTR 9552012) (Section 351
-- Transfer to Controlled Firm) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-453 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-29

TRANSFER OF TRUST COMPANY STOCK TO NEW CORPORATION TO OVERCOME
REGULATORY RESTRICTIONS QUALIFIES. (LTR 9552023) (Section 351 --
Transfer to Controlled Firm) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-464 (10 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-30

SHAREHOLDER WILL RECOGNIZE NO GAIN OR LOSS ON RECEIPT OF CONTROLLED
FIRM STOCK IN REORGANIZATION. (LTR 9552004 (5 pages)) (Section 355 --
Controlled Firm Stock) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-445) See 96 TNT 1-31

TWO SPIN-OFFS WILL QUALIFY AS REORGANIZATIONS; EXCHANGING
SHAREHOLDERS WILL RECOGNIZE NO GAIN OR LOSS. (LTR 9552051) (Section
355 -- Controlled Firm Stock) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-492 (6 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-32

SERVICE CORRECTS FACTS AND REPRESENTATIONS OF PRIOR RULING. (LTR
9552043) (Section 355 -- Controlled Firm Stock) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-484 (7 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-33

INSURER WILL SUCCEED TO CAPITALIZED BALANCES OF MERGED COMPANY'S
'SPECIFIED POLICY ACQUISITION EXPENSES.' (LTR 9552030) (Section 381
-- Carryovers) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-471 (4 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-34

SEP QUALIFIES. (LTR 9552055) (Section 408 -- Individual Retirement
Accounts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-496 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-35

SEP QUALIFIES. (LTR 9552056) (Section 408 -- Individual Retirement
Accounts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-497 (3 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-36

CHURCH PLANS QUALIFY. (LTR 9552050) (Section 414(e) -- Church Plans)
(29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-491 (6 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-37

CHURCH PLAN QUALIFIES. (LTR 9552054) (Section 414(e) -- Church Plans)
(29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-495 (6 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-38

REVISED SCHEDULE OF RULING AMOUNTS APPROVED. (LTR 9552041) (Section
468A -- Nuclear Decommissioning Costs) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-482 (8 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-39

TRUST QUALIFIES AS QSF. (LTR 9552009) (Section 468B -- Designated
Settlement Funds) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-450 (7 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-40

ASSET TRANSFER BETWEEN FOUNDATIONS WILL NOT RESULT IN TERMINATION
TAX. (LTR 9552052) (Section 507 -- Foundation Termination Tax)
(29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-493 (8 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-41

ASSET TRANSFER BETWEEN FOUNDATIONS WILL NOT RESULT IN TERMINATION
TAX. (LTR 9552053) (Section 507 -- Foundation Termination Tax)
(29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-494 (8 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-42

FUND-RAISING ORGANIZATION'S OPERATION OF FISHING FACILITY GIVES RISE
TO UBIT; ROYALTY ARGUMENT IS REJECTED. (LTR 9552019) (Section 513 --
Unrelated Business Defined) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-460 (8 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-43

HEALTH CARE SYSTEM'S RESTRUCTURING WILL NOT JEOPARDIZE TAX
EXEMPTIONS. (LTR 9552021) (Section 501(c)(3) -- Charities) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-462 (10 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-44

MINOR IS OWNER OF GRANTOR TRUST FUNDED WITH PAIN AND SUFFERING AWARD
STEMMING FROM FATHER'S DEATH. (LTR 9552039) (Section 671 -- Trust
Grantors as Owners) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-480 (3 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-45

REIT'S MANAGEMENT FEE INCOME WILL BE DISREGARDED IN APPLYING
QUALIFICATION RULES; REINVESTED DIVIDENDS MAY BE DEDUCTED. (LTR
9552038) (Section 856 -- Real Estate Trusts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-479 (9 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-46

MARKETING SERVICES WON'T DISQUALIFY REIT'S INCOME. (LTR 9552042)
(Section 856 -- Real Estate Trusts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-483 (4 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-47

MAINTENANCE SERVICES WON'T DISQUALIFY REIT'S INCOME. (LTR 9552044)
(Section 856 -- Real Estate Trusts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-485 (7 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-48

MANAGEMENT SERVICES WON'T DISQUALIFY REIT'S INCOME. (LTR 9552049)
(Section 856 -- Real Estate Trusts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-490 (10 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-49

PERFORMANCE OF SERVICES WON'T DISQUALIFY REIT'S INCOME; DIVIDENDS
PAID ON REIT STOCK WILL BE DEDUCTIBLE. (LTR 9552046) (Section 856 --
Real Estate Trusts) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-487 (13 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-50

DIVIDENDS PAID ON REIT STOCK WILL BE DEDUCTIBLE; STOCK TRANSFERS WILL
BE EFFECTIVE. (LTR 9552047) (Section 856 -- Real Estate Trusts)
(29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-488 (10 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-51

INTEREST PAID TO NONRESIDENT ALIENS ON INSURANCE CONTRACT 'RIDER
FUND' WILL NOT BE SUBJECT TO TAX. (LTR 9552016) (Section 871 --
Nonresident Alien Taxes) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-457 (7 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-52

EXTENSION GRANTED TO ELECT FSC STATUS. (LTR 9552017) (Section 927 --
FSC Definitions and Rules) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-458 (3 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-53

TRANSFER OF NONQUALIFIED TRUST CAUSED INADVERTENT TERMINATION. (LTR
9552031) (Section 1362 -- S Corporation Elections) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-471 (6 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-54

QTIP AND REVERSE QTIP ELECTIONS RULED TIMELY. (LTR 9552005) (Section
2652 -- Generation-Skipping Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-446 (3 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-55

EQUIPMENT OPERATOR WAS GOVERNMENT AGENCY'S EMPLOYEE. (LTR 9552006)
(Section 3121 -- Social Security Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-447 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-56

DENTAL ASSISTANTS WORKING AT CORRECTIONAL FACILITY ARE AGENCY'S
EMPLOYEES. (LTR 9552013) (Section 3121 -- Social Security
Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-454 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-57

SCHOLARSHIP PROCEDURES APPROVED. (LTR 9552020) (Section 4945 --
Taxable Expenditures) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-461 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-58

RIC MAY REVOKE CALENDAR YEAR ELECTION. (LTR 9552018) (Section 4982 --
Retained Investment Co. Income) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-459 (4 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-59

COLORADO LLC CLASSIFIED AS A PARTNERSHIP. (LTR 9552015) (Section 7701
-- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-456 (4 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-60

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552022)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-463 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-61

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552024)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-465 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-62

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552025)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-466 (12 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-63

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552026)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-467 (12 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-64

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552027)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-468 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-65

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552028)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-469 (12 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-66

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552029)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-470 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-67

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552032)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-473 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-68

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552033)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-474 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-69

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552034)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-475 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-70

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552035)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-476 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-71

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552036)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-477 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-72

PORTFOLIO WILL BE A PARTNERSHIP, BUT NOT A PTP. (LTR 9552037)
(Section 7701 -- Definitions) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-478 (14 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-73


                            Court Opinions

LEGAL FEES PAID IN SETTLING EMPLOYMENT DISPUTE ARE ALLOWED ONLY AS
MISCELLANEOUS ITEMIZED DEDUCTION. J. Kenneth Alexander, et ux. v. IRS
(77 AFTR2d Par. 96-301) (United States Court of Appeals for the First
Circuit) (No. 95-1451) (Section 67 -- Miscellaneous Deductions Floor)
(22 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-602 (21 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-74

IRS WINS SUMMARY JUDGMENT; TAX LIENS ATTACHED TO HOMESTEAD INTEREST,
CREDITOR'S JUDGMENT LIEN DID NOT. A.I.C. Trust Deed Services Inc. v.
Daniel J. Marquez, et al. (77 AFTR2d Par. 96-302) (United States
District Court for the Northern District of California) (No.
C-94-3579 EFL) (Section 6323 -- Priority of Liens) (20 OCT 95)
(Doc 96-603 (11 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-75


                  General Accounting Office Reports

GAO DEEMS 1995 FILING SEASON GOOD -- DESPITE SERIOUS PROBLEMS.
(GAO/GGD-96-48) (Section 6011(e) -- Electronic Filing) (29 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-579 (36 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-76


                      IRS Temporary Regulations

IRS ISSUES TEMPORARY AND PROPOSED REGS ON TRANSFERS OF STOCK IN U.S.
CORPORATIONS TO FOREIGN CORPORATIONS. (T.D. 8638) (60 F.R.
66739-66746) (Section 367 -- Foreign Corporations) (22 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-188 (8 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-77


                         Other IRS Documents

IRS RELEASES 1988 INTERNAL NOTICE OUTLINING PURPOSE OF LITIGATION
GUIDELINE MEMOS. (N (32)210-1) (18 APR 88)
(Doc 96-517 (3 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-78

ACTUARIAL EXAM COMMITTEE TO MEET JANUARY 8 AND 9. (60 F.R.
67019-67020) (Nontax Statutes) (26 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-360 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-79


                     Congressional News Releases

FULL TEXT: VUCANOVICH RELEASE HAILING PASSAGE OF SOURCE TAX BILL.
(State Taxation) (22 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-519 (1 page)) See 96 TNT 1-80


                        Treasury News Releases

FULL TEXT: TRANSCRIPT OF DEC. 7 TREASURY BRIEFING ON REVISED CLINTON
TAX BILL. Background Briefing With Senior Treasury Officials (12/7)
(Miscellaneous) (07 DEC 95)
(Doc 96-518 (35 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-81


                          Washington Roundup

NADER ASKS CEOs TO SUPPORT CORPORATE WELFARE CUTS. (Legislative
Proposals) (01 JAN 95)
(Doc 96-425 (2 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-82


                        Tax Article Abstracts

TAX NOTES/TNT TAX BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR NOVEMBER 13, 1995. (Miscellaneous)
(13 NOV 95)
(Doc 96-499 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-83

TAX NOTES/TNT TAX BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR NOVEMBER 20, 1995. (Miscellaneous)
(20 NOV 95)
(Doc 96-500 (5 pages)) See 96 TNT 1-84




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>