
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B33-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B025-167</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec95.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222738 text/html 21406
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:25:26 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:14 GMT
Content-length: 21219
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec95.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
NETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>SURF THE SILICON WITH DIGITAL&nbsp;SEMICONDUCTOR: NEW WEB SITE OPENS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(302 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL&nbsp;SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1039 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DIGITAL UNVEILS INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS FOR AD&nbsp;INSERTION AND NEAR VIDEO-ON-DEMAND APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(863 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>CABLE INDUSTRY NETWORK COMPETENCY CENTER CREATED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(614 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
NETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

SURF THE SILICON WITH DIGITAL
SEMICONDUCTOR: NEW WEB SITE OPENS

Internet explorers can now check the latest information about
the world's fastest microprocessors and Alpha's push into the
Windows market through Digital Equipment Corporation's new
Digital Semiconductor InfoCenter on the World Wide Web.

The new Web site also enables system and board manufacturers,
end users, industry and financial analysts, the media, and
other interested parties to learn about Digital
Semiconductor's industry-leading PCI-based networking and
bridge chips, PCI multimedia chips, and the forthcoming
StrongARM low-power, high- performance chip family now being
developed.

A broad range of information is offered, including a complete
product catalog, new product news, history, literature
ordering information, sales contacts, and more.

Supported by an AlphaServer multiprocessor system in Palo
Alto, the Digital Semiconductor InfoCenter is accessible
directly at URL: http://www.digital.com/info/semiconductor

It also can be accessed from the InfoCenter menu on Digital
Equipment's home page, at URL: http://www.digital.com

Digital Semiconductor joins seven other Digital Equipment
businesses that have active World Wide Web sites.

"We are continually providing information about new
developments and offerings and maintaining up-to-date product
catalogs and sales contacts for Web site visitors," said
Jackie Davis, Digital Semiconductor's World Wide Web
InfoCenter manager. "The Web is a valuable resource, because
it's a quick and easy way to make contacts and distribute
information, and it's always open."

Digital Semiconductor, a Digital Equipment Corporation
business headquartered in Hudson, Massachusetts, designs,
manufactures and markets industry-leading semiconductor
products including Alpha microprocessors and PCI chips for
networking, bridging, and graphics/multimedia, as well as
low-power StrongARM microprocessors under license from
Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. Digital Semiconductor operates
design centers in Hudson; Palo Alto, California; Austin,
Texas; and Jerusalem, Israel. A new, $450-million fabrication
facility in Hudson will begin revenue production in 1996.
Mitsubishi Electric Company is a second source for Alpha
microprocessors. World Wide Web address:
http://www.digital.com/info/semiconductor



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
NETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL
SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD

Digital Equipment Corporation and Microsoft Corporation has
unveiled audited transaction benchmark results that establish
new records in the highly competitive market for database,
application and PC LAN servers. The results further
demonstrate the companies' leadership in providing customers
the industry's most powerful, most cost-effective open server
platforms.

Breakthrough results of 3194.4 transactions per minute (tpmC)
at $196/tpmC, based on the TPC-C(2) benchmark Revision 3.0,
were achieved on the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 64-bit SMP system
running Microsoft Windows NT Server operating system V3.51 and
Microsoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database management
system. No other Microsoft SQL Server platform from any system
vendor delivers such impressive results.

The 3194.4 at $196/tpmC result is the industry's best price/
performance using any system, any database, or any operating
system. In fact, no other system has ever come close to
breaking the less-than-$200/tpmC barrier.

With a total system cost of $626,102, the AlphaServer 2100
5/300 delivers transaction performance and price/performance
superior to any other system priced below $1 million -- 24%
better throughput performance and $46/tpmC less than its
closest competitor, the Intel-based Compaq ProLiant 5/133

Model 2. It also provides better performance and price/
performance than many systems costing much more than $1
million (see charts below).

The Digital/Microsoft combination even outperforms a Tandem
Himalaya K10000-16 system with 16 processors and costing $3.5
million. And compared with competitive systems from IBM, HP,
Sun, Bull, AT&T, and others, these results are far superior.

"These independent benchmark results again demonstrate the
breakthrough performance and affordability of the Alpha
architecture," said Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of
the Alpha Server Business Segment. "For customers, this
represents the industry's best value in high-performance
server capabilities. It also further demonstrates the
engineering achievements of our strategic alliance with
Microsoft."

The TPC-C benchmark is the industry-standard test for
measuring database transaction processing performance and
price/performance. The $/tpmC result reflects the cost of
acquisition and ownership of the system over a five-year
period, including hardware and software maintenance, software
upgrades, and extended warranties.

"Today's news is one more way Digital and Microsoft are
bringing to customers computing solutions that offer
unprecedented value and flexibility," said Rich Tong, general
manager of the Business Systems Division at Microsoft.

"These TPC results demonstrate the power of the Microsoft SQL
Server and Digital Alpha platform for transaction- and
compute-intensive business applications in heterogeneous
environments."

Heterogeneous Computing Environment

The AlphaServer 2100 5/300 benchmark was conducted using three
CPUs and 2 gigabytes of memory. These results were achieved
in a heterogeneous computing environment, using Visigenics
ODBC client software for SCO UNIX running on Digital's
Intel-based Prioris PC systems.

"No longer must customers limit themselves to a single
operating system to get interoperability, performance, and
affordability," said Nist. "With these results, Digital has
proved that one of the best ways to solve business problems
can include a heterogeneous environment. Digital demonstrates
that a customer can leverage the strengths of both Windows NT
and UNIX to provide a cost-effective high-performance
solution." Competitive Comparisons

PRICE PERFORMANCE tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 $196 $626,101

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Digital AlphaServer 8400 5/300 9414.06 316 2,972,726

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/100-1 1516.77 319 484,108

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 364 1,384,763

TRANSACTION THROUGHPUT tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 $364 $1,384,763

Sun SPARCCenter 2000E 3534.20 495 1,751,004

AT&T 3555/4-XP 3312.70 587 1,942,593

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 196 626,102

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

Tandem Himalaya K10000-16 3043.49 1160 3,529,520

Bull ESCALA Deskside D401/8 2660.03 530 1,409,965

Compaq ProLiant 45005/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Customers Deploying Enterprise Database Solutions

The Potomac Group, of Nashville, Tenn., provides doctors and
hospitals in 20 states instant on-line access to Medicaid
subscriber data. According to Bill McClary, executive vice
president of operations, "Our AlphaServer 2100 / Microsoft SQL
Server solution enables us to compete and win in a market
dominated by giant companies with multi-million dollar legacy
systems."

At Ruben H. Donnelley Corporation, the world's oldest
publisher of Yellow Pages, AlphaServer 2100 systems and
Microsoft SQL Server are greatly expanding the company's
Interactive Yellow Pages, with new features such as
FAX-on-demand and sophisticated database manipulation.

And at the Los Angeles Times, the third largest newspaper in
the country, AlphaServer 2100 systems and Microsoft SQL
Server, together with Autologic for Windows NT, are powering a
rastor image processing (RIP) systems that enables the Times
to product more pages faster, with more graphics and higher
resolution, at lower cost.

300MHz Processor Upgrade, Special Pricing

In announcing the benchmark results, Digital also unveiled a
processor upgrade program for the AlphaServer 2100 and 2000
systems, raising the performance of the Alpha 21164 CPU used
in this system to a blazing 300MHz. The Alpha 21164
microprocessor is still the industry's fastest and only BIPS
(billion instructions per second) chip.

Through December, this upgrade is specially priced at only
$4,000. Complete 300MHz AlphaServer 2100 systems will be
generally available in Q1 of CY1996.

60-Day Payment-Free Leasing Offer

Digital also announced a limited-time leasing offer on all
Alpha servers and workstations. Through June 1996, Digital
Financial Services, a division of GE Capital, is offering
customers who migrate to Digital from competitors' systems a
60-day payment holiday on all 36-month leases. The program is
available to all direct and partner channels worldwide.

The Digital/Microsoft Alliance

Digital's AlphaServer systems provide a highly scalable
enterprise platform for the Microsoft BackOffice suite, which
includes Microsoft Windows NT operating system, Microsoft SQL
Server, Microsoft Systems Management Server, Microsoft SNA
Server, and Microsoft Mail Server. In June, Digital announced
an OEM agreement with Microsoft to bundle the Microsoft
BackOffice server suite with Digital AlphaServers and
Intel-based Prioris servers.

In August, Digital and Microsoft announced a major alliance,
the Microsoft-Digital Alliance for Enterprise Computing,
which will help customers implement and support Windows-based
computing in the enterprise. The enterprise level performance
numbers announced today demonstrate the results of the joint
efforts of Digital and Microsoft to deliver Windows NT-based
solutions to the enterprise.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
NETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL UNVEILS INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS FOR AD
INSERTION AND NEAR VIDEO-ON-DEMAND APPLICATIONS

New Products Generate Immediate Revenues For Cable Companies
and Telcos, Provide Strong Pathway To Digital Future

In a move that brings the interactive TV future into closer
reach, Digital Equipment Corporation has announced four new
interactive video servers supported by the company's powerful
Mediaplex video server architecture. The new offerings,
comprised of the Mediaplex 24-channel and 40-channel ad
insertion systems, and the Mediaplex 12-channel and 24-channel
near video-on-demand (NVOD) systems, leap frog industry
competitors to provide the fullest range of digital video
server solutions currently available.

"This announcement reaffirms that interactive television is
viable and being implemented today," said Peter Ryus,
director of worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and
Interactive Information Services. "Using existing analog
wiring infrastructures, Digital's Mediaplex servers enable
cable companies and telcos to immediately capture higher
revenues by inserting locally customized ads on cable channels
or giving viewers more selections of pay-per-view programming
and expanded schedule options.

By coupling Digital's heritage in systems integration and
networking with Mediaplex video server solutions, we are
paving the way for cable companies and telco customers to
enter a promising digital future, while providing tangible
benefits now."

Mediaplex Video Advertising Systems

The Mediaplex ad insertion systems position Digital as a
leader in providing digital ad insertion solutions for small
to large cable installations. Recently, Adlink, the regional
cable advertising interconnect tying the largest number of
cable systems in the United States, installed Digital's
systems in all 57 headends in their southern California
service area.

The 24-channel and 40-channel Mediaplex ad insertion systems
digitally encode advertisements using MPEG-2 compression
technology, then store and distribute ads over cable
communications networks to a pre-selected audience. Both
systems provide the ability to encode and distribute a 30-and
60-second spot to a cable operator's network in one hour or
less.

The Mediaplex ad insertion systems cut the costs of ad
insertion, thus improving the efficiency of advertising
scheduling, insertion and billing operations. They also
increase the inventory availability for advertising on cable
channels; enable the distribution of time-sensitive ads and
guarantee high video quality through adherence to the
International Standards Organization's (ISO) MPEG-2 standard
for full-resolution video and audio encoding.


Other Mediaplex video advertising system features include:

o local storage of 300 or more 30-second encoded ad spots;

o the StorageWorks highly available subsystem, providing ease
of maintenance with hot swap disk drives supporting RAID Level
5;

o the ability to continue inserting spots in the event of a
disk failure;

o separate hot-swap digital-to-analog decoders for each
channel, for the highest level of scheduling reliability and
ease of maintenance;

o automatic verification of completed spots from the ad
insertion system for customer billing.


These systems, which will begin shipping in volume in February
1996, are priced as low as $8,000 per channel.

Mediaplex Near Video-On-Demand

The Mediaplex NVOD systems give cable companies and telcos the
ability to broadcast multiple movies and other pay-per-view
programs according to any schedule over existing analog
infrastructures. They also provide the flexibility to program
closely staggercasted distribution of one movie, a wider range
of movies with more delay between streams, or any combination
of the two.

An optional encoding station is available so that service
providers can digitize their own content. Once digitized,
movie content is a computer file that can be routed to local
and remote video servers using traditional data networking.

By installing the Mediaplex NVOD system, customers avoid the
limitations and costs of analog-based pay per view systems,
and can begin establishing a digital infrastructure that
scales to support full interactive services, such as full
video-on-demand.

The Mediaplex NVOD system is available in two configurations:

o An Alpha-based server, priced below $180,000, provides up to
12 video streams at 8 Mbps with the capacity to store up to 18
hours of encoded content, also at 8 Mbps. A smaller system,
providing up to 6 video streams, is available for less than
$150,000. These systems are available immediately.

o A second AlphaStation system, priced at $200,000, provides
up to 24 channels of output with the capacity to store up to
18 hours of content. This system will be available in the
second quarter of 1996.


The Mediaplex Platform

Both the Digital Mediaplex NVOD and ad insertion systems are
based on Digital's industry-leading Mediaplex technology
platform. The applications are similar because they share the
tasks of scheduling and inserting content into analog
channels, and do not require a digital network from the
headend to the home.

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden; Westminster
Cable in London; and Adlink, one of the largest advertising
interconnect services in the United States. Trials by
telecommunications companies using Digital technology include
US West's trial in Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX
and Ameritech in the Northeast and Midwest of the United
States. Digital's servers are also being used to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
NETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

CABLE INDUSTRY NETWORK COMPETENCY CENTER CREATED

With the announcement of the Cable Industry Network Competency
Center, Digital Equipment Corporation has positioned itself to
become a driving force in the high-speed data communications
network industry. The Cable Industry Center offers network
consulting, integration, and management services to cable and
telecommunications companies around the world that are adding
high-speed data communications and Internet access to their
existing hybrid fiber/coax networks.

The Cable Industry Center, located in Littleton,
Massachusetts, is a logical outgrowth of the unique technical
and market experience Digital has gained over the past three
years. During that time, 60 high-speed data networks for cable
operators worldwide were installed to provide services to
local governments, schools and colleges, manufacturers,
healthcare institutions and telecommuters.

"We found that customers require both products and multivendor
integration services," said Larry Walker, vice president and
general manager of the Network Product Business Unit,
"therefore we have moved the Cable Industry Center from the
Network Product Business Unit to Digital's Network Services
group where its vast resources can be leveraged."

Graeme Shorter, vice president, Digital Network Services said:
"with this team of individuals we now have the experience,
skills, and knowledge to play a critical role as a partner in
the design, development, and deployment of complex, high-speed
data communications networks in the cable industry. This
market focus is an ideal complement to our existing network
business."

These networks provide users with high-speed access to the
"Information Superhighway," including Internet and on-line
services, as well as the ability to work at home, using
network connections that are 1,000 times faster than
conventional telephone modems.

In one of the initial projects for the Center, Digital
Equipment Corporation, MCI and Colorado Springs Cablevision
collaborated on a successful trial of the nation's first large
scale advanced telecommuting pilot during this past summer.
The Cable Industry Center is also currently working with
several other industry leading cable companies on their plans
to deploy new services.

Center Meets Urgent Need for Timely Network Implementation

Digital has created the Center at a crucial time in the
development of the high-speed data communications market. Many
service providers are now ready to move from the trial phase
to investment in full-scale full-service networks.

At the same time, changes in the regulatory environment are
opening up competition between telecommunications and cable
companies. Through the efforts of the IEEE 802.14 Committee,
the standardization and interoperability of technology for
multiple services over hybrid fiber/coax is fast approaching,
which will meet the needs of the cable industry.

"Multiple Systems Operators feel a great sense of urgency to
deploy networks," said Art Zins, managing director of the
Cable Industry Network Competency Center. "However, they worry
about making short-sighted decisions now that will preclude
other choices later. Our technical and business services can
help our customers implement flexible, modular, and economical
networks that meet their strategic business needs now and in
the future."

Leveraging Network Services and Multivendor Capabilities

The Cable Industry Network Competency Center staff bring with
them the skill and knowledge that was gained through
introducing and deploying Digital's ChannelWorks products
enabling high-speed data transmission over the existing cable
infrastructure.

As part of Network Services, the Cable Industry Center can
meet its customers' needs with cable data solutions that
employ products from multiple vendors. The Cable Industry
Center is establishing alliances with targeted cable modem
manufacturers and will continue to partner with cable
operators and systems integrators, as appropriate, to provide
the best-in-class solution. In addition, the Cable Industry
Center will be able to leverage the expertise of Network
Services' 1,300 network professionals and 40 Network Centers.
Network Services is part of Digital's Multivendor Customer
Services Division.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>