
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B30-35</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B007-228</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/de14.html 205.156.212.5 19970114212525 text/html 25093
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:23:34 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:11 GMT
Content-length: 24906
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/de14.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
MILITARY ROBOTICS via NewsNet <BR>
January 12, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PENTAGON DRONE LANDSCAPE COMPLETELY CHANGED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(823 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>MILITARY ROBOTS EXPECTED IN BOSNIA BY APRIL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NAVY MOVING OUT ON UNDERWATER ROBOTICS PROJECTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1150 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ROBOTIC DIGEST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1223 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MILITARY ROBOTICS via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PENTAGON DRONE LANDSCAPE COMPLETELY CHANGED

     The year 1995 was a tumultuous one for the Pentagon unmanned
aerial vehicle program. A series of significant events have
further rocked the power of the UAV Joint Projects Office and
moved the Air Force into the center stage.
     And when the smoke cleared one program, the beleaguered
Hunter short range drone, would head towards the scrapheap.     
Pentagon UAV programs include the aforementioned Hunter, the
so-called "tactical UAV" formerly the close range or maneuver
variant, the medium range UAV, the Tier One endurance drone, the
Tier Two Predator medium-altitude system, the Tier Two Plus
high-altitude UAV and the Tier Three Minus stealth drone.
     The defense authorization budget vetoed by President Clinton
contained $23 million for the short range system; $26.8 million
for the tactical drone, a $10 million cut; $45.3 million for
Predator a $25.3 million boost; the $117 million request for the
Tier Two Plus system; and $66 million for the Tier Three
Minus, an $18 million hike.
     For the TRW Inc.-Israel Aircraft Industries Inc. Hunter
short range drone, acquisition czar Paul Kaminski is expected to
sign at any time a order terminating further Hunter production,
maintain eight aircraft and ground equipment at Ft. Hood and less
than a full system at Ft. Huachuca for training and doctrine. The
rest will be put in storage for attrition.
     According to a Jan. 5 Defense Airborne Reconnaissance Office
(DARO) document titled "UAV Information Update," some details are
still being worked out. "Joint Staff has taken issue with the
deployment of Hunter beyond the one system and the use of
additional attrition vehicles out of storage," it said.
"DARO continues to work the funding color of money issue with the
Army and the Navy."
     And the Army has stopped recruiting soldiers and told Ft.
Huachuca,  Ariz., to shutter scheduled training classes,
according to the Sierra Vista Herald. 

Tactical UAV

     After years of delay, the release of a draft request for
proposals for the tactical drone program was expected to be
released Jan. 10 (solicitation No. N00019-93-R-0010). A notice in
the Dec. 28 Commerce Business Daily said a final RFP will be
released Jan. 24.
     According to the notice, the system should cost $350,000 for
the 33rd air vehicle and sensor. The 100th air vehicle and sensor
should cost $300,000. The program has also been attributed
Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) status. ACTDs
are reasonably mature systems that will be put into soldiershands
and will be made available for contingency operations.
     The ACTD plan is to buy six tactical systems, two mobile
maintenance facilities and eight attrition air vehicles and
modular mission payloads (MMP video and infrared sensors). There
will also be a low-rate initial production option for six more
systems, two MMPs and eight attrition vehicles and MMPs.
     The requirements call for 200 kilometer range, three hour
basic operation, to be upgraded to four, less than 100 meter
target location error and launch and recovery from unprepared
surfaces and large deck amphibious ships. Upgrades would add
automatic takeoff and landing and a heavy fuel engine. Payload
upgrades would include a synthetic aperture radar. The
systems will be carried aboard a single C-130 (four air vehicles
and ground equipment) and be transported on the ground by two
Humvees with a trailer. 
     Oklahoma Republican lawmakers are concerned about this
program's future. A Dec. 4 letter from Sens. James Inhofe and Don
Nickles and Rep. J.C. Watts expressed concern that the system
should carry a heavy fuel engine. They also advised the prototype
system be already demonstrated and available. Regarding the navy
requirement, they suggested a vertical takeoff and landing
system. They also advised that the target location error be less
than 100 meters.

     Endurance UAVs

     The Predator medium-altitude UAV has had some success in the
Bosnia theater and war games. A new sensor, a synthetic aperture
radar, has now been added. Integration of a vehicle has been
completed and a second system is being flight checked, according
to the aforementioned DARO document. Training on the radar will
begin at Ft. Huachuca, Ariz., on Jan. 16.
     Predator has also been used in conjunction with a aircraft
carrier battle group for the first tie in late November to early
December, according to a December Navy memo.
     For the Tier Three Minus system, a first flight is scheduled
for Jan. 27, according to the DARO document. And regarding the
Tier Two Plus, a major design review is slated for Jan. 29 to
Feb. 1.
     As endurance drones become more important to Pentagon plans,
UAV Joint Projects Office officials are concerned that their role
as developer and procurement center may be usurped by the Air
Force. After years of treating UAVs like poor relatives, it has
set up a drone squadron to handle endurance vehicles and a system
program office to manage them.
     Air Force officials are also interested in the Advanced
Research Projects Agency s Unmanned Tactical Aircraft program
examining robot jet fighters and bombers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MILITARY ROBOTICS via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

MILITARY ROBOTS EXPECTED IN BOSNIA BY APRIL

     Of all the Pentagon s robot vehicle programs, unmanned
ground vehicles (UGV) have always been the runt of the litter.
But its status may be changing due to increased interest in
anti-mine operations for which the systems are seen by many as a
godsend.
     For a case in point, the UGV Joint Joint Program Office, the
Army and contractors are preparing to send in April four
different types of robotic strap-on kits to Bosnia to turn manned
vehicles into remote control systems, said a knowledgeable
source.
     The engineer vehicles will perform a variety of tasks, but
the most important is mine clearing. The area holds an estimated
three million mines.
     The systems to be sent include the Panther, an M-60 tank
minus turret; Badger, based on a five-ton truck and Humvee;
Miniflail, a skid-steer loader with a chain flail; and Pointman,
currently based on the Westinghouse  Hazard Avoidance and
Reconnaissance Extender (HARE) II six-wheeled robot
chassis. The number of systems being sent is classified, the
source said. 
     Contractors involved include Omnitech Robotics (Panther and
Badger), Lockheed Martin Corp. (Miniflail) and Westinghouse
(Pointman).
     "There s a big push to get them over there in time for the
spring thaw," said the source.
     The Ft. Leonard Wood, Mo.-based Army Engineer School Robotic
Technology Insertion Activity is helping to construct new systems
and planning mobile training and logistics for the systems.     
The UGV master plan released in October calls for spending about
$260 million on the robots through fiscal 2001. Besides the
engineering vehicles the plan also funds the Tactical Unmanned
Ground Vehicle, Remote Excavation Vehicle System and the Remote
Ordnance Neutralization System.
     And along with mine warfare an increasingly important
application is security, and the Mobile Detection Assessment
Response System for interior and exterior applications enjoys
support in the services and Congress.
     In addition, the Army is prepared to approve an Operational
Requirements Document for the remote control strap-on systems
after the service formally accepts the Vehicle Teleoperation
Mission Needs Statement later this month, said a service source. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MILITARY ROBOTICS via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

NAVY MOVING OUT ON UNDERWATER ROBOTICS PROJECTS

     In fiscal 1996 the Navy is preparing to move out on advanced
unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) projects. Such systems could be
worth billions of dollars over the next ten to twenty years, said
industry sources. According to a just-unclassified version of the
UUV master plan, "Clandestine mine reconnaissance is the Navy s
top UUV priority."
     The other applications include surveillance, intelligence
collection, tactical oceanography, special warfare,
counter-narcotics and counter terrorism.
     Special Operations forces are also keen on such systems and
have requested an Advanced Technology Demonstration to
investigate the performance of miniature UUVs such as those
measuring six inches in diameter and 52 inches long for shallow
water operations, said the plan.
     At the center of Navy UUV activities is the Near-term Mine
Reconnaissance System (NMRS). Last year a Westinghouse Electric
Co.-Lockheed Martin Corp. team won a contract to design, build,
test and support the system, based on a classified Westinghouse
robot.
     It will detect, classify and accurately locate mines. The
robot will be launched and recovered from a 688-class nuclear
submarine. Deployment is pegged for fiscal 1997.
     The so-called "interim operational requirement" calls for
one system, consisting of two UUVs, launch and recovery equipment
and shipboard command and control and support equipment. Its
operational life will be six years.
     Not only is the vehicle to use existing Westinghouse
hardware, the sensors will also be built from existing designs
used on the classified demonstration system, said the plan. In
addition, "The command and control consoles and the launch and
recovery subsystem built for the demonstration system will be
refurbished for the operational prototype system," the plan said. 
    Now the Navy is pushing the next stage, the Long-term Mine
Reconnaissance System (LMRS). The request for proposals for the
system is expected to be released in the Spring, said the Navy.
Milestone I, concept definition, is expected to be achieved this
fiscal year. Deployment would begin in 2003.
     The service is offering data on the system over the Internet
and will hold a classified biddersconference on the robot Jan. 31
at Johns Hopkins University in Laurel, Md. 
     The Navy late last month released new information on LMRS
requirements. "LMRS will capitalize and build on the concept
exploration and definition efforts supported by Congress and
executed for the Submarine Offboard Mine Search System...which is
canceled," said the plan.
     A Cost and Operational Effectiveness Analysis (COEA) has
been launched and will investigate three vehicle diameters, 21
inches, 36 inches and 54 inches. Also to be studied are three
launch and recovery options including torpedo tube, dry deck
shelter and wet dock. LMRS will be launched and recovered from
SSN688, 688I and NSSN submarines.
     Overall, the COEA will identify various task areas. These
include scenarios involving attack submarines; measures of
effectiveness and performance; threat mine types; offboard
vehicle alternatives organic to the submarine and available after
2005; and models and simulations. Leading the COEA is Johns
HopkinsJohn Bennedict, COEA director for the Submarine Offboard
Mine Search System. Among the LMRS operations to be considered
include scenarios in the Middle East and Arabian Peninsula, the
Far East and Korean Peninsula and Russia. Operators would include
Naval Expeditionary Forces conducting naval or amphibious
operations and submarines performing singular missions.
Missions would include finding safe passages without compromising
submarine stealth. Mine threats would include moored and bottom
mines. 

LMRS Requirements

     The Navy has also revealed a number of broad requirement
considerations depending on applications. They include:
     o Clandestine operations: LMRS should be stealthy and use
standard SSN communications links in accepted anti-mine warfare
reporting formats.
     o Exploratory mine reconnaissance: the robot would be
capable of detecting bottom and other objects and classifying
them. The system should be able to find safe routes or operating
areas for naval forces.
     o Support multiple ship operations: LMRS should be able to
support a wide array of naval force operations, not just its host
ship.
     o Single ship operational support: UUV installation,
operation and performance should not hinder SSN operations and
missions.
     o Early reconnaissance: the robot should be capable of
deployment to forward sites prior to hostilities and naval force
build-up. "Under normal conditions, the system will be routinely
deployed aboard CONUS [continental United States] SSNs being
forward deployed," said the Navy s just-released June 7, 1995,
LMRS Top-Level Requirements document. The UUV should be rapidly
deployed at forward sites in an emergency.
     o Required functions: the LMRS should be self-powered and
self-propelled and capable of operating at variable depths.
Reverse propulsion may be necessary for launch and recovery
operations. For the sensors at a minimum they should detect
objects and provide enough information for characterization or
discrimination without further sensing.
     The navigation suite should allow the UUV to locate the
position of detected objects in a geodetic reference frame,
relocate and rendezvous with the SSN mother ship after a sortie
and conduct maneuvers in real-time along reconnaissance plans,
including reacquisition of previously detected targets.
     The Top-Level Requirements document also said LMRS should
include automated launch and recovery. Both autonomous and
semi-autonomous operations will be considered.
     Some specific design parameters include for deep water depth
of 600 feet, temperature 11.5 degrees Celsius, salinity of 35
ppt, density of 1.027 gallons per centimeters squared, sandy
bottoms, sound velocity of 1,500 meters per second and sea state
two. The nominal UUV search altitude would be 100 feet above the
bottom. The nominal altitude for object identification is 30 feet
to 50 feet above the bottom.
     For shallow water, the parameters include water depth of 100
feet, temperature of 22 degrees Celsius, salinity of 36 ppt,
density of 1.025 gallons per cubic centimeter, sandy bottom,
sound velocity of 1,522 meters per second, sea state two, 30 feet
above the bottom for nominal search altitude and 30 feet to 50
feet above the bottom for identification altitude.
     The mine threats the UUV will be used to detect include
bottom-type, close-tethered and deep volume. There is no
requirement for LMRS to detect or classify tethered near-surface
mines, floating or buried mines.
     Installation of LMRS aboard a submarine will be temporary
and not excessively impact boat operations and missions. But
according to the Navy requirements document, "some offload of
weapons will be necessary to accommodate the command, control and
replenishment elements of the system."
     In addition, there is no requirement for LMRS operations to
be compatible with SSN towed array operations. But speed, heading
and depth considerations on the mother ship will be necessary for
selected LMRS operation periods, said the document. At a minimum
such periods will include UUV launch and recovery and homing and
docking.
     The Navy has established two design cost goals for a six to
seven years of $143 million and $214 million in then-year
dollars. A single system would include two UUVs.
     The LMRS web site on the Internet is
http://sea02www.navsea.navy.mil. Click the icon for the
Electronic Technical Information Center to reach available
libraries and register for the classified biddersconference.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MILITARY ROBOTICS via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

ROBOTIC DIGEST

     o Air Force Aeronautical Systems Center is setting up a
technical library for the Miniature Air-Launched Decoy. The
library will be set up at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., in Building
11. A classified statement of objectives is scheduled to have
been released as is a draft request for proposals. The technical
library contact is Joan Sanders, (904) 882-4808. (Aeronautical
Systems Center, ASC/VXK, Weapons, Air Base and Range Contracting
Office, 102 West D Ave., Suite 168, Eglin Air Force Base, FL
32542-6807, ATTN: Maj. Richard Lewis, 904/882-8368 x 3260)      
o Army Missile Command is interested in obtaining
information on reconnaissance, surveillance and target
acquisition packages for use on tactical unmanned ground
vehicles. The packages at a minimum should have a forward-looking
infrared sensor, a day reconnaissance camera, a laser range
finder and Global Positioning System to accomplish target
location in military grid coordinates. The systems should operate
in all environments, be compatible with standard military open
architectures, detect and provide target imagery adequate for the
operator to recognize targets as small as 2.3 square meters at
ranges up to 2,000 meters. (Synopsis #0676-95, Commander, Army
Missile Command, Acquisition Center, Redstone Arsenal, AL
35898-5280, ATTN: Michael Harris, 205/842-9124)

     o Army Communications-Electronics Command is conducting a
market survey of Ku-band synthetic aperture radars for use in the
Predator medium altitude unmanned aerial vehicle. The radar must
have a resolution of 0.3 strip map, error area of 100 meters,
depression angles of 30 degrees to 60 degrees and a squint angle
of 90 degrees at speeds from 25-80 meters per second. It must
weigh no more than 175 pounds. The Army may require 24 such
payloads, eight sets of ground control station racks and spare
parts. (PM, NV/RSTA, SFAE-IEW-NV-TS, Building 9039, Evans Area,
Fort Monmouith, NJ 07703-5302, ATTN: Dan Kuderna, Fax,
908/427-5072)

     o Naval Air Systems Command intends to issue an order under
a Basic Ordering Agreement with Loral Communications Systems for
supplies and services to incorporate improvements to the Ku-band
satellite communications video processing system on airborne and
ground elements for the Predator medium altitude unmanned aerial
vehicle. (BOA #N00019-95-G-0135, Commander, Naval Air Systems
Command, Code 2.0, 1421 Jefferson Davis Highway Code, Arlington,
VA 22243-5120)

     o Naval Sea Systems Command plans to issue a request for
proposals for the development and production of a portable launch
system for nuclear Tomahawk land attack cruise missiles. The
launch system will be installed on SSN 688, 688I and NSSN
submarines. The launcher will be a standalone, portable system
including an operator console (called the Data Controller Module
or DCM) and the Weapon Interface Module. The DCM will reside in
the attack center and the other part will reside in the torpedo
room. The program is sponsored by OPNAV N872 and the command s
Submarine Combat Systems Program Office (PMS 425). The RFP will
not be released until the third quarter of fiscal 1996.
(Solicitation #N000024-96-R-6221, Commander, Naval Sea Systems
Command, Code 0262, 2531 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA
22242-5160, ATTN: SEA 02621H, Heather Jackson, 703/602-7703)      

     o Crane Army Ammunition Activity is soliciting for a remote
visual inspection system, Videoimagescope or equal. It must be
able to enter a 1-inch diameter opening and extend 15 feet, and
be flexible enough to pass through a 3-inch PVC drain. It must
have fiber optic light transmitting cable. (Solicitation
#DAAA32-96-B-0006, Contracting Officer, Crane Army Ammunition
Activity, 300 Highway 361,SIOCN-CT, Crane IN 47522-5099, ATTN:
Kim Shafer 812/854-3326) 

     o McClellan Air Force Base Sacramento Air Logistics Center
is procuring a casting robot manipulator arm to service casting
shakeout, cooling and shotblast system in the Casting Emissions
Reduction Program. The system must be commercially available. The
robot will be used to remove castings weighing up to 250 pounds
from a shakeout feeder and place them on a hanger suspended from
the cooling and shotblast conveyor system at a rate of 90
castings per minute. It will have an articulated boom with a
ten-foot reach and 360 degree rotation and have the proper
end-effector/gripper. An ombudsman has been appointed for the
acquisition. The contact is Allen Taylor at (916) 643-5070.
(Solicitation #F04699-96-R-0038, Sacramento Air Logistics
Center, 3237 Peacekeeper Way, Suite 17, McClellan Air Force Base,
CA 95652-1060, ATTN: K. Everton, 916/643-3824)

     o Army Missile Command Research, Development and Engineering
Center plans to extend a University of Alabama, Huntsville,
con-tract for maintenance and continuation of research activities
in numerous areas including robotics and automation simulation
and artificial intelligence. (Synopsis #R264-95, Army Missile
Command, Research, Development and Acquisition Center,
Procurement Office, R&D Contracts Division, Redstone Arsenal, AL
35898-5275)

     o Navy Inventory Control Point intends to contract Alliant
Techsystems Inc. of Mukilteo, Wash., for AN/SLQ-48 Mine
Countermeasures System underwater remotely operated vehicle depot
level repairs. (Solicitation #N00104-96-H-A028, Naval Inventory
Control Point, P.O. Box 2020, 5450 Carlisle Pike, Mechanicsburg,
PA 17055-0788)

     o Army Missile Command plans to extend a contract with
Continental RPVs of Barstow, Calif., for 1/5-scale target drone
flight services. (Contract #DAAH01-91-C-0695, Commander, Army
Missile Command, Acquisition Center, Redstone Arsenal, AL
35898-5280) 

     o Army Missile Command plans to issue a solicitation to
Hayes International Corp. Targets division for up to 175 radar
targets. (Solicitation #DAAH01-95-R-A097, Commander, Army Missile
Command, Acquisition Center, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5280)     

     o Naval Inventory Control Point has awarded a $72,700 contract
to Sechan Electronics Inc. of Litiz, Penn., for infrared target
services. (Contract #N00104-96-C-T002, Naval Inventory Control
Point, Code M2522, P.O. Box 2020, Mechaicsburg, PA 17055-0788)

     o Tinker Air Force Base has awarded a $106,000 contract
option to Boeing Co. Defense and Space Group of Seattle, Wash.,
for conventional air launch cruise missile arena test support.
(Contract #F34601-95-C-0478-A00002, OC-ALC/Director of
Contracting/Aircraft, 3001 Staff Drive, Suite 2AG87A,Tinker Air
Force Base, OK 73145-3020)

     o Benthos has announced that a new digital camera it is
marketing took numerous high-resolution pictures in the North
Sea. The DSC 510 digital still camera was mounted on the
underwater remotely operated vehicle Examiner and launched from
Stadive, the world s largest saturation diving and ROV support
platform, said the company. The purpose of the exercise was to
demonstrate the value of digital imaging techniques for offshore
inspection and was conducted by invitation from Shell U.K.
Exploration.
     The camera system acquires images and transmits them to the
surface. It incorporates Kodak "Megaplus" electronics and an
imager providing 1.5 million pixels of information, a gradient
detail of 1,024 light levels and equivalent film speeds ranging
from 60 to 750 ASA. (Benthos Inc., 49 Edgerton Drive, North
Falmouth, MA 02556-2826, 508/563-1000)

     o Oceaneering International announced what it called a
significant expansion of the company s underwater remotely
operated vehicle (ROV) fleet. The company s Morgan City, La.,
facility will deliver seven new Hydra and Quantum work-class
vehicles. Hydra is a high-thrust, high-payload, cage-deployed
vehicle. The new systems are 75- and 100-horsepower units capable
of operating in 6,600 fsw or more.
     The company opened a formal in-house training center for ROV
personnel at Morgan City last month. Oceaneering plans to employ
and train 60 additional ROV operators by May 1996.
     Said Jay Collins, vice-president of the firm s Oilfield
Marines Services, "Last year we provided ROV services on 33
percent of the wells drilled to 1,000 fsw or more and we
supported 45 percent of the wells drilled in 3,000 fsw or more."
(Oceaneering International Inc., P.O. Box 21830, Houston, Texas
77218)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>