
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B10-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B024-76</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb69.html 205.156.212.5 19970122041124 text/html 38391
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:09:26 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:16 GMT
Content-length: 38204
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/pb69.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet <BR>
DECEMBER 25, 1995<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>STATIC HANGS OVER DEVELOPING ITV INDUSTRY THROUGHOUT '95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2958 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>COURT REAFFIRMS 'MUST CARRY'; CONGRESS DEREGULATES CABLE ANYWAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1089 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>FCC'S 214 COFFERS DWINDLE AS AMERITECH YANKS ITS PERMITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(610 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>THOMSON BRIGHTENS STARSIGHT'S UNIVERSE WITH $25M INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(392 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>AT&T, HEWLETT-PACKARD PARTNER ON BROADBAND SOFTWARE PLATFORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(393 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>YOUR CHOICE TV  TO LAUNCH SINGLE-CHANNEL PPV SERVICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet
DECEMBER 25, 1995

STATIC HANGS OVER DEVELOPING ITV INDUSTRY THROUGHOUT '95

Although no one could claim 1995 was the best of times for
interactive television, the worst fears of industry skeptics
were not realized either.

As the ambitious plans of both cable companies and telcos to
deliver near-term digital deployment fell by the wayside, a new
sense of purpose began to emerge based more on economics and
true customer demand than pipe dreams.

The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) didn't help matters
much; it clouded the waters with a patchwork of regulations for
telephone companies seeking to package and deliver video
programming that continued to unravel throughout the year.  The
case for the telcos, which saw numerous federal court cases turn
in their favor, finally made its way to the Supreme Court
earlier this month.

Many telcos also appeared to give up altogether on the video
dialtone (VDT) route, first pulling their Section 214
applications with the FCC and then eyeing other means of
delivery such as via a traditional cable TV franchise or
wireless cable.

The fuzzy interactive and programming picture did not stop
companies from embracing big-money programming/technology
partnerships.  The year saw the rise of two notable telco
consortiums - TELE-TV, a venture among Bell Atlantic, Nynex and
Pacific Telesis; and Americast - the brainchild of Ameritech,
BellSouth, GTE, SBC Communications and the Walt Disney Co.  The
year also saw Disney's bid to swallow Capital Cities/ABC,
Westinghouse's purchase of CBS Inc., and Time Warner's plans to
buy Turner Broadcasting Systems.

Which is not to say the year was without its feuds.  As the year
grinds to an end, U S West and Time Warner continue to trade
barbs in court over Time Warner's proposed Turner acquisition
and new blueprint for a company reorganization.

Following are the year's top ITV highlights as reported in
Interactive TV Strategies and its predecessor, Entertainment
Technology:

January 1995:

*     Nearly all of the telcos, except for SBC Communications
and SNET, win the right to own the programming on their VDT
networks in a case in U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C.

*     Rochester Tel wraps up its 52-customer VDT with a whimper,
and a question mark as to whether it will seek to deploy
commercial programming services.  The telco was to remain quiet
on video plans for the rest of the year.

*     The FCC gives Bell Atlantic the green light to provide
some programming for its VDT trial in Fairfax, Va.

*     BellSouth nixes its plans to have an anchor programmer as
part of the VDT  service it plans to offer next year in Atlanta
in order to win speedier FCC approval.  The anchor programmer
issue is to plague telcos throughout the year.

*     The FCC approves Puerto Rico Telephone's plans to conduct
a VDT trial comprising services delivered via ADSL and fiber-to-
the-curb technology.

*     The commission also OKs five of Ameritech's Section 214
applications to build VDT networks in the metropolitan areas of
Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin.  As the year
progresses, the telco all but abandons near-term VDT plans in
favor of providing programming as a traditional cable franchise.

*     Sprint's local phone division, Carolina Telephone in North
Carolina, makes plans for a VDT trial in Wake Forest.

February 1995:

*     GTE and AT&T can their plans to conduct a VDT trial over a
hybrid fiber/coax network in Manassas, Va., signaling AT&T's
move away from participating in trials using technology "that
may not be in use a year from today."

*     Zing Systems receives a patent for its interactive
programming delivery system and an endorsement from Hewlett-
Packard, which will include the technology in its KAYAK set-top
boxes.

*     Cory Mitchell joins SNET to head up the telco's multimedia
services decision.  Mitchell is to resign before the year's end.

March 1995:

*     More than 100 major media companies, from film studios to
special-interest programmers, sign up to provide content on Bell
Atlantic's Stargazer VDT trial/system in northern Virginia.

*     Sprint announces plans to test interactive marketing via
the San Jose, Calif.-based Interactive Network, in which the
company invested $5 million.  The initiative was to be hamstrung
at the gate due to Interactive Network's failure to stay
financially afloat.

*     Legislation is introduced in Congress that would allow
cable TV converters, and the digital converters of interactive
television, to be sold by manufacturers and retailers rather
than the cable operators leasing them to customers.

*     Howard Stringer exits his post as president of the CBS
Broadcast Group to head up the Bell Atlantic-Nynex-Pacific
Telesis media and technology venture, eventually to be named
TELE-TV.

*     Bell Atlantic drops AT&T as the systems integrator for its
VDT platform, claiming it would rather learn and initiate the
integration functions itself.

April 1995:

*     In their first foray into wireless waters, Bell Atlantic
and Nynex agree to invest $100 million into Albany, N.Y.-based
CAI Wireless Systems Inc.

*     Cable billing and subscriber management company CableData
gets its first telco bid to provide support for BellSouth's
planned VDT trial in Atlanta in 1996.

*     IBM debuts its Digital Library to help companies digitize
their existing content as well as create new digital programming
for a variety of platforms.

*     After numerous delays, Scientific-Atlanta ships the first
300 headend systems for the delivery of the Sega Channel.

*     SBC Communications becomes the last of the regional Bell
companies to win a federal court ruling allowing it to provide
video programming to its in-region customers.

May 1995:

*     Bell Atlantic pays BroadBand Technologies (BBT) $7 million
for the right to acquire a noncontrolling stake in the company.

*     Bell Atlantic asks the FCC to suspend consideration on its
two pending Section 214 applications so it can review the
technology.  Before month's end, the telco is to withdraw its
applications to build hybrid fiber-coax VDT networks altogether.
The telco says it will resubmit applications based on switched
digital video technology.

*     Prevue Interactive Services begins working with BBN Hark
to develop voice-recognition technology it will incorporate into
its advanced navigator Prevue Express.

*     Your Choice Television, the time-shifted TV brainchild of
Discovery founder John Hendricks, signs an agreement with TCI to
begin digital compression, signal delivery and national
satellite delivery of its service.

*     High-definition television (HDTV) continues to be a hot
industry topic as the government debates whether or not to
auction off spectrum and consumer electronics companies rethink
methods to get the technology out of the gate.

*     NBC announces plans to break its ties with America Online
and Prodigy to form a broad-reaching multimedia agreement with
Microsoft that will see the companies jointly developing
products to be distributed online and on CD-ROM, as well as via
interactive and broadcast television.

*     The FCC makes yet another effort to prop up its regulation
of telco-provided video with the requirement that telcos seek
waivers to run programming on their VDT networks.

*     The commission gives GTE the green light to build VDT
networks in Ventura County, Calif.; Pasco and Pinellas counties,
Fla.; Manassas, Va.; and Honolulu.

*     In yet another clone court case, the U.S. District Court
in Connecticut grants Southern New England Telephone (SNET) the
right to provide in-region TV programming.

June 1995:

*     U S West becomes the second telco to pull its Section 214
applications from the FCC.  The telco pulls its five pending
applications, citing uncertainty about the staying power of VDT
technology.

In a related interactive sign of the times, U S West abruptly
cans its in-room interactive hospitality service, CityKey,
leaving Bell Atlantic as the sole provider of in-hotel
electronic yellow pages with its InfoTravel service.

*     The financially beleaguered Interactive Network lays off
most of its staff and begins sharply cutting back on service.
The company says it only has enough money to continue operations
for two months.

*     The IT Network, parent of the Interactive Channel, merges
with HB Communications and changes its name to the Source
Exchange.  The company looks to expand distribution among cable
systems.

*     ACTV, the company behind Canadian cable operator Le Groupe
Videotron's commercial interactive TV service, brings its
technology to the States for the first time in collaboration
with Ventura County Cablevision in Southern California.

*     Howard Stringer announces Edward Grebow, a former
colleague at CBS, will take the reigns as president of TELE-TV.
Creative Artists Agency wunderkind Michael Ovitz signs on to
oversee affairs as well.

*     Cable operators TCI, Continental and Comcast agree to
carry Zing ITV signals and help fund the production of Zing
consumer devices.

July 1995:

*     Telcos and cable companies emphasize customer service as
they begin to formulate marketing strategies for rolling out
their TV programming trials.

*     Ameritech makes good on its word to get into programming
via traditional cable franchise agreements with its first such
deal with the local authorities in Plymouth Township, Mich.,
outside of Detroit.

*     Bell Atlantic petitions the FCC to postpone VDT
rulemakings until Congress makes up its mind on the pending
telecom reform legislation.

*     Experts caution members of the suddenly hot wireless
industry to carefully assess their friends and foes at the
annual Wireless Cable Association conference in Washington, D.C.

*     Nynex cuts short its yearlong hybrid fiber-coax (HFC)
VDT/video on-demand trial in New York in favor of waiting for
advanced digital technology to become available.  The telco was
partnered with Time Warner Cable, Liberty Cable, Urban Cable and
ARTI in the 2,500-person trial.

*     U S West pares the staff at its Interactive Video
Enterprises division, a telling sign of the times at the telco.

*     In one of the most ambitious of the year's cable-computer
projects, Time Warner announces plans to test delivery of
broadcast television via personal computers to an office
building in Manhattan.

August 1995:

*     Microsoft reveals that interactive television may be its
other window of opportunity.  The company is developing an ITV
platform to be used by SBC Communications Corp. and Nippon
Telephone & Telegraph in Japan, and is testing technology
applications in concert with TCI, near its Redmond, Wash.,
headquarters.

*     Walt Disney makes a bid to swallow Capital Cities/ABC in a
$19 billion deal that would make it the largest entertainment
and media company in the world.

*     BellSouth successfully negotiates a franchise arrangement
with the local authorities in Daniel Island, S.C., to build and
operate a telephony/cable network there.  The FCC remains a
stumbling block.

*     Ameritech thumbs its nose at the FCC and continues
construction of its cable network near Detroit despite the
commission's imposition of a $200,000 fine for beginning to
build without a permit.

*     GTE joins the consortium among Ameritech, BellSouth, SBC
Communications and Disney, which is soon to be named
"Americast."

 In related news, Michael Ovitz announces his departure as
chairman of Creative Artists Agency to become president of
Disney, disrupting his relationship with the TELE-TV consortium.

September 1995:

*     In-home wagering emerges as one of the most promising
applications for near-term interactive television, with such
players as ODS Technologies, NTN subsidiary IWN Inc. and  Graff
Pay Per View racing to be first with a hot application.

*     It's one step forward and one step back for U S West, as
the telco dissolves its interactive shopping service, U S
Avenue, while at the same time cranks up its programming trial
in Omaha, Neb.

*     During a gala at its brand-new headend facility, Jones
Intercable announces plans to use a passive coaxial cable
network as it upgrades its state-of-the-art system in
Alexandria, Va.

*     In a move to entice participation in its technical trial
of VDT delivery in San Jose, Pacific Telesis begins giving trial
customers free 13-inch color TVs.

*     Video information provider FutureVision of America, a key
arm in Bell Atlantic's Dover Township, N.J., VDT deployment,
changes its name to Digital Broadband Applications Corp. and
splits into two divisions focusing on retail business and
interactive communications, respectively.

October 1995:

*     In this month's mega-media merger, Time Warner Inc.
announces plans to acquire Turner Broadcasting Inc.  The deal
would see Time Warner assume control of Turner in a $7.5 billion
stock takeover and create a programming arsenal equipped with
cable properties and the biggest film library in the world.

*     The TELE-TV consortium continues to bolster its wireless
technology commitment.  The group signs Thomson Consumer
Electronics to a $1 billion contract to supply up to 3 million
wireless set-top boxes and systems during the next three years.

*     Continental Cablevision and GTE mainStreet prepare to kick
off their joint interactive advertising trial outside Boston.
Both companies seek answers concerning content delivery and
technology.

*     Standards body the Digital Audio-Visual Council (DAVIC) is
set to release its first set of technical specifications for
end-to-end digital interactive video.

*     Stephen Weiswasser leaves his post as senior vice
president at Capital Cities/ ABC to become CEO of Americast, the
programming consortium of Ameritech, BellSouth, GTE, SBC
Communications and Disney.

*     Static still hangs over the burgeoning direct broadcast
satellite industry, but DBS is taking a much bigger bite out of
the programming pie than cable companies or telcos expected.

*     AT&T pulls the plug on its HomeCenter interactive TV
service, which had promised consumers access to on-demand local
news, weather and traffic reports, and the ability to recall
telephone messages via their TVs, check stock portfolios,
transfer money and more.

*     Viacom begins testing telephony service over its enhanced
fiber-coax network in Castro Valley, Calif.

*     John Clark joins TELE-TV Media as executive vice president
of programming and distribution relations.  Craig Tanner is
named senior vice president of advanced technologies at TELE-TV
Systems.

*     Texas Instruments announces plans to enter the local
multipoint distribution services (LMDS) market next year with an
all-digital interactive platform.

*     Australian telecommunications firm Telstra passes 600,000
homes.  It plans to build past 2.3 million homes by 1997 with
the broadband cable network.

*     The U.K.'s three largest cable companies - Bell Cablemedia
plc, Nynex CableComms and TeleWest - plan to establish a
multimedia lab to create interactive applications.

*     In programming news, "Decades," the Game Show Network's
interactive call-in show, will be the first GSN game to be
featured on the NTN Entertainment Network.

November 1995:

*     In the "looks like a computer feels like a television"
department, an increasing number of online services are
beginning to create programming that is demographically targeted
like a cable channel.  Among the latest and greatest ideas are
"The Hub," a Generation X stop developed on America Online
developed by AOL and New Line Television, and NBC's new fashion
site.

*     Ameritech makes two more agreements for the provision of
franchise cable service, this time with the local authorities in
Fraser and Northville Township, Mich.  The telco also takes its
first steps toward cable delivery on Chicago's South Side.

*     Southern New England Telephone (SNET) sets the
requirements video information providers must meet to take part
in the one-year expansion of its West Hartford, Conn., VDT
trial, which still is awaiting approval from the FCC.

A few weeks after that announcement, Cory Mitchell resigned as
head of SNET's multimedia division and the telco folds it into
its publishing unit.

*     Cox Cable ditches its plans to deliver interactive
television in Omaha, Neb., which at one time looked like the
site for the most robust programming between a cable company and
telco.  U S West says it still is committed to eventually
rolling out interactive TeleChoice services.

*     A consortium of computer hardware and software companies,
and broadcast and cable television houses begin developing a
service to provide World Wide Web pages along with television
programming.  AOL, Intel, NBC, CNN Interactive, Comcast, Viacom
and QVC are among the founding members of the so-called
"Intercast Industry."

December 1995:

*     A consortium of consumer electronics heavy-hitters -
including Hitachi, JVC, Matsushita, Toshiba and Sony -  agree to
jointly develop an interactive television system for use in
Japan.  The group, called Intertext, will incorporate technology
from Wink Communications directly into TV sets they manufacture.

*     SBC Communications revs up a 1,800-home trial in
Richardson, Texas, which will precede its 47,000-home build out
of a fiber/coax network over which the telco plans to deliver
telephony and programming services.

*     Time Warner adds customized, on-demand news and sports
programming to its Full Service Network and lays groundwork for
its first bank-at-home application and on-demand pizza delivery.
Customers, about 3,200 at this point, still are not paying a
monthly fee.

*     The issue that would not go away - whether or not telcos
have the right to own and package programming on their own
networks - finally gets its day in the Supreme Court.  A
decision from the is expected this summer.

*     Pacific Telesis sets up another strategic move into
wireless delivery.  The telco agrees to purchase 100 percent of
the stock of Wireless Holdings Inc. and Videotron Bay Area Inc.,
both joint ventures between Transworld Telecommunications and Le
Groupe Videotron Ltd.

*     U S West and Time Warner continue to trade barbs in court.
This time the telco amends its lawsuit asking the court to
prohibit Time Warner from going through with its proposed
reorganization of Time Warner Entertainment.

*     The FCC OKs the acquisition of CBS Inc. by Westinghouse
without setting specific conditions about the company's
commitment to children's television.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet
DECEMBER 25, 1995

COURT REAFFIRMS 'MUST CARRY'; CONGRESS DEREGULATES CABLE ANYWAY

WASHINGTON, D.C. - The Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
and the U.S. District Court for Washington, D.C., both have
separately said cable TV still dominates the multichannel
delivery of video.

Nonetheless, House and Senate conferees working on a compromise
version of telecom legislation loosened the bill's regulations
on cable TV even further than either the House or Senate telecom
bills originally did.  The conferees, though, are expected to
delay full deregulation of cable TV rates until three years
after enactment, backing away from the bills' original plan.

The legislation largely undoes the Cable Act of 1992, which
imposed rate regulation, and ends the cable-telco cross-
ownership ban, a key part of the Cable Act of 1984.

But another part of the Cable Act of 1984 sparked the FCC to
create its "must carry" rule requiring cable operators to carry
local broadcast channels.  The rule - an attempt to ensure the
newer medium would not eliminate broadcasting - was reaffirmed
earlier this month by the U.S. District Court for Washington,
D.C.

Cable operators, led by Turner Broadcasting, took their
challenge of the rule all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court,
which last year remanded the case to the U.S. District Court for
a rehearing.  The High Court, in a 5-4 vote, said the lower
court had not received enough proof for the FCC's case that
broadcasters would be harmed.

Significantly, the four of the five justices in the majority
wanted the case not to be remanded but overturned outright as a
violation of cable operator's First Amendment Rights.  Now, the
High Court will get a second chance to do just that, since
there's no question whether Turner will appeal the 2-1 ruling of
the district court's three-judge panel.

Writing for the majority, District Court Judge Stanley Sporkin
said there was no other alternative available to the FCC than
must-carry.  Antitrust law, he said, is time consuming and
leased access is costly while "many of the stations invoking the
must-carry protections are economically vulnerable."  Nor would
an FCC complaint procedure fit the bill, he said, citing the
"enormous administrative burden" of such a process.

Sporkin dismissed the challenge of the rule as an uncompensated
taking by the government in violation of the Fifth Amendment.
But, when he considered whether the rule is a content-related
restriction requiring strict scrutiny for its First Amendment
impact, he admitted the rule comes "very close."

But, he added, "we do not believe that they [at the FCC] cross
the line."

The very day the district court released its opinion, the
conferees on Capitol Hill held their second meeting in as many
weeks and adopted a set of changes to the vastly different
telecom bills passed by the House and Senate this summer.
Regarding the bills' language on deregulating cable operators,
the conferees chose the House bill as their mode, but loosened
its provisions even more.

Conversely, they imposed tougher conditions on cable TV's future
competitors - the telephone companies.

The House telecom bill, H.R. 1555, keeps the FCC from
investigating a cable rate complaint until 3 percent of the
cable system's subscribers have complained - the FCC now swings
into action on one complaint - and it orders the FCC to resolve
rate complaints in 90 days and to set only minimal standards for
set-top converter boxes.  But the conferees changed H.R. 1555's
language to raise the definition of a "small city" - one where
the cable operator immediately escapes rate regulation - from
35,000 to 50,000.

That, said Sen. Jay Rockefeller, D-W. Va., will only aggravate
President Clinton's concerns that the bill goes too far on cable
rate deregulation.  The president has threatened a veto, citing
that very concern.

Regarding telco-provided video, the conferees also hewed to the
House language, but again with big revisions.  Although H.R.
1555 would have let telcos operate "video platforms" such as
video dialtone (VDT) networks under reduced regulation, the
conferees instead required VDT-type networks to conform to a
modified version of the Title VI rules governing cable TV.  A
telco won't have to get local franchise agreements, but will
have to make at least two-thirds of its capacity available to
unaffiliated programmers.

That's the very sort of "must carry" rule cable operators
protest.  Telcos say it will rob them of much of the opportunity
to cash in on programming, the source of the real money in VDT.

While deregulating cable TV, the conferees also gave a big
benefit to cable's old nemesis, the broadcasters.  The latest
changes make broadcasters the only ones able to receive licenses
for the 6 Mhz of spectrum set aside by the FCC for "advanced
television (ATV)" -even though the spectrum also can be used for
paging or mobile data.  The spectrum is valued at $35 billion to
$100 billion but the conferees eliminated language from the bill
that would have the spectrum auctioned.

As for broadcasters' existing analog spectrum, which the FCC
would like to regain so that it can be auctioned, the conferees
eliminated any criteria from the bill for determining when the
spectrum must be returned.

The conferees are deregulating cable TV, in part, so that it may
acquire the capital needed to build networks to compete with
local phone companies.  The Cable Act of 1992 was said by the
industry to have hurt revenues, but the FCC last week issued a
report on cable industry competition that claims the industry
"posted strong growth over the past year."

The report said subscribership has increased by 2.5 million to
just under 60 million and average capacity has increased to the
point where 96 percent of operators provide more than 30
channels.

This hurts the industry's argument that it is suffering under
the increased rules.

The report also concludes that cable TV is still "the primary
distributor of multichannel programming to consumers," meaning
the FCC found there was only limited competition from digital
broadcast satellite (DBS) services or telcos offering video
dialtone.  It noted cable subscribership "continues to dwarf"
the combined subscribership of all competing services combined.

It also pointed to a increase in horizontal concentration of
cable systems, meaning that operators are consolidating,
particularly on a regional basis.  The industry now is
"moderately concentrated," it asserted.  About half of all 129
national programming services are vertically integrated -
meaning they also own a network - said the FCC, noting that this
total of programmers was up from 106 the previous year.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet
DECEMBER 25, 1995

FCC'S 214 COFFERS DWINDLE AS AMERITECH YANKS ITS PERMITS

What once was a beanstalk-like stack of Section 214 filings
sprouting at the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC)
Common Carrier Bureau, now is fast dwindling to a mere mound.

Ameritech earlier this month relented its Section 214 permits -
authorization the telcos need to obtain before they can begin
building video dialtone (VDT) networks - just weeks before they
expired.  Current FCC regulations mandate that a telco act on
its permits within a year of its approval.

The FCC last December approved Ameritech's five applications to
construct VDT networks that would serve 1.2 million homes in its
service region.  Yet the telco, which has been plowing ahead
with plans to operate as a franchise cable operator, for now has
all but abandoned any near-term VDT plans.

"Right now it's full speed ahead with cable.  There were two
main reasons for the withdrawal," Ameritech spokesman Dave Onak
tells ITVS.  "We have been getting increasing community support
for us to operate as a cable franchise operator.  And the FCC
still has not finalized their VDT rules."

Ameritech currently has notched eight franchise agreements with
the local authorities primarily in the outlying areas of
Detroit.  The telco also has agreements with the Chicago suburb
of Glendale Heights and the Cleveland suburb of Berea.  In
addition, it has just begun the franchise process in Chicago to
provide service in that city's south side (ITVS Nov. 27, 1995).

Onak says Ameritech continues with its brisk construction pace
despite the fact that the FCC has yet to approve the
applications.  Additionally, Illinois cable operators are suing
the telco and the authorities in Glendale Height.

Nevertheless, Ameritech intends to begin offering programming
service during the first half of 1996, Onak tells ITVS.  "We've
got a court ruling that says we can do so, so why not?"

Programming will be selected and packaged by the Americast
consortium in which Ameritech is partnered with BellSouth, GTE,
SBC Communications and Disney.  Americast thus far has signed
agreements with Encore, Time Warner, Turner, Viacom and other
programmers (ITVS Dec. 11, 1995), and the original package will
comprise about 80 to 90 analog channels.

Ameritech is in engaged in franchise discussions with an
additional 40 communities across the Midwest, Onak says.  The
telco has no plans to attempt to provide cable service outside
of its five-state region.  "We've got enough to keep us busy in
our own backyard," he says.

During the past year a handful of telcos - including Bell
Atlantic and U S West -  have amended, and then outright pulled
their applications for commercial VDT before they ever got to
the approval stage at the commission.  Of concern is the rapidly
changing technological landscape and the commission's lack of
clarity on just how, when and where the telcos can operate VDT
service.

Bell Atlantic in the late spring withdrew two of its Section
214s and currently has only one 214 application pending, which
seeks to provide VDT service over a switched digital video
network in Florham, N.J.  The application was filed nearly three
years ago and spokesman Harry Mitchell tells ITVS the telco is
letting it sit because it includes up-to-date technology. Bell
Atlantic has no plans to file any other Section 214s in the near
future.

"The wild card is the federal legislation," Mitchell tells ITVS.
"We are prepared to make the filings if necessary but we are not
going to tip our hand if we don't have to."

The FCC says it will finalize its VDT regulations by early 1996
if the federal government does not pass telecom reform
legislation making it a moot point.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet
DECEMBER 25, 1995

THOMSON BRIGHTENS STARSIGHT'S UNIVERSE WITH $25M INVESTMENT

On-screen program guide developer StarSight Telecast Inc. got a
hefty shot in the arm last week when Thomson Electronics agreed
to invest $25 million in the company, incorporate its technology
into its products, and engage in a joint marketing effort.

Thomson's investment, for which it gets 3.33 million shares of
StarSight common stock, buys the company a 13 percent interest
in StarSight, which also is owned by Viacom, Cox Communications,
Tribune Co., Time Warner and Providence Journal Co.

The proposed agreement also gives Thomson the right to acquire
up to 1 million additional StarSight shares during the next two
years at $7.50 per share and up to 1 million additional shares
of common stock during the next three years at $10 per share.

Under terms of the agreement, Thomson - whose U.S. consumer
electronics interests include RCA, GE and Proscan -  will
incorporate StarSight technology into selected product lines.
The cost to deploy StarSight ranges from $10 to $30 per piece of
equipment, according to Larry Wangberg, president and CEO of
Fremont, Calif.-based StarSight.

"Over time, as the cost of the memory goes down, this cost will
be reduced," he adds.  "Ultimately in the digital world the
deployment of StarSight will concern just the downloading of a
code, and that price, of course, will be very attractive."

Wangberg says the partnership greatly bolsters one of
StarSight's three core businesses - consumer electronics.  The
other areas of concentration are wholesale distribution and
licensing, which the company recently got into.

StarSight currently has agreements with 11 other electronics
manufacturers, and Wangberg says he expects they will react
favorably to the Thomson deal.

"I expect they are going to see this as positive news because it
greatly strengthens StarSight's financial position and ensures
that our business will continue to grow," he says.  Wangberg
also anticipates the Thomson investment, coupled with the recent
$5 million investment in the company by its current partners,
will carry StarSight through 1996.   He declines to project when
StarSight will stop bleeding red ink.

As part of the new agreement, StarSight and Thomson will jointly
market StarSight-equipped Thomson products.  "In some areas we
will be spending more money, and in other areas the spending
will be coming down," Wangberg says.  "It is very dependent on
the mix of revenue and the timing."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet
DECEMBER 25, 1995

AT&T, HEWLETT-PACKARD PARTNER ON BROADBAND SOFTWARE PLATFORM

In a move Carly Fiorina, president of AT&T Network Systems North
America, called "creating a new center of gravity for the
industry," AT&T and Hewlett-Packard last week outlined a plan to
jointly develop turnkey broadband network solutions for public
and private wireline and wireless networks, including
interactive television.

Aside from developing technology and products for ITV - which
will come later down the line - the companies together intend to
create an open network software platform and develop
applications to run on it, according to Willem Roelandts, senior
vice president and general manager of HP's computer systems
organization.

AT&T Network Systems, which next year will split off from AT&T
as part of a separate systems and technology company, just weeks
ago at the Western Cable Show announced it was teaming with HP,
and cable modem developers Hybrid Networks and Intel.  The
cooperative plans to set specifications for interoperability and
develop products for high-speed PC delivery.

The announcement already has received "positive responses" from
Time Warner, Comcast and several other cable operators, Fiorina
says.

The new AP agreement advances their relationship much further.
The first fruits of the deal will see both companies immediately
selling  high-speed cable modems.  Fiorina says within six
months the team also will be building products and services,
eventually to include home shopping, video and telephony, around
a common protocol using HP's "Openview" and AT&T's "BaseWorx"
software.  The companies are working closely with CableLabs to
ensure their standard is the one adopted by the industry,
Roelandts says.

Within the next year, AT&T and HP also will introduce advanced
headend equipment and additional integrated data-management
software.   "We see the potential of this relationship extending
into the future beyond next year and we have high hopes for what
else we can do together," Fiorina says.

The companies together are taking a different tack than other
competitors, including Motorola, IBM and Microsoft, in a move
Roelandts and Fiorina say is by design.

"Microsoft is driven by a very different view of how the
industry will evolve, and I am relatively confident that our
view is backed by a lot of network service providers out there
that have invested a lot in their networks," Fiorina says.

"There is not much value to be derived from merely providing a
pipe with no value associated with it."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE TV STRATEGIES via NewsNet
DECEMBER 25, 1995

YOUR CHOICE TV  TO LAUNCH SINGLE-CHANNEL PPV SERVICE

Your Choice Television (YCTV) is planning to launch a single-
channel pay-per-view version of its time-shifted program service
aimed at making it easier for cable systems with limited channel
capacity to offer YCTV.

The new proposal, which will offer a limited quantity of popular
television shows, is the most low-tech level of Your Choice
service.  YCTV also offers a more  robust multichannel PPV
version of time-shifted programming and an application for real-
time video on-demand (VOD), which primarily has seen use only in
trials.

The single-channel service will come in six-hour blocks of
programming and will be delivered via YCTV's satellite, which
has been up and running since April.  Suggested retail price for
the new service will be 99 cents, according to Randall McCurdy,
YCTV's vice president of sales and distribution, who says the
price "is low enough that people don't think about the cost but
high enough that they associate some value with it."

McCurdy tells ITVS Your Choice already has agreements in place
with several cable operators for the new service, but declines
to offer specifics.

"We see this as a migration path," McCurdy tells ITVS.  "A lot
of our subscribers have systems that are currently in several
levels.  Some have real digital systems that they are testing
the delivery VOD on, some have systems ready for near video on-
demand and some are on the tail-end of the rebuild and are
locked into one channel for a good while.  This is a scaleable
solution."

McCurdy says the lower-level service is a good way for YCTV to
reach cable systems that might otherwise not be able to use its
programming.  "Initially there are a lot more operators with one
channel, so we will be able to reach a lot more people with this
first," he says.

As for YCTV's foray into the market, McCurdy says the company is
pretty much finished with participating in the trials of the
cable companies and telcos for now.  "We've basically closed
down the trial mode.  We are focusing on commercial deployment
now," he says.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>