
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B36-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B009-256</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev55.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000534 text/html 75317
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:02:52 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:40 GMT
Content-length: 75128
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev55.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet <BR>
October 23, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>EC Breaks With Free Trade Dogma in Landmark Waste Accord</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2106 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***PACKAGING***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>OECD Report on Packaging Waste Favors Industry Solutions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(546 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Eco-Emballage Gains Approval to Handle Waste Recovery</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(666 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***NORMS AND STANDARDS***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Dutch Eco-Label Misses Deadline</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(482 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>No Green Christmas as EC Eco-Label Also Falls Behind Schedule</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(806 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BAT Definition Changes as EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1223 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***ENERGY***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>EC Finalizes US-Style Energy Labeling Scheme for Consumers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>New Report Forecasts Lower CO2 Emissions for Great Britain</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(495 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***CLIMATE***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>EC to Push for Methyl Bromide Controls, May Further Accelerate CFC&nbsp;Phaseout</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>German Regulations Will Limit Gas Station Emissions Starting 1&nbsp;January</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(756 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Study Finds Biofuel Drawbacks Outweigh Advantages</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(414 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***WATER QUALITY***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>In Britain, Better Pay for Better Water</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***GENERAL POLICY***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax, Ignore Packaging Directive in EC&nbsp;Presidency</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Europarliament Committee Wants Pollution Phase-Out Calendar</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>British Look at the Big Environmental Picture</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Environment Budget Up in Spain, Down in Italy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(571 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Norway Proposes Green Troops for Environmental Cleanup</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(195 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>NEWS BRIEFS:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>HOTLINE:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

EC Breaks With Free Trade Dogma in Landmark Waste Accord

     Shattering visions that Europe's giant single market for
goods should extend to trash too, the EC's environment ministers
sealed an historic agreement on 20 October that allows governments
to turn away shipments from other EC members of waste destined for
disposal in dumps or incinerators.
     For the first time ever the ministers also convinced the
European Commission, the Community's executive, to let them base
the packet of new waste rules on the environmental provisions of
the EC's treaty rather than on articles that promote open trade.
The move represents an almost heretical departure from the
Commission's long-standing dogma that waste should be considered
as a tradeable commodity, and opens the door for governments to
operate tougher national restrictions than the EC text foresees.
     EC Environment Commissioner Karel Van Miert defended the
Commission's capitulation as a one-off concession granted in the
face of enormous political pressure for stringent waste trade
restrictions from several governments, particularly France.  "What
we accepted was that the logic of the internal market should not
prevail" when it came to combating "waste tourism," he said.  The
decision did not signify any lasting change in the Commission's
waste policy, he argued.
     But triumphant French officials hailed the executive's
decision as a major victory for the environment over free trade,
as well as a crucial precedent for the Community and, more
importantly, efforts to reform the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT).  "The text clearly gives preeminence to
environmental protection over commerce," said French Environment
Minister Segolene Royal.
     Secretary-General of the European Federation of Waste
Management Dieter Vogt told EWWE he expected that Germany would
now seek a similarly nonharmonized approach to proposed EC
packaging legislation so that Bonn could maintain its far-
reaching national recycling rules, which other countries complain
pose a barrier to imports.
     Private court action seems likely to be launched sooner or
later to determine whether the text agreed by the Council of
environment ministers is legal under the EC's founding Treaty of
Rome.  Although Van Miert told ministers that the Commission did
not intend to challenge its legality -- a categorical assurance
that took Commission waste experts by surprise -- waste industry
officials said they would consider taking legal action to have the
legislation annulled on the grounds that it breaches the treaty's
free trade provisions.

A Panoply of Rules

     The regulation1, arduously negotiated over almost two years,
amounts to a landmark panoply of new rules for controlling
cross-border trade in waste not only within the 12-member bloc,
but also with the rest of the world.
     It covers virtually all kinds of waste except nuclear
materials, for which the EC has separate rules.  A key aim is to
bring EC practices into line with the requirements of the 1989
Basel Convention, which seek to limit international shipments of
hazardous waste, so that the Community and national governments
can ratify the pact.  Instead of distinguishing between hazardous
and nonhazardous waste, the regulation tailors the severity of its
control mechanisms according to whether trash is destined for
final disposal or for "recovery" -- meaning re-use, recycling, or
incineration to produce energy.  Controls on waste for disposal
are strictest.  The regulation bans the export of trash for
disposal to all countries except to European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) states that are also parties to the Basel
Convention.
     Export of waste for recovery is also banned in principle but
permitted to three groups of nations: members of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) that have agreed
to apply a common system of controls on movements of such waste
among themselves (so far Japan has not); parties to the Basel
Convention; and nations with which the Community concludes
agreements or arrangements guaranteeing, as the Basel Convention
requires, "environmentally sound" management of the waste at its
destination.
     The inclusion of this last group allows the Community to
continue exporting recoverable waste, including toxic materials,
to many developing or newly industrialized countries as well as to
eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.  (This will not apply
to 69 countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Rim, to
which the EC has banned all waste exports at their request).  The
environmental organization Greenpeace accused the ministers of
hypocrisy over this decision, arguing that all waste exports to
these states should be prohibited since unscrupulous traders were
increasingly using the pretext of recycling to dump hazardous
garbage in nations with inadequate import controls.
     The export rules also fall short of meeting the European
Parliament's repeated calls for a halt to all EC waste exports to
countries outside the OECD, the club of rich industrialized
nations, from the year 2000.  Ministers went some way toward
satisfying those demands, however, by building in a series of
safeguards.  All exports will be forbidden when a country has not
specifically consented to receive the waste or when authorities in
the EC nation of dispatch suspect it would not be treated in an
environmentally sound way.
     Moreover, the Commission will periodically review the
third-party agreements -- for the first time by the end of 1996 --
and can propose a ban on exports if the environmental guarantees
turn out to be insufficient.
     The regulation's innovation, however, is that for the first
time it explicitly permits public authorities within the Community
to entirely ban or systematically block imports of nonrecoverable
garbage from other EC states.
     The provision is inspired largely by France's decision in
August to ban imports of household waste for disposal in French
landfills after potentially hazardous hospital garbage was
discovered mixed in with some consignments from Germany.  Bonn's
support for the ban -- once it had swallowed its anger at the lack
of warning from Paris -- was vital in getting the rest of the
Council to back France's restrictive approach.  Having exported a
staggering 700,000 metric tons of household waste to French tips
last year, Germany is now having to redouble efforts to build up
its waste disposal capacity after years of public opposition to
construction of new facilities.

Accord Cites EC Treaty

     The text agreed by ministers stipulates that, to put into
practice the principles that waste should be disposed of as close
as possible to its source and that both the EC and its individual
members should become self-sufficient in waste disposal, "member
states may take measures in accordance with the [EC] treaty to
prohibit generally or partially or to object systematically to
shipments of waste."
     Governments will not be allowed, however, to keep out imports
of hazardous waste from other EC countries that produce so little
that it would be uneconomical to build their own disposal
installations.  This stipulation is intended to ensure that small
states like Luxembourg, Ireland, Portugal, and Belgium get
continued access to specialized disposal facilities elsewhere in
the bloc.
     Van Miert said he had insisted that ministers insert the
reference to the treaty, the EC's equivalent of the Bible, to lend
the regulation a stronger Community dimension and avoid giving the
impression that it allowed the "renationalization" of waste
policy.  "It was important to have the reference to the treaty so
that we were not just reimposing national boundaries," he told
reporters.  Van Miert also persuaded the Council to declare that
decisions between member states would be taken in a spirit of
cooperation.
     A Commission spokesperson said that inclusion of the treaty
reference would act as a constraint on authorities' scope for
imposing bans by underlining that their import policy had to
observe the treaty's golden rule of nondiscrimination between EC
members.
     Another official told EWWE the phrasing meant that member
states would have to be able to justify import restrictions on the
grounds that the waste shipments posed a particular environmental
threat to them or could be treated nearer to their source.  The
text would lead to waste policy being conducted on a regional
basis since it would be virtually impossible to justify blanket
bans on imports at the national level, he said.
     In practice, the question of whether measures taken are "in
accordance with the treaty" is certain to give rise to differing
interpretations and lead to legal disputes, officials believe.
These would be for member states and industry to sort out, since
ministers refused to grant the Commission power to vet measures
before they take effect.
     Van Miert's decision to temporarily ditch the Commission's
traditional line on waste marks his first significant policy
decision since taking over as the EC's environment chief in July
 -- a job many believe he will retain when the 17-strong executive
is reshuffled at the start of next year.  But by going along with
the Council's thinking and pledging not to attack it in court,
Commission and industry officials say the studious Belgian clearly
exceeded the mandate his peers in the EC executive had given him.
     This mandate envisaged that Van Miert should reserve the
right for the Commission to take legal action, as it has done in
the past whenever the Council has approved waste legislation on
the basis of environmental provisions instead of single market
rules.  The Commission's position was bolstered in July when the
European Court of Justice, the bloc's supreme court, upheld the
view that all waste, even nonrecoverable garbage, is a tradeable
good.  As EWWE went to press it was uncertain whether Van Miert's
Commission colleagues would accept his decision or order him to
backtrack.
     Commission officials said he could have to eat his words
anyway if the Court of Justice again supports the Commission's
dogma in two cases against the Council that are currently before
it.  Underscoring his claim that the Commission's fundamental
approach to waste policy had not changed, Van Miert said the
executive would not withdraw the cases.  France's Royal told
reporters it was now time for the Court to fall in with the
Council's view that waste could not be considered a marketable
commodity like any other.
     Though waste experts at the Commission consider the French
ban on imports of household waste to be illegal, they do not
expect the EC executive, feeling frail as a number of governments
try to cut back its powers, to take any action against Paris for
the time being.
     Ministers hope to formally adopt the regulation at their next
meeting on 15-16 December if the European Parliament, which has to
be consulted about the change in the legal base of the measure,
can deliver its advisory opinion by then.  The regulation would
take effect 15 months after it is passed, although Germany may
call for more time to change the rules in its devolved system.
Governments have yet to agree on how soon the Community should
ratify the Basel Convention.
     Waste industry officials predicted that extra administrative
burdens resulting from the tighter controls on waste trade
foreseen under the regulation could prove too burdensome for
smaller companies and force them to sell out to powerful
multinational waste groups.  "I see Waste Management Inc. and
Browning-Ferris picking up market share," said Vogt of the
European Federation of Waste Management.

Tracking the Waste

     The regulation lays down elaborate notification and
information procedures for virtually all waste movements, which
give authorities a month or more to decide whether to approve or
refuse a shipment.  Ministers agreed at the last minute to require
that movements within the Community of waste for recovery included
on the OECD's so-called "green" (nonhazardous) list must be
accompanied by a tracking document giving details of where it is
destined and when.
     Belgium insisted that transporters should carry such
information with them to facilitate spot checks aimed at ensuring
that such waste is actually recovered.  Investigations in the
Flanders region had shown that 30%-40% of all green waste sent for
recovery never arrived at its destination, raising suspicions that
it was simply being dumped, Belgian officials said.
     Under the regulation, exports of green list waste for
recovery would be subject to no special controls unless an
importing country required them.  But ministers, largely at the
instigation of The Netherlands, agreed that the Community should
be able to impose controls on such waste if it proves to have
hazardous traits.  Greenpeace argues that although the list
primarily groups inoffensive materials like glass and paper, the
US has succeeded in persuading its OECD partners to include heavy
metals that could prove harmful in certain circumstances.

NOTES

     1 Based on COM(90) 415 and COM(92) 121 - Proposal and amended
proposal for a Council Regulation on the supervision and control
of shipments of waste within, into, and out of the EC.  For more
information, contact: EC Council of Ministers, Information
Service, 170 rue de la Loi, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2
234 6111.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

OECD Report on Packaging Waste Favors Industry Solutions

     A report on Reduction and Recycling of Packaging Waste,
released this month by the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) and written by James McCarthy of the US
Congressional Research Service, cites different definitions and
different ways of compiling data on waste and recycling as a
barrier to effective waste reduction and management.  The OECD
expects the report to provide a common basis for regulators to
develop and refine national programs to reduce packaging waste.
The report carefully avoids direct criticism of individual OECD
member countries, but seems to favor waste reduction programs that
place the financial and logistical burden of reducing packaging
waste on industry rather than on local governments.
     "There is no standard definition of recycling in use in most
OECD countries and certainly no definition accepted by the OECD as
a whole," the report says.  "With many countries setting goals for
recycling ... and many wishing to make intercountry comparisons,
improved data are now particularly important."  Recycling
statistics vary widely by country; some include industrial waste,
postconsumer waste, or contaminants, while others exclude them.
Countries also use different methods to account for imported and
exported waste.
     The key issues mentioned in the report are:

     * Application of the "polluter pays" principle.  Comparing
the US, New Zealand, and Japan (where "it appears that ... the
government will pay the additional costs of recycling through
local governments") with Europe (where "regulators favor placing
the financial and logistical burden of reducing waste on
industry"), the report concludes that "there are clear advantages
to holding industry responsible" for packaging waste management.
If industry collects the materials, the report notes, there is an
incentive to reduce waste generation through lighter materials or
reusable packaging.  Governments are likely to be less responsive
than industry to market signals and may also run out of funding to
sustain effective recycling programs.
     * Primary opportunities.  Improved recapture rates can be
achieved with all materials, according to the report, but
corrugated containers and glass offer the best opportunities
because they do not pose major logistical problems and they make
up a large amount of packaging waste.
     * Packaging restrictions.  The report points out that banning
specific packaging materials or using economic instruments to
curtail their use might be a controversial option.  "In free
market economies, consumer choice is a fundamental value.
Limitations of consumer choice are not taken lightly....
Questions arise as to the extent to which other considerations
(such as the protection of markets) have masqueraded as a concern
for protection of the environment," the report says.

     The OECD is currently working on a report on packaging and
financial instruments, OECD sources say.  That report could be
finished and approved internally by the end of this year.  One
OECD source, however, termed the subject matter "very sensitive"
(since the report will deal with taxation and other financial
incentives and disincentives to waste reduction) and cautioned
that it might take longer.
     To obtain a copy of Reduction and Recycling of Packaging
Waste (OECD Environment Monograph Number 62), contact the OECD
Environment Directorate, 2 rue Andre Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16,
France.  Fax: +33 1 4524 7876.  In the US, contact the OECD
Publications and Information Center, 2001 L Street NW, Suite 700,
Washington, DC 20036-4910, USA.  Tel: +1 202 785 6323; Fax: +1 202
785 0350.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Eco-Emballage Gains Approval to Handle Waste Recovery

     Eco-Emballage, the system set up by the French private sector
to ensure compliance with France's new packaging decree, has now
obtained the official approval of French Environment Minister
Segolene Royal to contract to consumer goods producers and
importers.  To complete the approval process, it still needs the
go-ahead from the Finance, Agriculture, and Industry Ministries,
and the Secretary for Local Communities.
     The so-called "Lalonde Decree" -- named for former
Environment Minister Brice Lalonde and set to take effect in
January 1993 -- gives companies a choice between setting up their
own retrieval and reduction schemes for packaging waste or joining
a system such as Eco-Emballage.
     Because of the financial and logistical problems associated
with managing a nationwide collection, sorting, and recycling and
energy recovery program, many companies are expected to opt for
participation in Eco-Emballage.  Wine and spirits producers,
however, consider Eco-Emballage's participation fee too expensive
and have decided to establish their own system, Adelphe, to handle
bottle glass recovery and recycling.  Adelphe has independently
applied for government approval and will have "a separate
agreement" with Eco-Emballage to use some, but not all, of the
other system's services, according to Eco-Emballage spokesperson
Nathalie Laine.  Eco-Emballage expects to charge 1 centime (0.2
cents) per bottle during its first year of operation, and to
increase the fee during the following years.
     Eco-Emballage came into existence in August and now groups 17
companies, including Procter & Gamble France, Nestle France, and
Coca Cola Beverages S.A.  In return for its participation fee,
which is based on a company's annual packaging production, the
system guarantees to develop sorting facilities and find recycling
or energy recovery outlets for the packaging waste it handles.
     Eco-Emballage resembles the German packaging waste recovery
system, Duales System Deutschland, but there are some key
differences.  The French system relies on existing local
government collection authorities to collect and separate waste.
It does not currently expect to install packaging return bins at
the point of sale, as the German packaging law requires.  And
unlike the Duales System, Eco-Emballage will be able to incinerate
plastic waste for energy production.  The German system has had
problems trying to find uses for the plastic waste it collects.
     In September, Eco-Emballage signed an agreement with the
Duales System to use the German system's "Green Dot" symbol to
mark the product packaging of participating companies.  This
agreement will allow companies selling into both the French and
German markets to adhere to the collection and recycling
requirements of both countries by participating in one of the
systems.  The two will jointly use the "Green Dot" to avoid
confusion.  Laine says that Eco-Emballage expects similar systems
in other neighboring countries to eventually use the same symbol.
     Though the French decree does not set specific quantitative
targets, they are likely to follow once the proposed EC directive
on packaging waste is approved.  Quantitative targets will then
"fill out the rest of the framework" provided by the EC, says
Claude Reny, a French packaging industry expert.  For the time
being, "no one expects an effective system to come right away,"
says Claude Perrin at the French National Federation of Waste and
the Environment, adding that full implementation "is likely to
take several years."  Eco-Emballage's general target is to recover
75% of all packaging.  It plans to recycle three quarters of that
amount and incinerate the rest.
     With regard to the EC packaging proposal, which the European
Commission issued in July, Great Britain, which is president of
the EC's Council of Ministers until the end of this year, wants
the 12 environment ministers to hold a first debate on it at their
next scheduled meeting on 15-16 December in Brussels.  In the
meantime, it aims to get negotiations on the proposed directive
started between officials from the member states.
     For more information: Nathalie Laine, Regards International
RP, 10 rue Pergolese, 75016 Paris, France.  Tel: +33 1 4417 9000;
Fax: +33 1 4067 9488.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Dutch Eco-Label Misses Deadline

     The national environmental label that the Dutch Environment
Ministry hoped to introduce next month will be several months late
in coming.  Although the independent foundation charged with
preparing it is busy defining criteria for six product groups, the
criteria will not be ready until the end of this year, and
eco-labeled consumer goods will be available in stores by spring
1993 at the earliest.
     Development and administration of the eco-label, initiated
this summer by the Dutch Environment Ministry and the Ministry of
Economic Affairs, is in the hands of Stichting Milieukeur, a
foundation in which producers, retailers, consumers, and
environmental groups as well as the government are represented.
The foundation owns the label, defines the criteria used in
awarding it, and controls its use.  In considering a product
group, Stichting Milieukeur takes into account all phases of a
product's life cycle, from production to the waste stage.  Food
and pharmaceutical products are excluded from the eco-label
system, because in these categories rules for product information
already exist.
     Establishing the criteria for the first six product groups is
taking more time than expected, says H.G.M. Giezeman, general
manager of the foundation.  Stichting Milieukeur is currently
working on criteria for cat litter, shower heads, paints, gypsum
board, light sources, and paper.  According to Giezeman, "we'll be
happy if we set criteria for two or three of these product groups
by the end of the year.  Our plan is now to have the first
products with an eco-label in the stores sometime in the spring of
1993."
     Producers and consumers alike can make a request to set
standards for a certain product group, and the foundation has
already received a few requests to include additional groups.
After the criteria have been defined and published, a producer or
importer can present a product for examination.  The tests are
carried out by recognized certifying institutions, not by the
foundation itself.  If the applicant is awarded the label, he has
to pay Stichting Milieukeur a turnover-based amount for the use of
it.  The label is then valid for two to five years, depending on
the product group.
     The Dutch label will show a hand holding a stamp that prints
"Milieukeur," or "Eco-label."
     The EC has also approved an eco-label scheme, but "the
Environment Ministry and the Ministry for Economic Affairs opted
for a Dutch eco-label in addition to the planned EC label for two
reasons," says Giezeman.  "First, because the EC label is a long
time coming, and second, because it is quite possible that the
European standards will be less severe.  Of course we aim at one
label, but with 12 parties involved, [less stringent] compromises
seem likely."
     For more information: H.G.M. Giezeman, General Manager,
Stichting Milieukeur, Eisenhowerlaan 150, 2517 KP Den Haag, The
Netherlands.  Tel: +31 70 358 6300; Fax: +31 70 350 2517.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

No Green Christmas as EC Eco-Label Also Falls Behind Schedule

     Manufacturers hoping to win the EC's new environmental label
for their "green" products will have to wait until the start of
next year at the earliest.  Governments had hoped to get the first
goods bearing the long-awaited eco-label into stores this fall,
but the plans have fallen several months behind schedule,
officials from the EC and interest groups told EWWE.  "The truth
is that no products with an eco-label can appear in the shops in
1992," said one.
     Getting experts to agree on the cradle-to-grave criteria that
products should meet is proving slow going: to date they have
proposed standards only for washing machines and dishwashers.  But
the scheme has also been held up by teething troubles in the
creation of a 12-strong "consultative forum" of nongovernmental
interest groups that has to give its (purely advisory) opinion
before environmental standards for each group of products can be
fixed.
     Industry, the retail trade, consumer organizations, and
environmental groups have three seats each on the forum.  Trade
unions are angry that industry and retailers have refused to
include labor representatives in their delegations, while
environmental groups have withheld their nominations to the forum
until they receive financial assistance for participating.
Officials from the European Trade Union Confederation and the
European Environmental Bureau, an umbrella grouping of some 140
environment nongovernmental organizations across the EC, told EWWE
that both issues seemed likely to be resolved fairly soon with
help from the European Commission, probably enabling the forum to
start work by the end of November.
     Theoretically the forum could have been launched without the
environmentalists -- the other three groups have already nominated
their members -- but in practice this could have undermined the
eco-label's credibility.  Such credibility is widely seen as
crucial to the success of the scheme as it seeks to bring order to
a rash of claims to "environmental friendliness" by manufacturers
and to help the growing numbers of concerned consumers choose
goods that are genuinely "greener."  Some officials hope that in
the long term it will supplant the national schemes operated by
Germany and getting under way in France and The Netherlands,
leaving Europe with a single eco-label.
     If getting the first eco-labeled goods into the shops by
Christmas seems out of reach, there are hopes that at least the
criteria for the initial product groups can be agreed by then.
Proposed standards for washing machines and dishwashers were
submitted by a British-led working group of EC experts in August.
Once the consultative forum delivers its opinion on the proposal,
the way will be clear for the Commission, aided by a committee of
EC government officials, to fix the standards.  Assuming the forum
starts work soon, "I still see some prospect that the first
criteria can be adopted by the end of the year," one EC official
told EWWE.  "At the moment we're still building the slipway to
launch the ship, but once the year turns we're likely to see
things rolling forward quite quickly."
     That should mean producers and importers of washing machines
and dishwashers will be able to apply for an eco-label early in
1993.  Under the decentralized awards procedure decided by
governments, producers or importers need apply in only one EC
member state for a label valid across the whole Community of 340
million people.  Specially designated agencies in each of the 12
countries -- due to be set up by early November -- will be
responsible for awarding or refusing the label on the basis of the
standards set at EC level.
     After washing machines, paper is likely to be next in line to
get the eco-label logo, a flower made up of 12 stars enclosing a
lop-sided "E."  EC officials said a Danish-led group of experts is
close to proposing criteria for various paper products.  After
that may come detergents, although controversy has erupted over
the criteria: self-styled "environmental detergent makers" have
criticized draft standards produced by a German-led expert group
as far too lax and have set up their own trade association to
ensure they get a say in the rest of the drafting process.
Criteria for other goods are further off.  French-led work on
standards for paints and varnishes is months overdue and an
Italian-chaired group is still debating norms for packaging
materials.  Hairsprays, light bulbs, soil enrichers, and textiles
are further back still in the pipeline.
     For more information: European Commission,
Directorate-General for Information, 200 rue de la Loi, B-1049
Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 235 1111.  (The Commission's local
offices around the world can also help).  Raymond van Ermen,
European Environmental Bureau, 26 rue de la Victoire, B-1060
Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 539 0037.  Joseph Roevens,
Environmental Detergent Manufacturers' Association, Industrieweg
3, B-2390 Antwerp, Belgium.  Tel: +32 3 312 4373.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

BAT Definition Changes as EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion

     Answering a key demand of industry, the European Commission
intends to remold its definition of "best" available techniques
(BAT) for limiting pollution from industrial plants to take
account of the techniques' economic viability and environmental
benefits.  The new definition will be written into the next -- and
possibly final -- draft of the European Commission's ambitious
upcoming directive on integrated pollution prevention and control
(IPPC), a well-placed source in the EC executive told EWWE.  The
17 Commissioners could formalize the proposal in the next few
weeks although it seems more likely that they will hold it over
until early next year (see "Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax" on
page 13).  Once adopted by the Commission, the text will require
the unanimous approval of the Council of EC environment ministers
to get onto the Community's statute book, a process that seldom
takes less than a year.
     The EC's industrial lobby has been irked that the approach to
BAT taken by the Commission's directorate-general for environment
so far has not been based on cost/benefit analysis.  (This is a
complaint leveled at the department's work across the board by an
increasing number inside as well as outside the Commission.)  The
change now envisaged means that the Commission's definition of BAT
will be akin to what British requirements term BATNEEC ("Best
Available Techniques Not Entailing Excessive Costs").  "Just
because the latest technology can reduce emissions by 1% doesn't
mean you will have to use it if it costs three times as much,"
explained the Commission source.  Though the concept of BAT will
still be multifaceted and open to differing interpretations, the
explicit inclusion of costs and benefits as factors to be taken
into account will make it easier for industry to resist being
forced into making frequent and expensive plant upgrades as
BAT-driven standards are ratcheted up.
     The IPPC directive would require new and existing plants in a
wide range of industries, from energy production to large-scale
animal rearing, to obtain an operating permit from the relevant
national or local authorities.  It sets a framework of permit
rules under which emissions to air, water, and soil would be
considered in an "integrated" way, the aim being to prevent or
minimize emissions and the creation of waste in all areas
simultaneously instead of shifting pollution from one medium to
another.  BAT plays a central role in these rules.  The text
stipulates that BAT must be used to limit emissions of a broad
span of substances listed in a technical annex, particularly those
that are carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, toxic, persistent,
or bioaccumulative, or that have a "bearing on global pollution
problems."  BAT would also have to be employed to recover and
recycle waste where such operations made economic and
environmental sense.

Flexibility for Existing Installations

     The permit would have to ensure that environmental quality
objectives -- whether set at EC level or locally -- were met.
Moreover, for each plant the competent authority would be required
to fix limit values for emissions of substances listed in the
technical annex.  The limits would have to be based on BAT and to
be at least as strict as those fixed by the Community (where
common EC standards exist).  There would be a degree of
flexibility for existing installations, however: where they could
meet the relevant environmental quality objectives without using
BAT, their emissions limit could be up to twice as high (though
not for the more harmful substances, and only if the less
stringent standards did not pose an unacceptable risk to
ecosystems or human health).
     Any plan to increase emissions would require approval from
the permit authority.  Furthermore, the authority would have the
right to reconsider a permit at any time in the light of
developments in BAT.  For plants where the relevant equipment has
been depreciated by 90% or more, the authority would be obliged to
toughen up the permitted emission limit values into line with
those attainable by BAT at that time.  Operators unwilling or
unable to upgrade an installation to meet revised standards would
have to close it within two years.
     Under the proposed timetable -- which, if past experience is
any indication, is quite likely to be stretched by ministers, at
least for some EC members -- the directive would enter force on 1
July 1995.  New plants could not start operations after that date
without a permit.  Existing installations would have until 1 July
1999 to apply for a permit and until 1 July 2005 to comply with
its requirements.  In practice this means that many plants
operating today may not be affected by the rules.
     Because BAT is about techniques, not technology, Commission
officials say increasingly stringent BAT-led limit values could be
met in many cases through improved operating practices without
having to make costly new investments.  "The idea is not that
(operators) would have to put in new equipment every five years,
although that's not entirely impossible," said one.

Industry Seeks to Freeze Permit Conditions

     Industry is wary of such assurances, however, and wants
permits to be valid for a clearly defined period.  The Union of
Industrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe (UNICE),
European industry's lobby group, proposes that permit conditions
should not be changed for 10 years "unless to do so would result
in a necessary improvement for the environment as a whole at an
acceptable cost for an average operator in the relevant industrial
sector."  It also rejects the yardstick of a 90% depreciation of
equipment, which in some countries could be achieved within as
little as five years, Commission officials said.
     The framework directive creates potential for an avalanche of
follow-up legislation by stipulating that the EC executive may
propose Community-wide limit values based on BAT.  These would
require approval by only a two-thirds majority in the Council of
Ministers.  The Commission source said, however, that his
institution was likely to hold off on proposing common norms
unless differences in BAT-based standards from country to country
led to distortions in fair competition within EC industry.
     Here, in brief, are other key details of the draft directive:

     * Permit applications must detail measures proposed for
preventing or minimizing emissions and waste, as well as solutions
that were rejected after consideration.
     * Permits should normally be issued within six months of an
application, though the deadline can be waived in certain
circumstances.
     * The public must be given the right to comment on
applications for permits before the competent authority makes a
decision.  The results of monitoring of plants' compliance with
permit requirements must also be available to the public.
     * The Commission will organize information exchanges between
national competent authorities on developments in BAT and
monitoring.
     * A committee of member state representatives chaired by the
Commission would have the power to revise EC emission limit values
in the light of BAT developments.

     Sectors covered by the permit requirement would be energy;
metals production and processing; manufacture of nonmetallic
mineral products; chemicals; waste management; pulp and paper;
dyeing; treatment or finishing of fibers or textiles; production
of dyestuffs, pigments, paints, inks and enamels; production and
tanning of leather; electrolytic or mechanical plating of metals;
printing; application of paints and varnishes; food canning and
processing; treatment or processing of animal waste; and intensive
animal rearing.  In some sectors the requirement would apply only
to installations above a certain size or annual throughput.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

EC Finalizes US-Style Energy Labeling Scheme for Consumers

     Manufacturers and importers of a range of household
appliances sold in the EC will be required to supply prospective
customers with information on their energy consumption from the
beginning of 1994 at the latest.  Under the terms of a directive1
recently finalized by the Council of Ministers, the EC's
legislative body, appliances will have to be labeled for their
energy efficiency and product brochures must include energy
information.
     The scheme is the latest example of the Community's efforts
to harness market forces in the cause of environmental protection.
It aims to resuscitate a moribund energy labeling initiative that
dates from 1979 and was only ever applied to electric ovens.  As
governments look for new ways to limit carbon dioxide emissions
from power generation, the directive also seeks to prevent a
proliferation of different national energy labeling schemes that
would create new barriers to internal trade just as the EC and its
EFTA neighbors prepare to launch the giant European market on 1
January 1993.
     Initially, energy efficiency labels and information will be
required for seven categories of appliances:

     * Refrigerators and freezers;
     * Washing machines and driers;
     * Dishwashers;
     * Ovens;
     * Water heaters and hot-water storage appliances;
     * Lighting sources; and
     * Air conditioners.

     The text says, however, that other types of appliances could
be added to the list later, though only those that use significant
amounts of energy and afford adequate scope for improved
efficiency would be targeted.  The directive will apply whether
appliances covered are for use in the home or in nonhousehold
locations such as restaurants and hotels.
     The energy information must not only be displayed in shops,
but it must also be provided in mail order catalogues and to
customers who hire an appliance or buy one on hire-purchase terms.
Details of information and labels and measuring methods will be
specified in "daughter" directives for each type of appliance to
be issued before the scheme begins.
     For more information, contact: EC Council of Ministers, 170
Rue de la Loi, 1041 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 234 6111.

NOTES

     1 Directive 92/75/EEC.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

New Report Forecasts Lower CO2 Emissions for Great Britain

     In the same week that British Rail announced a substantial
increase in long-distance rail fares, the British government
published figures suggesting road transport will overtake industry
as the principal source of rising emissions by the year 2000.
     In its Energy Paper 59, the British government details its
latest range of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions forecasts and
explains the methodology and models used to arrive at these
figures for the first time.
     The new figures update those given in Energy Paper 58,
published in 1990, and suggest Great Britain will emit around 10%
less CO2 than was feared in the earlier forecasts.  However, they
also indicate existing policies will do far less than the
recession or the closure of the coal industry to combat global
warming.
     On the basis of the figures given in Energy Paper 59, Great
Britain could readily bring its CO2 emissions back to 1990 levels
by the year 2000.  The forecast of Energy Paper 58 for the year
2000 was 174 to 206 million tons of carbon in emissions; Energy
Paper 59 only speaks of 157 to 179 million tons, compared with 160
million tons actually emitted in 1990.  The report suggests that
the earlier estimates have allowed the British government to set
itself achievable -- if not lenient -- emissions reduction
targets.  Achieving them is now made even easier by a recession
and a rapid switch away from coal-fired electricity generation to
power from natural gas.
     The difference between the long-term forecasts is somewhat
smaller; Energy Paper 58 speaks of 188 to 316 million tons, and
Energy Paper 59 stays approximately within that range, with a
forecast of 188 to 285 million tons.  These forecasts reinforce
the arguments that overall emissions will continue to rise if
energy prices continue to fall, and that the proposed EC carbon
tax is unlikely to affect the two most important future sources of
CO2 emissions: transport and domestic households.
     While the British government recently launched a public
campaign aimed at householders to encourage energy saving in the
home, its road policies are the subject of vocal criticism from
environmental pressure groups.
     At the recent review of the 1990 government "white paper" on
the environment, "This Common Inheritance," British Environment
Minister Michael Howard said he would be "looking at road pricing"
to limit environmental damage, but could not promise any firm
proposals in this direction before the end of 1994.
     Greenpeace UK says the British government "has no policy to
tackle the rising environmental cost of road transport....  With
the price of oil around US $20 per barrel, the economic cost of
motoring in the UK is now cheaper than at any time since before
the oil crisis.  But the EC carbon tax won't translate into a
significant price rise at the petrol pump."
     Copies of Energy Paper 59, published by the British
Department of Trade and Industry, can be obtained from the British
government publisher, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.  Tel: +44
71 622 3316.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

EC to Push for Methyl Bromide Controls, May Further Accelerate CFC
Phaseout

     The EC is to join the campaign by industrialized countries,
aimed toward next month's conference of parties to the Montreal
Protocol, to impose controls on production and use of methyl
bromide, a gas widely used for fumigating soil and crops.  The
decision reflects mounting scientific evidence that the chemical
is a hugely powerful destroyer of atmospheric ozone.
     Greece had resisted the move but backed down and fell into
line with the rest of the Community at a meeting of the EC's
Council of environment ministers in Luxembourg on 20 October.  The
ministers agreed that the Community should press other parties to
the protocol to bring methyl bromide into the list of controlled
substances at the Copenhagen conference.  The EC will push for
production and use of the pesticide to be frozen at 1991 levels by
1995, and for more far-reaching limits to be set next year.
     Molecule-for-molecule, methyl bromide is estimated to be
between 30 and 120 times more destructive to ozone than chlorine.
A scientific panel set up by the UN Environment Program has found
that cutting atmospheric methyl bromide concentrations by 10%
would be as beneficial to the ozone layer as speeding up the
phaseout of CFCs by three years.  But many developing countries
are resisting the idea of limiting use of the chemical, arguing
that alternatives for crop fumigation are costlier and less
effective.
     Differences between the 12 EC members meant ministers had to
leave open the question of whether the Community should push at
Copenhagen for an even quicker phaseout of other ozone eaters by
the industrialized world than it has envisaged hitherto.  Last
March the EC agreed to urge a 1 January 1996 deadline for a total
halt to production and use of CFCs, halons, carbon tetrachloride,
and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloroform) except for essential
uses for which no viable substitutes existed.  Now Germany,
Denmark, and The Netherlands, with some support from Belgium,
Britain, and the European Commission, want faster action.
     Ministers decided to come back to the question at a
coordination meeting just before the Copenhagen conference opens
on 18 November.  British Environment Secretary Michael Howard, who
chaired the Council meeting, said governments had agreed that the
March position "is not the last word."  EC Environment
Commissioner Karel Van Miert told reporters the situation was
still evolving and the Community could even agree on a more
ambitious position on methyl bromide before the conference begins.
     After Copenhagen, the Council aims to decide at its next
meeting on 15-16 December whether the EC should go faster in
phasing out listed substances internally than whatever new
timetable emerges from the Montreal Protocol conference.  For more
information, contact: EC Council of Ministers, Information
Service, 170 rue de la Loi, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2
234 6111.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

German Regulations Will Limit Gas Station Emissions Starting 1
January

     Two regulations seeking to limit hydrocarbon emissions at gas
stations in Germany will come into force on 1 January 1993.  One
mandates the introduction of the so-called "balancing" system,
which cuts down on emissions from the filling of gas station
storage tanks.1  In this system, a hose runs between the gasoline
truck and the tank.  Gasoline flows into the tank, while vapors
from the tank that would otherwise escape into the atmosphere are
pumped back into the truck, then taken back to the refinery to be
reprocessed.  This system is already widespread, and Josef Lerach,
an expert at the German Environment Ministry, expects it to be
"fully functional" within five years.  For new gas stations,
compliance with the regulation has been mandatory since 14 October
1992, while others have a grace period.
     The second regulation2 provides for gas stations to install
double-barreled hoses on their pumps to limit emissions from
pumping gasoline to cars.  Gasoline flows out, while vapors are
recovered.  The regulation does not specify the technical details,
leaving room for development.  It seems fairly certain, however,
that German gas stations will not adopt the US-type vapor recovery
system, which petroleum industry representatives have described as
"unwieldy" (and which would also not work well in Europe because
its effectiveness depends on a degree of filler neck
standardization that does not yet exist there).
     New gas stations will have to comply with the regulation as
of January, which makes it particularly important for the former
East German states, where many new stations are opening up.
Existing fuel stations will benefit from grace periods in inverse
proportion to their size to allow time for retrofitting. Large
stations, selling more than five million liters per year, have
three years to comply, medium-sized ones four years and small ones
five years. Existing stations selling less than one million liters
a year are exempted altogether.  Annual checkups are mandatory;
every five years, an independent expert must inspect the system.
     At the EC level, an initiative to combat hydrocarbon
emissions is taking shape at the European Commission in Brussels.
The proposal, which could be ready by the end of this year or
early 1993, would generalize the requirements that Germany and
also The Netherlands (where regulations requiring the installation
of vapor recovery systems were recently introduced) are already
putting into law.
     The plan, which like all legislative proposals would require
approval by the EC's Council of Ministers before it could enter
the statute book, marks the second stage in a Commission drive to
reduce hydrocarbon emissions from the fuel distribution chain.
The EC executive launched the first stage in August by proposing a
directive3 that seeks to cut emissions of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) from storage facilities and distribution tankers
by 90% over 10 years through use of vapor recovery systems and
other measures.
     Behind the strategy lie the twin goals of cutting pollution
by low-level ozone and reducing people's exposure to potentially
harmful localized vapors of benzene and other hydrocarbons.
Hydrocarbons are one of the main precursors of ozone, creating the
irritant gas when they react in sunlight with nitrous oxides from
vehicle exhausts.
     To the chagrin of the oil industry, Brussels has followed the
US's lead in deciding against requiring large carbon canisters to
be fitted on cars.  Vapor recovery systems will be pump-based
instead.  The Commission's current thinking is to make fuel
throughput, rather than location, the key criterion: large service
stations would be the primary targets for installing vapor
recovery equipment.
     A minimum of technical harmonization would also be needed to
lay down essential specifications for pump and car equipment and
vapor recovery efficiencies.  Whether location will also become a
criterion remains to be seen.  An earlier suggestion that stations
in towns of fewer than 50,000 inhabitants should be exempted seems
to have faded.  Germany, with its approach based on the throughput
of fuel stations, opposes such exemptions on the grounds that
emissions pose a health risk wherever they occur, Lerach told
EWWE.  In Germany, the location of the gas station plays a role
only in that stations in more polluted areas (as defined by the
Lander, or federal states) have one year less to comply.
     For more information: Josef Lerach, Bundesministerium fur
Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit, Bernkastelerstrasse 8,
5300 Bonn 2, Germany.  Tel: +49 228 305 2424.

NOTES

     1 Verordnung zur Begrenzung der Kohlenwasserstoffemissionen
beim Umfullen und Lagern von Ottokraftstoffen (20.
Bundesemissionsschutzverordnung).
     2 Verordnung zur Begrenzung der Kohlenwasserstoffemissionen
bei der Betankung von Kraftfahrzeugen (21.
Bundesemissionsschutzverordnung).
     3 COM(92) 277.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Study Finds Biofuel Drawbacks Outweigh Advantages

     A study commissioned by the German Federal Environment Office
(Umweltbundesamt), and due to be released soon, comes to the
conclusion that the environmental drawbacks of substituting
rapeseed oil for diesel fuel outweigh the advantages, and that
money subsidizing rapeseed production could probably be used to
more advantage elsewhere.
     The study tries to take a comprehensive look at the different
ways in which the use of rapeseed oil would affect the
environment.  It takes into account emissions of various
greenhouse gases -- in particular methane and nitrous oxide (N2O),
fertilizer use and runoff in rapeseed production, and the extent
to which rapeseed production (and the subsidies farmers can obtain
for it) interferes with a government program to let fields lie
fallow for a certain period to improve the soil.
     Its overall conclusion is that while shifting to rapeseed oil
does have environmental benefits, they are too small to warrant
such a shift.  Subsidies for rapeseed production, says Jurgen
Landgrebe, the author of the study, could be put to more effective
use elsewhere, for example in research on fuel-efficient
automobiles.  This conclusion is not likely to please the
agricultural lobby, which considers rapeseed production one way of
helping West European farmers at a time when they see agricultural
subsidies in general to be in danger.
     Experts at research institutes and in the German Environment
Ministry are currently commenting on the study, and challenging
some of the assumptions it is based on.  One main concern is that
the N2O level that the study's conclusions are based on may be too
high.  Reliable data on man-made N2O are relatively hard to come
by, compared with other greenhouse gases.
     A second study, by Guido Reinhardt of the Institute for
Energy and Environmental Research (IFEU-Institute) in Heidelberg,
Germany, focuses specifically on energy and carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions.  Reinhardt, whose study is being published separately,
compared the overall amount of energy needed to produce enough
rapeseed oil or diesel to fuel a car for a given distance.  His
conclusion is that, in terms of energy and CO2 emissions alone,
the use of rapeseed oil offers significant environmental benefits,
but that, if one wants to take all factors into account, more work
needs to be done.
     For more information: Jurgen Landgrebe, Umweltbundesamt,
Bismarckplatz 1, 1000 Berlin 33, Germany.  Tel: +49 30 8903 2083.
Guido Reinhardt, IFEU (Institut fur Energie- und Umweltforschung
Heidelberg GmbH), Wilhelm-Blum-Strasse 12-14, 6900 Heidelberg,
Germany.  Tel: +49 6221 47670; Fax: +49 6221 476 719.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

In Britain, Better Pay for Better Water

     Severn Trent Water Ltd., a British utility company, has made
a deal with its employees that may give them a good reason to
comply with EC directives on water quality -- a persistent problem
for Great Britain -- and cut down on customer complaints.  Two
years of negotiations between the company and the local unions led
to an agreement -- the first of its kind in the British water
industry -- under which workers could see pay rises of up to 23%
by 1994, provided that the quality of Severn Trent's water
improves.
     The basic annual pay increase for Severn Trent's maintenance
staff is 4%.  On top of that, workers have been promised "quality
performance" bonuses of 5% in 1993 and 10% in 1994.  The bonuses
are contingent upon the company's achieving its targets for water
and sewage treatment and customer services.
     Severn Trent will not, however, tie the payments to the
results of water quality tests.  Instead, workers will receive the
bonus when the number of customer complaints comes down.
According to a Severn Trent spokesperson, "We want the water
people drink to be of the best quality.  The only way we know we
are achieving this is if we see the number of complaints at a
minimum."
     Severn Trent employs 10,000 people and supplies water and
treats sewage for over 8 million customers in the British
Midlands.
     For more information: Terry Corner, Industrial Relations
Manager, Severn Trent Water Ltd., 2297 Coventry Road, Birmingham
B26 3PU, UK.  Tel: +44 21 722 4380.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax, Ignore Packaging Directive in EC
Presidency

     According to a preliminary list of priorities drawn up by the
Danish Environment Ministry, Denmark intends to push for agreement
on an EC-wide carbon/energy tax but to cold-shoulder proposals for
common rules on packaging during its term as president of the
Community's legislative body, the Council of Ministers, in the
first half of next year.
     Copenhagen is hoping EC environment ministers will approve
the highly controversial carbon/energy tax proposal1 during its
six-month presidency, a goal many will find ambitious given the
technical complexity of the tax and the political raw nerves it
touches in several countries.  Denmark is eager for the Community
to bring in the tax to help meet its CO2 stabilization goal,
without waiting for the US, Japan, and other Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) members to take
similar measures, as the European Commission has proposed.
     Conspicuously absent from the environment ministry's list of
eight priorities is the long-awaited directive on packaging2
proposed by the Commission in July.  Denmark is among the member
states that have criticized the draft proposal, which in its
current form would force Copenhagen to scrap its long-standing ban
on the sale of beverages in cans.
     Denmark is, however, hoping the Council will reach agreement
on introducing a voluntary eco-auditing scheme for industry3 (see
News Briefs, page 16) and to approve tighter regulations on trade
in endangered species.4
     The other issues Denmark plans to work on are:

     * A yet to be published proposal establishing a common regime
for integrated pollution prevention and control (see "BAT
Definition Changes As EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion" on
page 7);
     * A directive seeking to reduce volatile organic compound
(VOC) emissions from fuel storage and distribution by 90% over 10
years5;
     * A directive toughening up emissions standards for
incineration of hazardous waste6;
     * The European Commission's fifth EC environmental action
program,7 and the possible development of further initiatives to
carry out the program; and
     * The discussion and possible establishment of procedures to
integrate the concept of sustainable development into all sectors
of policy.

     The ministry stresses that the list is tentative and may be
changed, possibly in order to accommodate any issues left
unresolved by Great Britain, the Council president until the end
of this year.  However, the ministry considers eight issues the
maximum number it can properly deal with over six months.

NOTES

     1 COM(92) 226.
     2 COM(92) 278.
     3 COM(91) 459.
     4 COM(91) 448.
     5 COM(92) 277.
     6 COM(92) 9.
     7 COM(92) 23.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Europarliament Committee Wants Pollution Phase-Out Calendar

     An influential committee of EC parliamentarians is calling
for the bloc to draw up a timetable for completely phasing out
emissions of pesticides, phosphates, nitrates, and other
pollutants.  The demand forms part of a resolution the European
Parliament's environment committee has drafted in response to the
fifth EC environmental action program proposed by the European
Commission, the Community's executive.  The program, the main
vehicle through which the EC intends to translate the Rio Earth
Summit agreements into practice, will run from next year until
2000, and seeks to make a start on shifting the Community economy
toward environmental sustainability.
     The full 518-member Euroassembly is expected to vote next
month on the resolution, which the Commission is not obliged to
heed.  Spanish Socialist member Carmen Diez de Rivera, who drafted
the resolution, told EWWE the zero emissions calendar was one of
many long-standing demands of the parliament that had so far been
ignored.  Other suggestions in the paper include an EC-wide
referendum on nuclear power, creation of a Community inspectorate
to make sure environment rules are heeded, a standard tourist tax
to fund environmental maintenance of resorts, and payment of part
of the revenues from the proposed EC carbon/energy tax into a fund
to help developing countries and East European states reduce their
carbon dioxide emissions.
     The Community's Council of environment ministers is waiting
for the parliament to approve the resolution before finalizing its
own reaction to the program in December, the last procedural
hurdle to cross before the Commission can start implementing the
plan.  The program forms a comprehensive strategy of measures to
achieve defined environmental quality targets through cooperation
among all levels of society.
     For more information, contact: Carmen Diez de Rivera,
European Parliament, 97/113 rue Belliard, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 2 284 5895.

NOTES

     1 COM(92) 23.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

British Look at the Big Environmental Picture

     The British government has for the first time published a
comprehensive collection of environmental statistics.  UK
Environment covers a broad range of topics including climate, air
quality, waste, soil and land use, water quality, the marine
environment, coastal erosion, wildlife habitats, and populations.
     Not much of the information in the compendium is new, but
much of it has not been compiled into one reference source before.
The publication of the report also fulfills a promise made in the
British government's 1990 "white paper" on the environment, This
Common Inheritance, to make information about the environment
available to everyone.  Consequently, much of the information is
presented in the form of charts and maps for the layperson rather
than detailed tables for the expert.
     The report confirms that some environmental standards have
deteriorated.  Since 1980, sulphur dioxide concentrations have
declined, but carbon monoxide emissions have risen by 30% over the
same period due to an increase in road transport.  For the same
reason, nitrogen dioxide emissions have increased by 35% since
1986.  CO2 emissions have remained reasonably static over the past
10 years, but the relative importance of road transport has also
risen substantially for this pollutant.
     According to the report, accurate figures for the amount
spent on protecting the environment do not exist in Great Britain.
Nevertheless, the compendium estimates that some 14 billion pounds
(US $22.4 billion), or about 2.5% of gross domestic product, was
invested in environmental protection during 1991.  [Note: As used
in EWWE, the word billion equals thousand million or
1,000,000,000.]
     According to government estimates, the largest share of this,
6.7 billion pounds (US $10.7 billion), went toward water
purification and river pollution cleanup.  British water suppliers
are currently implementing a program of changes required by EC
directives governing water quality (see "In Britain, Better Pay
for Better Water" on page 13).
     Three billion British pounds (US $4.8 billion) was spent to
reduce pollution arising from all types of waste material.
Industry spent a further 2.4 billion pounds (US $3.8 billion) to
reduce air emissions, and just under 2 billion pounds (US $3.2
billion) went toward land cleanup and noise reduction.
     Overall, around 60% of identifiable expenditure, or 8.8
billion pounds (US $14 billion), was related to pollution
abatement.  Natural resource management took 24% and amenity
improvement 8%.  Less than 10% in total was spent on conservation,
research, development, education, and training.
     Copies of UK Environment, published by the British Department
of the Environment, can be obtained from the British government
publisher, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.  Tel: +44 71 622 3316.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Environment Budget Up in Spain, Down in Italy

     The Spanish Ministry for Public Works and Transport (which is
also in charge of environmental affairs) projects a 30% increase
(over 1992) in Spain's environment budget for next year.  For
1993, Vicente Albero, general secretary for water and the
environment, will have a total amount of 160 billion pesetas (US
$1.5 billion) to spend.  Water plays a major role in the
allocation of those funds; substantial amounts will go toward
coastal improvements, the improvement of wastewater systems, and a
new water management and protection plan.
     If approved, this plan would create protected areas for all
rivers, and would also set water prices to reflect the cost of
treating wastewater.  According to a recently released government
report, more than 100 Spanish rivers are -- at least in part --
extremely polluted, groundwater is overexploited, and 40% of all
Spanish reservoirs are entropied.  Under the proposed water price
policy, however, consumers in the driest and least-developed
regions of Spain (which use the largest amounts of water) would
have to pay the most, a fact that has already provoked negative
responses from consumers as well as some parliamentarians.
     At the same time, the Department of Nature Conservation
(Instituto Conservacion de la Naturaleza) within the Ministry of
Agriculture plans to invest more than 5 billion pesetas (US $48
million) in the maintenance of Spain's nine national parks.  The
Ministry of Industry and Tourism, for its part, expects to invest
a total of 48 billion pesetas (US $457 million) in a program that
provides, among other things, for grants to local administrations
and tourist industry companies that want to improve their
environmental performance.  Tourism is a key industry in Spain,
and surveys have shown that environmental quality is important to
visitors from abroad.
     In Italy, meanwhile, the environment budget seems set to go
down by as much as three quarters, as the country is experiencing
major economic and institutional problems.  This, at least, is the
cabinet proposal that the Italian Parliament is currently
discussing.  If the budget is approved in its present form, funds
for energy efficiency and renewable energy programs under
Environment Laws 9 and 10 will be trimmed substantially; funds
earmarked for a CFC phaseout and the stabilization of greenhouse
gases would also suffer.  In the area of public transportation,
the development of high-speed trains, which connect major cities,
would continue to be funded, while funds for local public
transportation are expected to go down.  At the same time, no cuts
have been proposed in the area of road building and road
transport.
     Substantial budget cuts will not help Italy's new environment
minister, Carlo Ripa di Meana, who has to accomplish three major
tasks: reorganize the Ministry of the Environment, badly
understaffed given its tasks and compared with other ministries;
improve Italy's system of enforcement of environmental
regulations;  and fight for funds.  In the latter area, at least,
there may be two partial solutions.  For one thing, Ripa di Meana
has managed to retrieve funds that his predecessor, Giorgio
Ruffolo, did not spend; normally, such funds would go back to the
Treasury.  The 30% left over from last year's budget will now be
available in addition to this year's budget.  Ripa di Meana is
also considering the introduction of "green" taxes and charges
(for example on land use), and the setting of fees for water use
and waste management to reflect their actual cost.  Revenue from
these sources may also help offset budget losses.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

Norway Proposes Green Troops for Environmental Cleanup

     The Norwegian government has announced a preliminary plan to
establish an elite force of "green troops" to fight national and
international environmental disasters.  The troops would be drawn
from the regular Norwegian army and would be trained to deal with
oil spills, natural disasters, and nuclear disasters, and to lead
post-war cleanup efforts.
     Gabriel Lund, secretary of the joint defense-environment
ministerial working group that proposed the new program, told
EWWE's sister publication, the Global Environmental Change Report
(GECR), that the government will hold a hearing to discuss the
plan on 16 November 1992 and will publish its decision in
December.  The plan must then be approved by Parliament.
     Lund told GECR that troops would be deployed in two major
units: an emergency unit of 500 to 600 soldiers, prepared to
respond to any disaster within 48 hours, and a follow-up force of
1,100 that would be involved in longer-term cleanup efforts.  Lund
said that international requests for green troop assistance would
be handled through diplomatic channels and cleared with the UN.
     For more information, contact the Norwegian Defense Ministry
Information Office.  Tel: +47 2 402 300 or +47 2 402 310.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

NEWS BRIEFS:

     Former EC Commissioner for the Environment Carlo Ripa di
Meana is threatening to set up a European environment agency with
non-EC countries unless the bloc's leaders agree at their December
summit in Edinburgh on where to site the currently homeless EC
Environment Agency.  The colorful Ripa, who now heads Italy's
environment ministry, exploded when his French and Spanish
counterparts blocked attempts to get agreement on a location for
the agency at the EC environment ministers' recent meeting in
Luxembourg.  He also indicated that Italy and France would soon
come forward with new initiatives for reducing carbon dioxide
emissions...  Officials say prospects have improved that EC
environment ministers will agree in December to create a voluntary
scheme to encourage eco-auditing by industry after Germany did not
renew threats to block the initiative...  Belgium's
French-speaking Green party has put forward detailed proposals for
eco-taxes on packaging, throw-away razors, pesticides, and
non-recycled paper, but an agreement in principle, reached on the
issue by the country's major parties this summer, now seems in
doubt...



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet
October 23, 1992

HOTLINE:

     Contact the EWWE Hotline for more information on any news
item covered in this issue.  Tel: +1 617 641 5128 (Boston); +32 2
230 8978 (Brussels).  Fax: +1 617 648 8707 (Boston); +32 2 230
8558 (Brussels).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>