
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B01-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B037-301</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt42.html 205.156.212.5 19970122014503 text/html 70482
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:43:01 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:49 GMT
Content-length: 70295
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/gt42.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet <BR>
January 01, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI> Transcript of Presidential Radio Address to the Nation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1211 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI> Transcript of Dec. 29 White House Press Briefing By Mike McCurry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3685 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI> Transcript of Second Dec. 29 White House Press Briefing By Mike&nbsp;McCurry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1669 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI> Transcript of Presidential Remarks in Photo Opportunity with&nbsp;Congressional Leaders</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(573 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI> Transcript of Remarks by President Clinton in Sunday Photo&nbsp;Opportunity With Congressional Leaders</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(567 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI> Transcript of White House Press Briefing by Mike McCurry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4282 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

 Transcript of Presidential Radio Address to the Nation

 To: National Desk
 Contact: White House Press Office, 202-456-2100

   WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 /U.S. Newswire/ -- Following is a transcript
of President Clinton's weekly radio address to the nation:

                          The Oval Office

   10:06 A.M. EST


   THE PRESIDENT: Good morning.  Tomorrow is New Year's Eve, a time
for celebration, friendship and hope.  Nineteen ninety-five has been
a good year for our country, and the coming year can be even better.

   In Washington, we all know this has been a year of serious
differences and profound debate over our nation's future direction.
But if we remain true to our values, we will prove once again that in
America we can have serious differences without leaving deep
divisions.  We know our nation is strongest when we're true to our
fundamental values, giving every American the opportunity to make the
most of their lives, remembering the duty we owe to our parents and
our children, preserving our families and our communities, keeping
America the strongest force of peace and freedom in the world.

   In our effort to advance these values, 1995 has been a time of
real progress and concrete achievement.  The key to our strength is
economic opportunity for every American.  In 1995, the ingenuity and
hard work of our people has kept the economy growing, steady and
strong.  In the past 12 months the economy created 1.75 million new
private sector jobs.  In every month the unemployment rate has been
below six percent.  All told, since 1993, we Americans have created
nearly eight million new jobs.  The stock market has broken every
record.  The deficit dropped for the third year in a row, for the
first time since Mr. Truman was President.  Long-term interest rates
continue to fall, bringing lower mortgage payments for working
families and more affordable credit for small businesses and
consumers.

   A growing economy and lower interest rates are why a million new
Americans became homeowners for the very first time in 1995.  There
were more new businesses incorporated this year than in any previous
year.  And here in Washington, in spite of all of our differences, we
made some real progress on an important issue -- political reform.
At long last, Congress passed a law which applies to themselves the
same laws they oppose in the private sector.  And at long last, after
three years of effort, the Congress passed lobby reform legislation,
banning gifts to congressmen and requiring extensive disclosure about
the activities of lobbyists.

   Most important, our communities all over America are coming
together around our values again.  In city after city, in state after
state, violent crime is down; the welfare and food stamp rolls are
down; the poverty rate is down; even the divorce rate is down.  And
for two years in a row now, the teen pregnancy rate has dropped.

   It hasn't always been an easy year for America.  There have been
moments that tested our national community.  In the wake of the
terrible bombing in Oklahoma City, which took the lives of 169
people, our nation reached out and recognized the bonds that hold us
together.  Out of the ashes of that tragedy a new sense of national
spirit took hold.  We affirmed once again that all Americans are in
it together.  We recognized once again that we can't love our
country and hate our government.

   And a strong America has been the world's strongest force for
freedom, peace and democracy in 1995.  Our brave men and women today
are in the snows of Bosnia, helping to uphold the peace agreement to
end the worst bloodshed in Europe since World War II.  And from the
cobblestone streets of Northern Ireland to the sands of the Middle
East, a strong America has helped to bring peace to regions long torn
by strife.

   Yes, 1995 has been a good year for America.  Our people have
accomplished a lot.  And it goes without saying, we still have one
major task to finish to top off the accomplishment of this year.  We
have to finish the job of balancing the budget and to do it in the
right way.

   As you know, for the last two weeks the Congress has refused to
pass legislation that would keep the federal government open to serve
the American people.  This has never happened before for this length
of time in the whole history of the republic.  And it's been very
hard on three-quarter of a million public servants who have to pay
rent and utilities and mortgage payments and buy food.  And they're
losing pay at holiday time.  And it's also cut off services for
millions of Americans who depend upon them.

   This Tuesday, if the government is not open, clean-up efforts
will be stopped cold at 32 toxic waste sites in neighborhoods around
our country.  Next week, federal funds for unemployment insurance
will begin to run out, forcing states to scramble to find ways to
keep helping workers who have lost their jobs.  And the Meals On
Wheels program to our senior citizens won't go forward.  Every day,
nine of 10 work place safety complaints go unanswered.  And every day
2,500 people can't get guaranteed home mortgages.  Every day,
thousands of young people looking for college loans can't apply for
them.  If ever we needed a reminder that our government is not our
enemy, this is it.

   Let me be clear: I am committed to balancing the budget.  Our
administration already has cut the deficit nearly in half, and I am
determined to finish the job.  For weeks I've been working in good
faith with Republicans and Democrats in Congress to find common
ground, to balance the budget in a way that reflects our values.
Yesterday I met well into the evening with Speaker Gingrich and
Majority Leader Dole.  And in just a few moments I will sit down with
them again, along with the Democratic congressional leaders.

   We are making real progress.  We know that our work is not done.
We know we have much to do, so that the American Dream will remain
alive for every citizen, and so that we can come together as a
people, and so that America can remain the strongest force for peace
the world has ever seen.

   So on this New Year's, let's resolve that we will balance the
budget, but that we'll do it in a way that will keep our country
growing and that will be true to our basic values.  That is, we'll
balance the budget without gutting Medicare and Medicaid, without
deeply cutting education or the environment, without raising taxes on
working families.  Let's resolve to reopen the government and do it
now.  And let's resolve to act without rancor or partisan bitterness
in the spirit of the new year and in the interests of the American
people.

   Nineteen ninety-five has been a year when we've been true to the
best of America.  If we'll just work hard and work together and
follow our values, 1996 can be even better.  Hillary and I want to
wish you and your families a happy and health New Year.  Thank you
for listening.

             END 10:11 A.M. EST

 -0-
 /U.S. Newswire  202-347-2770/



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

 Transcript of Dec. 29 White House Press Briefing By Mike McCurry

 To: National Desk
 Contact: White House Press Office, 202-456-2100

   WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 /U.S. Newswire/ -- Following is a transcript
of a press briefing held Dec. 29 by White House Press Secretary Mike
McCurry:

                          The Briefing Room


  6:10 P.M. EST


     MR. MCCURRY: Hi.  I wanted to appear briefly with my colleagues
here and give you a very short update based on the guidance that we
just got from the budget principals, who obviously continue their
hard work in the Cabinet Room, sleeves rolled up, sheets of paper
flying back and forth, and coffee being produced in copious
quantities.  I'm doing my color since I don't have much substance to
report.

     Q How many --

     Q Was it being consumed in copious quantities?

     MR. MCCURRY: The President, the Majority Leader, the Speaker,
the minority leaders and the others participating agreed that they
would work about another hour tonight.  They are working through a
series of difficult budget issues, but they clearly are very serious
about addressing those issues that are on the table.  They expect to
work about another hour tonight, take a break.

     The budget advisors group, which consists of Mr. Panetta,
Chairman Domenici, Chairman Kasich, and the two ranking members --
Mr. Sabo and Mr. Exon -- will reconvene on the Hill at approximately
8:00 p.m. or roughly a half hour after they conclude here.  They will
continue to do the type of work that they did today, working through
some of the issues that they're attempting to analyze for the benefit
of the principals.  And then, according to the President and the
others, they expect to reconvene tomorrow as early as possible based
on the advice they get from the budget advisors who will meet later
this evening.  We don't have a time or --

     Q The principals?

     MR. MCCURRY: The principals will meet again tomorrow.  We don't
have a time set, although the preference is to begin as early in the
morning as they can based on however late the advisors group works
tonight.

     That's about all I am afraid I can report at this point.  By
agreement, we're not going to attempt to summarize any of the
substance.  As one participant said, we obviously wouldn't be
continuing to meet if we thought it was going poorly.  But other than
that, I don't want to characterize any --

     Q -- no chance that the House or Senate would take up the
proposals that they mentioned in --

     MR. MCCURRY: I really don't want to speak to that.  I think it
would be more appropriate for you to direct that to either the
Speaker's or the Majority Leader's -- but if you want --

     Q Are there any plans for the --

     MR. MCCURRY: I think you know the President's view.  The
President's view is that it would be good to get the federal
government up and running, federal workers back at their desk.

     Q But what about back pay?

     Q But wait a minute, wait a minute.  Can we get them to answer
the question of whether the House or Senate will take up the issue
tonight of --

     MR. BLANKLEY: It has to be taken up in the Senate first --

     Q Could you go to the mike?

     MR. BLANKLEY: Sure.  I like that.  (Laughter.)

     MR. MCCURRY: Don't get used to it.  (Laughter.)

     MR. BLANKLEY: It would have to be taken up in the Senate first,
and it's not clear whether the Senate Democrats would be supportive.
So we have to be checking on that before we can move it --

     Q Why wouldn't they?

     Q They voted for it last time.

     Q Why wouldn't they?

     Q Is this because of the expedited --

     MR. BLANKLEY: Well, it's not clear.  That may be an issue.  So
we're still checking.

     Q What about the House?

     MR. BLANKLEY: It will have to start in the Senate, so we can't
get out of the Senate.

     Q But as of now, it is still the plan of the leadership to try
to push it through both chambers --

     Q Tonight?

     MR. BLANKLEY: We're trying to, but as I said, it would have to
start with the Senate.  You need unanimous support on both sides of
the aisle there.

     Q The Senate is still --

     Q What is it that you would try --

     Q I don't get this --

     MR. MCCURRY: Would you guys calm down?  One of you at a time
will ask a question.

     Q What are you trying to put through tonight in the Senate?

     MR. BLANKLEY: What the Speaker mentioned earlier at the photo
op, which is to have basically the provision that passed in the
Senate last week, which is attached to the Middle East act, that
would bring -- designate all government employees essential and would
not pay them, but would guarantee their pay once there is a
government up and running again, and would also have an expedited
procedure rule for the Senate so that we could get whatever agreement
we get out of here moved to the Senate with alacrity.  And there's
some speculation that the Senate Democrats may not want to consent to
unanimity on that point.

     Q Do you know what the state of play in the Senate is?

     MR. HINE: The Senate is still in session, prepared to deal with
it, and Senator Dole may have more to say on the floor once we're
done here.

     Q Logistically, Mike, what would you anticipate that will happen
at the end of the principals meeting?  Would you come out and say
something or will they return to the Hill, have --

     Q Yes, what happens in an hour?

     MR. MCCURRY: We did not cover that point.  We will either
provide another brief readout which will not be much different from
this readout, or alternatively, have some type of joint statement as
we did at the conclusion of the meeting last Friday.

     Q You wouldn't expect an appearance by the principals here?

     MR. MCCURRY: I don't expect an appearance by them here, and I'm
not aware of any plans by the Republican leaders or the Democratic
leaders to attempt to do any type of readout tonight on meetings or
make any type of comment.  There obviously -- this is a work in
progress, and the work will continue tomorrow.

     MR. HALLEY: On the continuing resolution -- I work for Senator
Daschle -- when this bill comes up, the Democrats will object because
of the fast track procedures that are being attached to it that would
affect consideration of any budget bill.  But at the same time, we
will offer a clean continuing resolution to fully open the
government, as we've been trying to do for days.  So the one that is
being considered by the Republicans, we will object to that because
of the expedited procedures that have been attached to it.  But we
will offer a clean continuing --

     Q Does that mean you won't give unanimous consent tonight to
that?

     MR. HALLEY: That's correct.

     Q What's wrong with the expedited procedure?

     MR. HALLEY: It violates basically most of the procedures of the
Senate in terms of amendments and debate, et cetera.

     Q But hold on for a second.  Didn't you vote for something just
like this before Christmas --

     MR. HALLEY: No, that was the Middle East part of it.  There's
three parts to this thing that's being put --

     Q No, we're talking about just calling all the workers
essential.  Do you have an objection to that?

     Q That passed last Friday evening.

     MR. HALLEY: No.  There are three pieces to the thing that are
being put together by the Republicans.  One is deeming workers to be
essential, which we agree with that.  Two is the Middle East
initiative, which we agree with that.  What we will be objecting to
is the legislating of expedited procedures to -- that would harm our
ability to both amend and debate the budget bill.  And so we will
object to that vehicle, but then we will offer a clean continuing
resolution to open the government.

     Q Well, when you mean a clean continuing resolution do you mean
to --

     Q -- what the prospects for that?

     Q Michael, what's the White House position on this legislation
with the three parts?  Do you support the Senate Democrats or the
House --

     MR. MCCURRY: The President indicated that, earlier today, he
wants federal workers back at their desks and working.  He wants the
services of the government available to the American people.  And we
understand that there will have to be discussions on Capitol Hill to
make that happen quickly.  We hope that that will happen as quickly
as possible.

     Q In other words, he sides with the Republicans, not the
Democrats on this?

     MR. MCCURRY: No.  In other words, I very artfully ducked the
question.  (Laughter.)

     MR. BLANKLEY: Let me just point out that the provision that
apparently the Senate Democrats are going to block is the same
expedited procedure that you have on a reconciliation bill.  And,
obviously, their concern would be that they wouldn't -- it would get
an agreement here that certain Democratic senators might not be able
to destroy the agreement by a filibuster on the floor after the
members here have worked it out.  So there's -- that's a procedural
question.

     Q Tony, the Speaker is still against a clean CR, is that not
correct?

     MR. MCCURRY: Listen, I want John to do -- and this is -- our
purpose here is -- my colleagues are here to give you an update on
the meeting that's going on here.  I think if they want to talk about
the procedural issues, which are important, and the rights of
individual senators to raise points, which the White House
acknowledges is a very important part of the procedure on Capitol
Hill, they should really brief you up on Capitol Hill about those
procedures.

     Q But he has the right of rebuttal.

     MR. HALLEY: Yes, thank you.  But to restate, the Democrats, as
we've tried to do for weeks, are fully supportive of opening the
government and fully supportive of that -- the piece of this, which
is to deem workers as essential.  And so that's not the issue.

     The reason we'd be objecting to this procedural notion is,
again, because it would deny the ability to amend and debate fully.
And as we did in 1990, there is a way to reestablish a reconciliation
bill.  As you may recall, in 1990 after the agreement was reached, we
did another budget resolution that would then trigger a
reconciliation bill under the full procedures of reconciliation.  And
so that option is open to us.  And we felt that, therefore, we did
not need to run around completely the entire budget process with
something that we'd do this evening.

     MR. MCCURRY: Okay, anything more on the meeting going on now
before we exit?

     Q Yes, Mike.  Does the President intend or feel he will need to
before Senator Daschle and Senator Exon leave the White House
tonight, make the point to them that apparently if everything is so
close to reopening the government, they should set aside -- does he
intend to have a separate thing with them, saying set aside your
objection to this; I really want you to do it?

     MR. MCCURRY: No, he has such good working relations with them
that I don't think he feels that there's a need to cover that point.

     Q There were briefings on the Hill earlier about the areas that
were covered at the budget advisory report, or whatever it's called.
Can you say whether the leaders here essentially worked within that
framework?  Did they go in it or out of it or --

     MR. MCCURRY: Based on what I know -- I don't have a complete
readout of their entire discussions tonight.  They did review some of
those issues that the advisers dealt with today.  They also moved
into what are referred to in their argot now as the tier three
issues, which are more difficult issues that are -- where the
differences are more fundamental between the sides.

     Q Which one?  Medicaid --

     MR. MCCURRY: I'm just not -- we're not authorized to get into
the substance of their dialogue.

     Q Mike, can you explain what the benefit would be of this piece
of legislation that's having its difficulties this evening?  It
sounds as though what you're talking about doing is essentially
bringing 260,000 people back who then will join a bunch of other
people who aren't getting paychecks.  They'll all be getting their
paychecks, there still will be money for their designated agencies to
--

     MR. MCCURRY: We would prefer, obviously, any type of continuing
resolution that would reopen the government.  That's been the
President's view all along.  We believe the government should be
open.  We have believed for a long time there should be a clean CR
that would do so.  But we're dealing, and we have to be realistic
about the environment we're dealing with.  And these gentlemen can
speak better than I can on the attitudes on the Hill.

     On the other hand, the effective legislation that would except
federal employees who are currently furloughed from the furlough
would be to incur a legal obligation to pay them.  That legal
obligation would be very useful to federal workers that need any type
of short-term loan to make mortgage payments or who can produce that
as evidence to a creditor that they got the ability to pay bills that
are due.  I think that would be at least some comfort to federal
workers.  It would be far better for them to get a paycheck, far
better for them to go back to work, far better for them to provide
services to the American people.  That at least it's something, and
something is better than nothing.

     Q So you don't mind if they try to amend -- they block the
ability to amend the --

     MR. MCCURRY: As I just heard, that -- I could tell from their
discussion, that's way over my head.  I think there is some work,
clearly, that Congress will have to do on this.  The President's view
he stated very clearly earlier; he would like to see those federal
workers back to work as quickly as possible.

     Q Any guidance beyond talks tomorrow?

     MR. MCCURRY: No, I don't have anything for the days beyond that
or what time they might finish tomorrow, or would they finish in time
for various people to make travel plans.  I don't have any guidance
on that.

     Q How are you going to let us know, Mike, if they're going to
meet and what time in the morning?  All-call or --

     MR. MCCURRY: We will do an all-call tomorrow and also put in on
the recording as soon as we know what the time is.  But I would check
in here.  I think the President still plans to do the radio address
live tomorrow morning at 10:00 a.m., so you will -- at least at that
point --

     Q Live from the talks?

     Q You wouldn't expect it before the radio address, would you,
Mike?

     MR. MCCURRY: I'm sorry, let me amend that.  Just in case they
want to start earlier, if they end up deciding they want to start
earlier, there's some chance that we might have to pretape the radio
address earlier in the morning.  So check here tomorrow morning.

     Q What is it going to be on?

     Q If Senator Dole give the rebuttal, will he do that live --

     Q Pass the mike around the table.

     Q Is he going to do that from here?

     MR. HINE: I think we're operating under the same conditions that
Mike on that.  It's entirely possible --

     Q Mike, just to clarify -- you're not suggesting that this
measure that's being conducted this evening would restore the
government to full functioning.

     MR. MCCURRY: No, it would -- our understanding is it would allow
federal workers to return to their work, it would allow them to do
certain accepted activity that would be authorized by their
individual agencies.  That would be some progress.  It would allow in
some cases, my understanding is, for applications to be processed.
For example, one example is it's conceivable to me under this
legislation, unless my colleagues disagree, that they might be able
to begin issuing passports again for people who wish to travel, just
as one example.

     Now, that's an activity that doesn't incur any additional
obligation to spend money on the part of the government, but it
allows some measure of government services to be restored to the
American people.  And that would be better than nothing, as I said
earlier.

     Q Can you open the national parks under this?

     MR. MCCURRY: I don't know the answer to that.  I don't know the
answer.

     Q Sometime this evening could you get us a reaction to -- the
President's reaction to the Senate Democrats stopping that process
that you just outlined?

     MR. MCCURRY: I think I commented on that already.  They didn't
say they were stopping it --

     MR. HALLEY: We're not.  We're --

     MR. MCCURRY: They've got a plan to reopen the government by a
clean continuing resolution, which is something, as you know, the
President is strongly supportive of.

     Q What's the chance of getting a clean CR?

     Q Do you have any idea what the mood is in the room?

     MR. MCCURRY: Unless my colleagues would dispute this
characterization, they clearly are very serious in purpose.  As I
said, many of them have their coats off, they've got their sleeves
rolled up, they've got pens out and --

     Q Why didn't they do that before?

     MR. MCCURRY: -- they're working very seriously on the relevant
issues.

     Q Is the Senate essentially in town?

     MR. HINE: Yes, we're in session.  We're in recess subject to the
call of the chair.

     Q So if there had to be a roll call -- you don't expect a
roll-call vote tomorrow, for example?  If the majority found it
necessary to have a roll-call vote to tamp down the Democrats
thinking --

     MR. HINE: I'm not certain that that's how events are going to
unfold.

     Q Mike, why couldn't all of this have been done Tuesday or
Wednesday?

     MR. MCCURRY: Tuesday or Wednesday -- you mean earlier in this
week?  The process that was defined by the principals last Friday, a
week ago today, called for the staff-level discussions and analysis
to begin on Tuesday and Wednesday, which occurred.  It clearly was
very useful for that to happen because it's been the premise for a
lot of the work that occurred today, and that the principals are
doing now.

     There was an alternative procedure that had been discussed a
while back.  That was not available to the President or the
principals for reasons everyone in this room knows.  This is the
process that was available.  This is the process that at the moment
appears to be working.

     Q A question for John, just to clear up the Senate action.  Does
the Senate action -- say, it happened tonight or tomorrow -- does
that have to be by unanimous consent, or can there be a vote on it,
which presumably could override the Democrats' objection?  And then
could the Democrats, say, filibuster to prevent a vote?

     MR. HALLEY: No -- I mean, our intent is to -- I mean, you would
need consent at this time of day.  Again, our intent -- we've tried
I'd say 10 times in the last two weeks to pass a continuing
resolution that would open the government, and that's our position.

     Q A continuing resolution, not just this deeming measure?

     MR. HALLEY: Right.

     Q You're talking about a real, live CR?

     MR. HALLEY: Right, a complete opening.  A real, live
put-people-back-to-work and pay them, and open the agencies.

     MR. MCCURRY: This meeting will be over before the briefing ends
if we don't move on.

     Q John, can you spell your last name?

     MR. HALLEY: H-a-l-l-e-y.

     Q Any idea when you might be able to give us some guidance about
Hilton Head?

     MR. MCCURRY: It won't be tonight, and it will be late in the day
tomorrow.  I just don't have any way to give you any guidance.

     Q Can you say how early could these talks -- 7:00 a.m.-8:00 a.m.
tomorrow morning?

     MR. MCCURRY: I believe that will depend entirely on how late Mr.
Panetta, the chairman and the congressional group works this evening.
I think their intent is to work rather late and that might make the
start not at the crack of dawn, but somewhat around mid-morning
tomorrow.

     Q At 8:00 a.m., 9:00 a.m.?

     MR. MCCURRY: And then I would suspect that the President and the
other principals would commence shortly after that.  So I don't -- my
guess is around mid-morning, but we'll wait and see and give you
guidance as we've got it.

     Q Tomorrow the principals meeting would be back here, not at the
Capitol?

     MR. MCCURRY: It sounded to me like the intent is to meet here.

     THE PRESS: Thank you.

             END 6:40 P.M. EST

 -0-
 /U.S. Newswire  202-347-2770/



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

 Transcript of Second Dec. 29 White House Press Briefing By Mike
McCurry

 To: National Desk
 Contact: White House Press Office, 202-456-2100

   WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 /U.S. Newswire/ -- Following is a transcript
of a second press briefing held Dec. 29 by White House Press
Secretary Mike McCurry:


                          The Briefing Room


  7:25 P.M. EST

     MR. MCCURRY: Second verse, same as the first.  Bye.  (Laughter.)

     Q Do you know now how the President feels about the Democratic
move in the Senate?

     MR. MCCURRY: The President believes that we'll able to work --
given the cooperation shown today, we can work something out that
will allow federal workers to resume their diligent service to the
American people.

     Q Tonight?

     Q What's that mean?

     MR. MCCURRY: It will be up to senators and leaders on the Hill
to resolve those issues, but we hope they will.

     Q Well, does he agree that the Democrats have a point?

     MR. MCCURRY: He understands the concerns the senators have to
make sure they've got the right protected to debate very important
budget matters and the very few hours of hearings and debate devoted
to aspects of the Republican budget.  And he well understands why
people are protecting the right to have further debate.  At the same
time, he will encourage all members of Congress from both parties to
act quickly to allow federal workers to return to their posts.

     Q Mike, when you say work something out, does the President --
is the President given to understand that there will be something
done today or tomorrow to work something out to return furloughed
federal employees back to the job -- to their jobs?

     MR. MCCURRY: The sense the President got is that congressional
leaders on both sides of the aisle are working urgently to solve the
matter.

     Q -- conciliatory to me.

     MR. MCCURRY: -- let me tell you what I know about tonight.
They're taking a break.  Mr. Panetta and his group from the White
House will return to Capitol Hill, begin meeting with the so-called
budget advisers group, approximately 8:00 p.m.  It's my understanding
they do not plan any further readouts this evening.  They are
continuing to work through issues that they then prepare for
discussion by the budget advisers.  I anticipate that staffs are
going to be working throughout the evening and into the morning to
prepare discussion documents that will be used by the principals
tomorrow.  They've agreed to reconvene here at the White House at
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.  That's the principals group.

     Q How does that affect the radio address?  Still be done live?

     MR. MCCURRY: The radio address is going to be done taped just to
protect -- make sure we don't have any -- because the President may
be involved in pre-briefs prior to the meeting.

     Q What's the subject?

     MR. MCCURRY: It will be about the budget.

     Q When will that be available, Mike?

     MR. MCCURRY: He's taping it tomorrow morning, and we expect it
will be available just shortly before air time.

     Q Mike, the Republicans all left tonight without comment.  Did
the meeting end in an atmosphere of --

     MR. MCCURRY: It ended very amicably.  And the President, the
Speaker, the Majority Leader and the Democratic leaders agreed that
the readout that you heard earlier this evening would suffice for the
work that they did between roughly 6:00 p.m.  and 7:20 p.m.

     Q -- resolution tomorrow, Mike?  What does it look like?

     MR. MCCURRY: Say again.

     Q For the prospects of a resolution tomorrow.

     MR. MCCURRY: A resolution -- you mean a resolution of issues or
--

     Q Yes.

     MR. MCCURRY: They will make progress tomorrow, but I don't --
the work they're doing, it would be very hard at this point to
predict that they would arrive at any final agreements tomorrow.
They've got a lot of work to do tomorrow.

     Q Do you this going, then, into Sunday?

     MR. MCCURRY: Conceivably, yes.  But that's not been decided yet.

     Q Do you have a reaction from the President to the Daschle
blocking this plan that --

     MR. MCCURRY: Yes, we talked about that earlier.

     Q Is there a meeting with Panetta and the budget advisers
tomorrow morning before the principals meeting?  There was some talk
about a 9:00 a.m. meeting on the Hill before the principals came down
here.  Was there any talk about that?

     MR. MCCURRY: They may -- the budget advisers group may reconvene
tomorrow morning, but they -- that would be prior to the 10:30 a.m.
meeting --

     Q Why did the President cut off a reporter from asking Gingrich
whether he had caved?

     MR. MCCURRY: The President -- (inaudible) -- felt that there had
been any indication by the Speaker that he had, quote, unquote, caved
-- (inaudible) -- the President also thought he might give a better
answer than the Speaker might.  (Laughter.)

     Q What?

     Q He wants peace to reign.

     Q -- single issue was set aside as agreed upon or anything
narrowed substantially --

     MR. MCCURRY: The procedure they've been using for these
discussions is that any element discussed and any element that they
reach consensus upon would not change the admonition that nothing is
finally agreed until everything is agreed.

     Q Your sense, Mike, about any travel plans the President may
have that could be tomorrow or more likely Sunday now?

     MR. MCCURRY: I have no sense, but the President seemed to be
enjoying himself here as much as he would in South Carolina.
(Laughter.)

     Q You have no sense of that?

     Q -- answer to that question that nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed -- what you're saying is, whatever differences
they narrow today have no permanent status because everything has to
be agreed to or--

     MR. MCCURRY: As a common negotiating device, they usually --
even as they work through complicated issues, that they reserve the
right at the end of the discussion to go back and look at the entire
package.  And they have done so here, and I suspect they will
continue to do so -- that they will go back and look at the final
package that they get, if they in fact get one, before they agree
that they've got a final agreement.

     Q But you -- as you agree, you guys are just checking it off and
moving on to the next one, and then --

     MR. MCCURRY: Yes, but what they're doing -- they're doing -- I
mean, without getting into the substance, because I'm not authorized
to get into the substance, they are working through a set of issues
that have been identified.  The budget advisers today met, dealt with
a series of budget issues, not all of them, but many of them.  They
were analyzed in some detail, discussions papers were prepared.  They
were reviewed today.  The budget advisers will now go back up to the
Hill, continue to address elements of the budget discussion.  They
will be analyzed, discussion drafts will be prepared, and they'll
work again on it tomorrow.  They're taking these issues serially as
they work through a series of contentious issues that range from the
-- starting with the less controversial and moving to the more
controversial.  And they clearly now are moving into areas that are
more controversial.

     Q On the Hill tonight do you think there will be action to get
the workers back to work?

     MR. MCCURRY: I cannot predict that.  You've heard the discussion
of the representatives and the congressional leadership earlier, and
it will be up to them to --

     Q Mike, are there going to be simultaneous meetings with the
budget leaders up on the Hill, meeting at the same time that the
meetings down here are taking place, or do they complete --

     Q I think Tony Blankley said --

     Q He did indicate -- Tony indicated that they'd be up on the
Hill, you know, working on churning stuff out even for future issues
-- even as --

     MR. MCCURRY: Oh, yes, they have -- well, we have -- there have
been staff -- staff work has continued even while the principals are
meeting, yes.  In fact, there's some -- staff has been available in
the Roosevelt Room in case there is a need for expert advice on
budget related issues, and they continue.

     Q With Cabinet-level people?  Will they be meeting also at the
same --

     MR. MCCURRY: I wouldn't rule it out, but mostly the people who
are there are more staff level experts.

     Q -- radio address subject?

     MR. MCCURRY: It will be the budget situation generally.  It will
also be, because it's the last radio address of the year, it will be
a review of 1995.

     Q Mike, unrelated, is the policy out here changed at all, or was
that just a mis --

     MR. MCCURRY: That was a regrettable misunderstanding, and I
believe we have got meetings going on right now to straighten out --

     Q That's not the first time it's happened today.  It's happened
several times.

     MR. MCCURRY: I understand, and there's --

     Q Some people decided not to provoke a fight and --

     MR. MCCURRY: Right.  They're working to clarify what the ground
rules are on -- (inaudible) -- because they obviously --

     Q Is the President going out tonight?

     MR. MCCURRY: Say again.

     Q Is the President going out tonight?

     MR. MCCURRY: Not that I'm aware of.  Is he?  He is?  Pool alert
-- that he may go out for dinner apparently.

     Q Where?

     MR. MCCURRY: Okay, see you all tomorrow.

     THE PRESS: Thank you.

             END 7:35 P.M. EST

 -0-
 /U.S. Newswire  202-347-2770/



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

 Transcript of Presidential Remarks in Photo Opportunity with
Congressional Leaders

 To: National Desk
 Contact: White House Press Office, 202-456-2100

   WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 /U.S. Newswire/ -- Following is a transcript
of remarks made by President Clinton today during a photo opportunity
with Congressional Leaders:


                         The Cabinet Room


  11:35 A.M. EST


     THE PRESIDENT: I want to be brief today because we're getting
off to a little late start.  We've got a lot to do.  I have three
things to say.  I think we made a good start yesterday, we're making
progress, and I believe we need to open the government.  I hope we
can agree to do all that.

     Q Sir, do you know any more information on the soldier who was
wounded in Bosnia?

     THE PRESIDENT: Our reports are sketchy and I have tried to get
an update, but what I do know is that there were apparently two
vehicles and four soldiers involved.  Only one was seriously hurt and
he has been medivacked to Croatia in a hospital there, and we
understand he's in stable condition.

     But mines have always been our biggest concern and we're working
very hard on it, but that's what happened.  And we'll continue to
monitor it and do the best we can.  The mission itself is going very
well.  The people have received our soldiers very well and I'm very
well satisfied with the progress.  And I'm obviously very sorry this
happened, but they're making good progress on the mine problem, but
it's going to be difficult to get rid of them all.

     Q -- the measure to get the workers back that's going to get
through Congress?

     SENATOR DOLE: Well, it passed the House.  We hope we can pass in
the Senate today, so make some progress.

     SENATOR DASCHLE: We tried to pass a clean CR, one without any
conditions.  And that was objected to, but I hope we can work
something out.

     Q But isn't the fact now that the Democrats are holding things
up?

     SENATOR DASCHLE: Not at all.  As a matter of fact, as I said, we
passed a continuing resolution -- we had no conditions.  It sent
people back to work, and that was objected to.  So we're not trying
to hold anything up here.  We hope we can get some sort of an
agreement as early as today.

     Q Well, what's it going to take to get a deal?

     SPEAKER GINGRICH: Well, let me just something.  I think the
President had a right -- we're glad to have you all in.  We have a
lot of work to do.  We made, I thought, real progress last night.  It
is not easy.  We have very significant areas we have to work on, but
I thought the spirit was very positive.  We don't just want to get
the federal workers back, we want to get them paid.  And in order to
do that, I think we've got to get this whole thing worked out.
But I thought we had a great start last night.  And with you all's
permission, I think we can get a lot more done in the next few hours.

     Q Mr. President, is the message from the Democrats basically
that they don't trust you?

     THE PRESIDENT: We've got to go to work.  Thank you very much.

     THE PRESS: Thank you.

             END 11:37 A.M. EST

 -0-
 /U.S. Newswire  202-347-2770/



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

 Transcript of Remarks by President Clinton in Sunday Photo
Opportunity With Congressional Leaders

 To: National Desk
 Contact: White House Press Office, 202-456-2100

   WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 /U.S. Newswire/ -- Following is a transcript
of remarks by the president in a photo opportunity with congressional
leaders:

                         The Cabinet Room
9:50 A.M. EST

     Q  Mr. President, are you close to a deal today?

     THE PRESIDENT:  Let me tell you where we are today.  We had
a very long discussion yesterday.  We discussed almost all the issues
where we had differences on our plans financially, in terms
the dollars.  And this morning we're going to have an extensive
discussion of the Medicare policy.  And then we're going to give our
staffs some instruction.  We're going to meet again on Tuesday and
we're going to do our best to work through this and come to an
accord.

     My New Year's wish is that we'll get this balanced
budget plan and we'll do it in a way that protects the things that we
care about -- the Medicare, the Medicaid, the education and
environment, the other issues, and we've been working at it.  I've
been very well pleased and I think we've been somewhat successful
because we haven't said very much about it.  We've just got to keep
working until we reach an accord.

     Q  Mr. President, will you touch on -- negotiations --

     Q  Will you leave town today without reopening the
government, of the three --

     SPEAKER GINGRICH:  I'm sure we'll be talking about that, that's
one of the things we want to get done and get agreed to.  So we're
trying to work out how to get the federal employees back to work
-- we'd also like to get them paid, I think that's an integral
part of getting them back to work.  But as the President said, I
think, frankly, most of our success so far has been that we've been
in this room talking with each other and not getting involved in
negotiating in public, and I think we've made a lot of progress.

     Q  To follow on that, sir, is it healthy to have the
House speakers talking on CNN yesterday on the --

     SPEAKER GINGRICH:  Oh, that is nonsense.  I told the
President on Friday that I was so favorable about him in answering
their big question on Evans & Novak that I thought he'd want to see
it.  The fact is we're working very well together.  I was asked a
question about the campaign next year, and I suspect if you ask Mr.
Gephardt or Vice President Gore about how they'll campaign next year,
they'll give you similar answers.  We're negotiating very well from a
government standpoint in here and I think we have a lot to be proud
of.  Our New Year's wish ought to be that we get this done and give
the American people a balanced budget and the government paid for and
back to work.

     SENATOR DOLE:  The Senate is going to meet at noon,
we'll try to pass something to help the federal employees.

     Q  Are you closer?

     SENATOR DOLE:  Oh, we're about six feet apart.
(Laughter.)

     SENATOR DASCHLE:  We'll be a lot closer in a couple of
hours.  (Laughter.)

     THE PRESIDENT:  We're working at it steady.  Happy New
Year everybody.

     THE PRESS:  Happy New Year.


             END                          9:54 A.M. EST

 -0-
 /U.S. Newswire  202-347-2770/



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/gt42.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
U.S. NEWSWIRE via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

 Transcript of White House Press Briefing by Mike McCurry

 To: National Desk
 Contact: White House Press Office, 202-456-2100

   WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 /U.S. Newswire/ --  Following is a transcript
of a press briefing by Mike McCurry:

                          The Briefing Room
12:40 P.M. EST

     MR. MCCURRY:  Let me just tell you what's going on right
now.  The President of the United States is thanking individually the
various members of the budget staffs that have been supporting the
administration team during these discussions, folks from Health and
Human Services, Treasury, OMB, the National Economic Council, Mr.
Panetta's staff, those that have done extraordinary work over the
last week and, as you'll be able to tell in a moment, have got an
extraordinary amount of work today and tomorrow.

     The budget discussions today led to an agreement by the
principals to instruct staff to really summarize the discussions
they've been able to have over the last several days, which resulted
in exploring the differences that exist in a range of areas from
income support programs to welfare, to tax issues, to health care
finance issues -- to really summarize those discussions and draw
together the places where there appeared to be some agreement between
the Republican side, the administration and the congressional
Democrats; and then, also set forth in more precise detail the areas
that there clearly are still differences.

     That will lead to a meeting that will happen here at the
White House Tuesday evening, either late afternoon or early evening
-- I suspect more early evening -- between the budget principals.
They will reconvene, review the discussion document that is prepared
by staff over the next day and a half, and they will begin, I think
they all believe, the more serious discussions of tradeoffs that
exist on the large issues that will be fundamental to a final
agreement.  But they all clearly remain committed to this process and
the process is working.  They are making progress because they are
defining the areas of agreement and disagreement more clearly.  And
the President's satisfied that they're making progress.

     The President also strongly encouraged the congressional
leaders to find a way to pass some measure that would restore federal
workers to their rightful places of employment.  He also wants them
to be paid, but he understands that those are -- there are different
points of view on that issue.  He hopes they can resolve some of
these issues.

     Q  What's his point of view on that?

     MR. MCCURRY:  He believes they should be working, they
should be paid, and the government should be fully open, as he said
over and over and over again.

     Q  Any suggestion, any hint that they were close to
working some deal today?

     MR. MCCURRY:  They worked on it a lot.  There was
considerable side-bar discussion during this meeting between House
and Senate staffers, and Senate staffers between the Republican and
Democratic side, and that will lead to whatever action occurs on the
Hill shortly.

     Q  Did Dole and Daschle say they would --

     MR. MCCURRY:  I'm not going to comment on the business
that they need to do themselves on the Hill.

     Q  Mike, Tony Blankley said that there was one area
that was not covered in the walk-through.  What is that area?  He
said it was one major area.

     MR. MCCURRY:  I suspect -- can you run and check on
this?  I suspect the answer to that is Medicaid.  But Barry will run
that down.

     Q  They didn't act on that at all?

     MR. MCCURRY:  They spent a lot of time discussing
Medicare.  The almost entire discussion today was devoted to Medicare
and different options.  And what the President and congressional
leaders asked for is something that really defines more clearly what
the policy choices are in Medicare given the respective positions of
the various budget proposals that are out there.

     Q  Mike, in the event that there is some kind of deal
in the Senate, will there be any briefing here on what -- the
technicalities of what that means for the government?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, if there's a final agreement in
Congress that would restore federal workers to their jobs, OMB staff
will be available to talk about how that will affect any restart
activities that they have.  But we'll direct that to OMB because
they'll be in the best place to analyze that.

     Q  Mike, can you confirm that as of yesterday they had
an agreement in principle to at least a packet of savings of $100
billion in social spending?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, that would be -- that requires some
rough eyeballing that I don't think you can really do under the
circumstances.  There are different ways that you can look at the
categories of things they've done here.  There are some areas where
there are clear agreements and they should be able to rather quickly
write the legislative language that would lock in some of the things
they've agreed to.

     There are other areas where it's a little fuzzier, where
there are some different options that exist and you could get a range
of savings depending on how you calculate it.  But my guess is -- I
saw that comment in one of the stories today; I think that was
probably a rough eyeball guess that someone made that would try to
put a numeric value on some of the work they've done.  Frankly, I'd
caution people here against using that kind of calculation because
the ranges are so large when you look at the big ticket issues.
There could be considerably more in savings, depending on how you
judge the progress they made on some of these discussions.

     Q  What are the differences on Medicaid without going
into detail?  Are they financial or are they philosophical?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Both.

     MR. TOIV:  Medicaid is the issue, but it was discussed
in the context of block grants, the whole block grant issue, but not
separately as a --

     MR. MCCURRY:  The fundamental dispute there is the
guarantee of health care coverage and the federal entitlement and
what happens if you block-grant it.  Now, that's a large issue and
one of the issues covered particularly as they dealt with domestic
discretionary spending, which they did both yesterday afternoon and
yesterday evening.

     So I think that they've touched on that aspect of
Medicaid, but they haven't gone through all the -- they haven't gone
through it in the same detail and precision on that issue as they
have some of the other areas that they've looked at.  Now, that will
be covered by some of the staff work.  They are going to take some
look at issues related to that as they work over the next day and a
half.  They'll be preparing some side-by-side analyses of how the
different issues play out.

     Q  Are they working from the same base numbers?

     MR. MCCURRY:  They're working from the same calculation
of what the budget impact is based on CBO numbers, yes.

     Q  What's the point of all these hours of walking
through this?  It seems to me we all know what the big differences
are.

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, that's not necessarily true.  I
mean, everyone knows what the big differences are and what the big
numbers look like on a single sheet of paper.  But remember, every
one of those large numbers is premised on fundamental policy
decisions that have a great deal of nuance and complexity associated
with them.  And I think it's encouraging and the principals are
encouraged at how detailed these discussions have been.  They have
looked item by item at these policy implications of the large
numbers.

     I think many Americans think, well, gee, you get
together in the room and you split the difference in a simple
arithmetic.  That's not policymaking.  Policymaking requires
attention to the detail that underscores each of those numbers.  And
that's the work they've been doing.

     Now, based on the very intense discussions they've had,
the staff can now summarize in a much more detailed fashion what the
specifics of a legislative approach to a final budget agreement would
look like.  That's encouraging because it means if they do reach an
agreement on a final budget package, the work of assembling that and
putting it in legislative language would be considerably easier based
on the discussions they've had here.  In a sense, one participant
compared this to something like a conference committee on the Hill;
they're doing much the same thing they would do in a House-Senate
conference committee, looking at big issues, discussing the policy
differences, and then making it possible for staff to write what
amounts to a conference report.

     Q  Are they getting a sense of how far away they are
from reaching some kind of final agreement?  Are they getting a sense
of the kind of time frame they're looking at?

     MR. MCCURRY:  They could be so near or so far away
because it will depend in part on what types of tradeoffs they make
on the large issues.  They have not attempted to take the big issues,
as Hillary just said that everyone knows are out there, and reconcile
them.  They've approached this from saying, let's narrow as closely
as we can the differences that exist and define better what types of
tradeoffs will exist once you've reached those big decisions.  But I
suspect that by Tuesday night when they meet again, they're going to
start moving to those more fundamental issues that will have to be
embraced if there's going to be a final agreement, which is why right
now it's impossible to say one way or another whether they will
actually reach an agreement.

     Q  -- an agreement in the order in which they'll take
up the big issues?  Because, as you've said in the past, you would
prefer that the spending and the final decisions on spending
determine the size of a tax cut.

     MR. MCCURRY:  I don't believe -- they have given a list
of specifics to the staff to address, but I can't say for certain
that the principals will work through those issues in the same order
-- that they go from income maintenance through health care finance
issues to discretionary spending issues to revenue issues.  But I
don't guarantee that that's the order in which they will be addressed
on Tuesday night.

     Q  Would you say that they have finished stage one,
the walk-through process, then and are getting -- are heading into
stage two, the decision-making process?

     MR. MCCURRY:  They finished the walk-through process
during the course of the day yesterday, with the exception of the
more detailed discussion of Medicare that they wished to have today.
They are now preparing for what amounts to the tradeoffs that will
have to occur.

     Q  Is the President ready to compromise and trade off?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, the President is ready to continue
to discuss these issues in good faith.

     Q  In what context have they discussed Social
Security?

     MR. MCCURRY:  It has been related to many of their
discussions of health care finance, Medicare in particular, and
related in some respects to their AFDC discussions since they're all
covered by the various titles of the Social Security Act.

     Q  Did they talk about it in terms of --

     MR. MCCURRY:  They've had -- I believe they had a very
brief discussion of the CPI issue, and there was not instant
resolution of that.

     Q  You said that there's a day-and-a-half discussion
beginning on Tuesday evening that concerns --

     MR. MCCURRY:  I'm sorry, it was a day and a half for
work now.  The staff is going to be working -- one of the reasons the
President wanted to spend some time with our courageous and noble
staffers is they are now going to work for the rest of the day today
and they're apparently going to start about 9:00 a.m. tomorrow and
they'll be able to work all day long tomorrow.  That's not going to
be any -- we're not going to arrange any press coverage of that,
that's just the work they're going to be doing, both informal and
probably getting together at various points.

     Q  Going back to -- how would you characterize the
agreement so far money-wise?  You won't say $100 billion.  How would
you characterize it -- issue-wise, money-wise?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, they've made good progress.  It's a
large sum of money, but it's not satisfactory -- wouldn't be
sufficient to reach the balanced budget goals.  That would require
some additional decision-making that obviously wouldn't happen before
Tuesday night.

     Q  Can you offer any color or anecdotal details of
today's meeting?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, they continued -- we do the best on
food more than anything else.  (Laughter.)  They had the traditional
congressional meeting donuts back today, for some reason.  We were on
a health food kick yesterday, but today -- normally, when the
bipartisan congressional leadership meet with the President they have
wonderful donuts available.  And they reappeared and quickly
disappeared during the meeting today.

     There was a lot of kibitzing.  As the result of being
together over the couple of days, there were moments where the
partisan sides are able to tease each other or get little quips in on
each other from time to time, and there was a fair amount of that
going on.  I don't have a specific example of that that I can think
of off my head, but there's some of what I would describe as general
ribbing back and forth.

     The Speaker was concerned that we all make sure that
--he was concerned about a question he got in the pool session this
morning and he was nervous that we not over-interpret those -- the
appearance on the Evans and Novak Show.  Some of us watched that and
some of us managed to stay awake through it.  (Laughter.)

     Q  As he shouted Ron down -- did they discuss that?
As he shouted Ron down, did he and the President then discuss that?

     MR. MCCURRY:  No, they didn't.  They didn't, although
the Speaker reached that with some of us and we didn't take any
offense at his remarks.

     Q  You didn't take any offense at the remarks at all?

     MR. MCCURRY:  No.  Compared to other things that he
says, they -- (laughter.)

     Q  Dole and Gingrich have said before that they see
Wednesday as sort of a deadline; they're going to be adjourning
Congress and reopening Congress.  Is there any sense that you'll know
by Wednesday that you're going to have a deal or you're not going to
have a deal?

     MR. MCCURRY:  You mean on this question of federal
workers and --

     Q  No, no, no.  No, over the budget deal, the budget
negotiations.

     Q  The CR would expire -- I mean, they're saying that
you're supposed to have it finished in the first session, which
is --

     MR. MCCURRY:  In the statutory and in the first session
is on Wednesday, and clearly one reason they're meeting Tuesday night
is with that deadline in mind.  But I wouldn't predict at this point
it would be possible to get an outline of agreement by Wednesday.
Certainly everyone hopes to get an agreement on a balanced budget as
quickly as possible.

     Q  I watched the back-and-forth there.  The money that
we're not supposed to put a numerical figure on that's not
necessarily $100 billion, but is something -- what does that concern?

     MR. MCCURRY:  I made that so absolutely, magnificently
impenetrable, there would be no way you could answer that.
(Laughter.)  Look, the reason is as you look through these issues it
could be -- they've got -- $100 billion is a rough estimate of some
of the work that were in the so-called tier two issues that were
being handled at the budget advisors level.  That's where it has come
from.

     Now, if you look at some of the other issue areas -- the
so-called tier three issues -- where they've identified some
agreement in policy approaches, they've got considerably more than
that, I would guess.  But I can't put a dollar figure on that, nor
should I, because it's subject to further discussion.  And in any
event, as we've said all along again, they have to get agreement on a
whole package before it all matters.

     Q  Tier two is what?  Tier two is nonentitlement,
discretionary --

     MR. MCCURRY:  Tier one -- they've defined issues as they
worked at both the staff and budget advisor issues as tier one, tier
two, tier three issues, as they rank order some of the policy
questions.  And just, for example, in the area of revenues I think
there were, what, Barry -- 70 separate issues that they needed to
examine.

     Now, they range from -- tier one would be something
which there is a common approach both in the balanced budget act, in
the President's approach on policy terms that's reflected in some of
the other discussion documents they've looked at, whether it's
Breaux-Chafee, whether it's Daschle, whether it's the coalition
budget, that there's some commonality approach and they think they
can lock in language that would satisfy everybody.  So, in other
words, a done deal; it looks like that will be easy to do.

     Tier two are areas where there are differences, but
they're fairly close.  They can be significant policy issues, but
there are ways in which you could bridge the gaps.  And they
concentrated a lot of work on the tier two issues.  And I think
that's where they found agreement that would take you beyond this
mythical $100 billion that was reported somewhere today.

     And then tier three issues are the more fundamental
differences that really are central to getting final agreement.  And
as I say, those are ones in which they agree to sharpen up the
discussion by really looking for how you define and analyze the
tradeoffs that would have to happen in order to reconcile those two
or three issues.  But that's work that will have to go on on Tuesday.

     Q  Does it have to be balanced down to a penny?  I
mean, it has to be actually -- the numbers have to be coinciding
totally?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, they -- it's more -- the more
important issue and then more of these discussions have been around
the policy has to be agreed to, how do you -- what's the policy going
to be.

     Q  Are tax cuts on the table?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Tax relief for working families has always
been on the table.

     Q  I didn't ask that.  I asked would tax cuts --

     Q  When this is all finished, for each of the major
topics they talked about will there be a figure for each of seven
fiscal years that will be the limit leading to a zero deficit?


     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, when it's all said and done and they
have a final agreement they will have a document that then can be
scored by CBO that could produce that type of analysis, sure.

     Q  Going back to -- can you characterize at all this
-- without the figure, what kind of subject areas there are
agreement?  How will you characterize the areas they have agreement
on?  You don't want to do it money-wise.  Subject-wise, anything
besides --

     MR. MCCURRY:  No, that's a -- I mean, substantively
we're not -- that just is more fuel for a lot of incorrect
speculation.  And as the Speaker made the point today, that it has
helped them that they've not tried to score points in the public
discussion of these deliberations.

     Q  I just want to clarify -- if, for purpose of
discussion the President is talking about CBO assumptions in all of
these discussions, is he then acquiescing to CBO's growth
predictions, its interest rate predictions?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Not necessarily.  I mean, that might be
that the issue of how you define assumption, will look at assumptions
-- and more importantly, how you decided when certain budget features
would trigger on or trigger off.

     Q  I'm sorry, could you run that past me one more
time?  You're saying he is not in agreement with the CBO --

     MR. MCCURRY:  I said that -- the question is about
assumptions, has he agreed to lock in the CBO assumptions.  I think
that's still an area that the principals could explore as they look
at issues like when certain budget features trigger on, trigger off,
how you measure that and how you look at impact.  For purposes of
these discussions they have agreed to a CBO evaluation on what the
budget options are.  I'm not going to get any more specific than what
I just said, although I just gave you a very good hint.

     Q  In talking about Medicare today and trying to talk
about their differences of viewpoint on medical inflation, what are
they -- whose numbers are they utilizing?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, for an informed discussion they use
-- they were relying on budget experts at CBO, at HHS, they were
looking at different types of analysis.

     QQ  Oh, this is the last tier thing where if you save
money on discretionary in the last years then you have to trigger
off, based on if you beat the CBO assumptions?

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, trigger-on, trigger-off is an aspect
of various budget proposals that are out there.  There are some in
the coalitions, there is one in the President's most recent offer.

     Q  What's he going to do at Hilton Head?

     MR. MCCURRY:  In Hilton Head he's looking forward to
seeing his friends, first and foremost; spending time with his
family; having dinner with his friends tonight and spending some time
outdoors tomorrow.  It's been raining --

     Q  What time do you expect --

     Q  Mike, will he say anything on going out to the
helicopter?


     MR. MCCURRY:  No, I think he wants to just get down
there and see his friends and have New Year's Eve with people he's
spent New Year's Eve with for the last 12 years.

     All right, happy New Year, everybody.  Have a safe and
prosperous 1996.

     Q  Did they all wish each other a happy New Year?

     MR. MCCURRY:  They did.  Actually, they said goodbye to
each other, happy New Year to each other.  There was a little bit of
discussion about travel plans for everybody.  I think, as you know,
Senator Dole after the senate session is going up to New Hampshire.


     Q  Did the President wish him well?

     MR. MCCURRY:  There was some good natured discussion.
He's going for the first eve festivities, or something like that.  I
would say that there continues to be a good atmosphere in these
discussions, but everybody is realistic enough to know that there are
sharp differences that still exist and that there's a lot of hard
work ahead.

     Q  Any idea when they're going to actually be done
with any sort of an agreement on the seven-year plan -- to they have
a time -- can't do it by Wednesday?

     MR. MCCURRY:  No, I think -- I think that everyone
understands -- the President is very cognizant of the Speaker's
concern about doing this within the statutory calendar of the first
session.  In fact, the President, at several points when it was
suggested there's going to be a lot of work that would have to be
done to get this discussion document together, that it might not be
done by Tuesday, the President admonished everybody again and said it
was very hard to ask people to work on the holiday.  But that because
of the Speaker's concern about January 3rd and that date, that it was
important to have a meeting during the day on Tuesday, even if it had
to be late in the day.  So we understand the importance of that and
that's why everyone is committed to trying to work this through as
quickly as they can.

     Q  Do you think there will be meetings between the
principals Wednesday, Thursday -- every day until there's --

     MR. MCCURRY:  I can't predict.  I'm taking it a day at a
day.  I'll tell you what I know, they plan to meet Tuesday night and
we'll see where we go from there.

     Q  So they have until midnight Wednesday night,
Thursday morning -- or is that --

     MR. MCCURRY:  Well, that's not -- I want to make it
clear that's not a -- that's a date that's important to the Speaker,
for reasons that the Speaker can tell you because it relates to the
statutory deadline of the first session, and it also relates to the
continuing resolution issue.  But I think we need -- you know, from
our point of view we just need to continue to work to try to resolve
the issues and do it as expeditiously as possible.

     Q  Is it midnight Tuesday or midnight Wednesday --

     MR. MCCURRY:  You should ask the House Speaker.  It's
their deadline, not ours.

     Thank you.

             END                          1:00 P.M. EST

 -0-
 /U.S. Newswire  202-347-2770/




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>