
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000621-B039-270</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te148.html 205.156.212.5 19970122053155 text/html 48641
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:29:59 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:17 GMT
Content-length: 48454
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te148.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
VIA SATELLITE via NewsNet <BR>
November 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>GLOBAL SATELLITE EXECUTIVES MEET IN PARIS&nbsp;by Cynthia Boeke</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1171 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>BUSINESS TV APPLICATIONS VIA SATELLITE&nbsp;by James Careless</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2540 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>BETWEEN TWO WORLDS--WHY SATELLITE DISTANCE LEARNING IS BOTH THRIVING&nbsp;AND MERELY SURVIVING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2490 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SATELLITE SITES ON THE WEB&nbsp;by Gerald E. Oberst, Jr.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(797 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
VIA SATELLITE via NewsNet
November 1, 1996

GLOBAL SATELLITE EXECUTIVES MEET IN PARIS
by Cynthia Boeke

      This September, the world satellite industry's glitterati met in
Paris at the fifth Satel Conseil Symposium to discuss issues facing
the future development of the satellite industry. 
     Among the most talked-about developments were the high rate of
growth in the satellite industry; the development of Ka-band systems
for Internet-related broadband, multimedia applications; growth in the
use of geostationary satellites for mobile telephony services; and the
challenge of orbital slot overcrowding.
     Satel Conseil is a French consortium that provides international
consulting, engineering and technical assistance services in the field
of space communications.

THE FRENCH CONTRIBUTION

      "Growth in the satellite market has exceeded everyone's
expectations," said Francois Fillon, French Cabinet Minister for
Postal Services, Telecommunications and Space. "Everything points to
future growth as well." 
     Fillon noted that low earth orbit (LEO) constellations are
playing a major role in this growth, but that growth in the number of
new geostationary satellites is just as rapid. 
     Three of the world's leading geostationary satellite bus and
payload manufacturers--Matra Marconi Space, Aerospatiale and
Alcatel--are French. "It is vital for France and Europe to preserve
and increase our industrial capability by making sure [French
satellite manufacturers]
have the technology they need," said Fillon. He highlighted the
Stentor program, a partnership between French government and industry,
which will "develop tomorrow's satellite technology--extra capacity
and lifetime."
     Although France is playing a major role in geostationary
satellite manufacturing, Fillon said that "American manufacturers have
taken the initiative in LEO constellations. We must pay tribute to the
American ability to mobilize resources, but we must respond with
second-generation constellations for high data rate exchanges."

THE INTERNET CONNECTION

      Much of the discussion at Satel Conseil centered on the growing
role of the Internet and the potential use of satellites to become a
major Internet delivery vehicle. 
     "Before 2005, the Internet will have exploded," said Serge
Tchuruk, chairman and CEO of Alcatel Alsthom. "It will disintegrate
and be reconfigured." The reason, according to Tchuruk: the Internet
is not business-oriented and is susceptible to technical disruptions.
     "When the Internet is rebuilt," he said, "it will incorporate
broadband multimedia." By that time, he predicted," satellites will be
orbital networks complementing terrestrial networks.
They will be one of the key telecommunications technologies in the
21st century."
     Indeed, one of the systems serving the interactive, broadband
multimedia needs of future users could be Sativod, a constellation of
64 medium earth orbit satellites proposed by Alcatel.
      Sativod is being designed to provide access to the Internet and
online services, remote access to enterprises, telecommuting,
videoconferencing, teleteaching, telemedicine and entertainment
services, said Pascale Sourisse, director of planning and strategy at
Alcatel Espace.
     Sourisse said that there will be 15 million to 20 million
potential Sativod users around the world by the end of the next
decade.
     Future satellite-delivered multimedia services will be driven by
"prosumers," said Karl Savatiel, president of AstroLink at Lockheed
Martin Telecommunications. Prosumers will use the broadband,
interactive satellite services for teleworking and personal use in
their homes or remote offices, he said.
     "Internet backbones are not adequate," said Ronald Maehl, senior
vice president of strategy at Space Systems/Loral. Such a situation,
he said, will provide myriad opportunities for new Ka-band,
satellite-based Internet services, including SS/L's proposed Cyberstar
system.

MOBILE TELEPHONY

      The growing role of geostationary satellites for mobile
telephony applications was underscored at Satel Conseil. 
     According to Michael Williams, vice president of mobile
communications systems at Lockheed Martin Telecommunications,
developing countries are "driving a dramatic increase in demand for
cost-competitive voice services." Lockheed Martin, he continued, can
provide a geostationary satellite-based solution for direct-to-user
mobile telephony with its LMA2100AX high power/dissipation satellite
bus. Its attributes include commercially viable 12- to 15-meter
reflectors; commercially available digital transmission and coding
techniques; and low mass, low power onboard signal processing.
     Meanwhile Inmarsat, for its part, is studying a possible
successor to the new Inmarsat 3 generation of geostationary
satellites, said Warren Grace, director general of Inmarsat. The
potential Inmarsat 4 satellites, he said, might be used to serve new
business markets and provide broadband, broadcast, navigation and
rural communications services. "The chosen solution will probably be
GEO-based," he said, because it allows "less complex user terminals,
reduced network complexity, lower probability of outages and
continuity with existing services." 
     Vladimir Tamarkin, first deputy director of Informcosmos and
director of Russia's Marafon project, provided details of the Marafon
mobile satellite system. Marafon, he said, will comprise five
geostationary Arkos satellites and three or four highly elliptical
orbit Mayak satellites. Initially, services will be provided using a
European satellite. The majority of the system is scheduled to be
operational by 1999.
     The main strategies for Marafon, Tamarkin said, are to attract
advanced foreign technologies to develop the means of space and ground
segments of the system, develop strategic partnerships with foreign
companies, develop partnerships with existing European mobile
satellite service providers, and attract investment for Marafon's
space segment.
     Another geostationary-based system that is looking for partners
is the Euro-African Satellite Telecommunications (EAST) project
proposed by Matra Marconi Space. According to Jean Maury,
director/sales manager for the Civil Communications Satellite
Directorate at Matra Marconi Space, EAST will most likely be based on
two Eurostar 3000 satellites with 12-meter unfurlable reflectors. EAST
would provide mobile telephony services to all of Europe, the Mideast
and parts of Africa. 

ORBITAL SLOT HOARDING

      One of the thorniest issues facing the satellite industry is
orbital slot crowding. "Overfiling is exploding," said Robert Jones,
director of the Radiocommunication Bureau at the ITU. 
     Jones cited two possible solutions to orbital slot crowding:
procedural and financial. The procedural solution, he said, would
involve certification of progress toward the construction and launch
of a satellite by applicants. The financial solution would entail fees
or deposits submitted with each filing, which would be returned when
the satellite is launched. 
      "Orbital slot congestion is worse in the Asia-Pacific than any
other region," emphasized Seon Jong Chung, president of the
Asia-Pacific Satellite Communication Council and vice president of the
Satellite Communications Division of South Korea's ETRI. "Nearly 120
satellite networks have not been processed.
     "Excessive filing for many years complicates limited resources,"
he continued, "and gives burdens to everybody." 
     Despite the regulatory logjam, most conference participants
predicted that the high rate of growth in new satellite systems will
continue. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Telecommunications and
Space Co., said he remembered not too long ago, in the 1980s, when the
demise of the satellite industry was predicted because of fiber. "Now
there are four times as many satellites in orbit as there were at the
time of that prediction," he said.
     Dorfman cited new satellite-based consumer applications, higher
power satellites, lower-cost terminals and digital compression as
drivers in satellite growth. "I believe we will continue the
double-digit growth in satellite communications as we have over the
past ten years."
      Cynthia Boeke is the Editor of Via Satellite.
      For more information on Satel Conseil or to obtain a transcript
of the fifth Satel Conseil symposium call +33/1-46-57-75-65, fax
+33/1-46-57-70-34, email satelconseil@calva.net or visit the Web site
at http://www.francetelecom.com/SATEL/bienvenu.html.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
VIA SATELLITE via NewsNet
November 1, 1996

BUSINESS TV APPLICATIONS VIA SATELLITE
by James Careless

      Business television (BTV): finally, the advent of digital video
compression has saved the industry from the drought of analog
satellite space. And with the sudden freedom (and reduced bandwidth)
offered by digital transmission comes a new emphasis: interactive
distance education.
     "Training by satellite has been dramatically increased by new
forms of interactivity," notes Susan Irwin, president of Irwin
Communications and acknowledged BTV "guru." "No longer is it strictly
a one-way medium. Now, with students able to voice questions and file
their responses back to teachers in real time, distance learning has
taken on a whole new power, and a whole new importance."
     To test this theory, Via Satellite surveyed a number of major
U.S. BTV users, to see what they're doing with their BTV networks.

CARRIER CORP.'S "BEAM TV"

      Carrier Corp. is the world's largest maker of air-conditioning,
refrigeration, heating and ventilation equipment. It's products are
distributed in 145 countries worldwide. As a result of this
success, Carrier needs reliable communications to keep its customers
well-served. And that's why the company turned to business TV.
     "Basically our business television network came as a result of
customer demands," says Toni Nevins, Carrier's business development
manager, when asked about the roots of Carrier's Beam TV. "We used to
have two national meetings a year, and our customers--the independent
distributors who sell our equipment--asked us to cut it down to one."
In order to continue to keep customers informed while eliminating the
need for more than one meeting a year, Carrier decided to install its
own business television network.
     "That's where Group W Network Services came in," she adds. "After
we conducted a feasibility study, they helped us install and activate
our network on April 1, 1995, in order to ensure we had another way of
getting important product information out to our customers."
     Known as "Beam TV," Carrier's BTV network supplies at least six
hours of programming a month to 116 sites in the United States and
Canada. The signals are sent out digitally using GI DigiCipher 1
equipment, and received by the sites using 1.2-meter antennas.
     The programs they receive are quite varied, says Nevins. "We do
product introductions, service bulletins, service training, corporate
communications to both employees and customers, and of course, a
monthly half-hour update on the company called `Beam News.'
     "This is scheduled to coincide with the customers' monthly sales
meetings," she continues. "They integrate the news programs into their
meetings to update their employees on Carrier information that they
may need to do their jobs.
     "Most of our broadcasts are live interactive broadcasts," she
adds, "where our customers communicate with the on-air people using a
special  1-800' telephone number."
     This last feature has already proved particularly useful in
keeping Carrier's clients happy, says Nevins. For instance, "we were
doing a major product overhaul that our customers were concerned
about. Once we knew of their concerns, we were able to go to air
within 48 hours with a live phone-in show explaining what we were
doing and why, and fielding their questions as they arose."
     For her part, Nevins is sold on the value of Beam TV. "It has a
strong cost benefit in getting a consistent message out to our
customers," she says, "while offering them to chance to voice their
own concerns. And, not incidentally, it has reduced our travel
expenses as well."

FAA's "TELE-TRAINING"

      With responsibility for critical areas such as air traffic
control and aircraft safety, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration
is an agency that relies heavily on training to maintain its
standards. But recent federal budget cutbacks have put the agency in a
real bind, says the FAA's Hank Payne. 
     "From 1992 through 1996 we've seen our training budget cut by 42
percent," Payne notes, "while we've only been able to reduce our
actual training needs by 21 percent."
     Much of the expense of FAA training was the result of residential
training centers, and the travel and per diem costs associated with
sending staff to the sites. That's why in 1993 the FAA turned to AT&T
Tridom to set up its Interactive Video Tele-Training Program, in
a bid to save money while upgrading its staff's expertise.
     Payne manages the Interactive Video Tele-Training Program for the
FAA, one which uses 3.3 MHz of digitally compressed live instructional
video, voice and data fed to 34 receive sites across the country (with
another 26 due to be added soon). 
     The sites themselves are equipped with One Touch student response
keypads, so that both audio and data are relayed back to the
instructor in real time. These keypads are a product offering of One
Touch Systems Inc. of Santa Clara, CA, a supplier of interactive
learning technology. The One Touch system allows students to register
a "call" asking questions of the instructor, and lets them answer
true/false or multiple choice questions as well.
     To date, the FAA has broadcast both specialized (such as
hazardous materials inspection techniques) and general interest (such
as problem-solving) courses to its staff. By doing so, it has
discovered that teaching by satellite actually cuts approximately 25
to 33 percent off course time without any decline in student
performance.
     The reason for this, says Payne, is that residential schools
"keep staff in training eight hours a day because we're paying them
for eight hours a day, despite the fact that people don't learn well
this way. Tele-Training allows employees to get up from their desk, do
two or three hours of learning, and then return to their job--a
strategy that improves their learning ability, and cuts down on the
cost of covering for them while they're in school."

FORD'S FORDSTAR NETWORK

      Ford has been a pioneer in business TV since the early `80s,
when it set up an analog network connecting 200 to 300 of its plants
and parts depots.
     But it was the company's desire to connect all of its 6,000 North
American dealers that led it to establish the Fordstar Network, a $100
million VSAT network built using Hughes Networks Systems' technology.
     The move to Fordstar has sped up data exchange, parts ordering,
and warranty submissions, says Fordstar Manager Lawrence Conley. But
it has also meant that digitally compressed video, with all of its
benefits, has been added to the network. 
     Specifically, "we've got eight channels of full motion video
going out to our dealers," says Conley. These channels feature
distance learning courses for all types of dealer staff. In addition,
the courses are all live and interactive with remote sites using the
One Touch viewer response keypad system to relay student audio and
response data back to the teacher during sessions. 
     To say the least, Fordstar is an impressive commitment to
business television, but one that Ford firmly believes it had to make.
     "We're introducing new models at the rate of one every six weeks
worldwide," says Conley. "These new models have a lot of new
technology and new features, and training our dealer people to keep up
with them is important." BTV allows Ford to achieve such goals.
     In addition, satellite-based distance learning has drastically
reduced training costs, while actually improving the potential level
of expertise at dealer locations. That's because distance is no longer
a barrier to knowledge, thanks to the Fordstar network.

JCPENNEY'S NEW DISTANCE LEARNING NETWORK

      In 1995, retailer JCPenney was faced with a dilemma, namely what
to do with its aging analog business TV network.
     For the past nine years, the company had been running analog
broadcasts showcasing the assortments of merchandise to store managers
so that they could order for their particular stores, according to Ron
Fazio, manager of communications programs and services. However, in
1995 the company realized that sending managers the images on CD-ROM
was much more cost-effective, especially in the light of climbing
satellite costs. In addition, Fazio says the CD-ROMs were much easier
for them to manage.
     Having made the switch to CD-ROM, JCPenney had to look hard at
whether to continue operating an occasional-use analog network, since
the fundamental reason for funding it was now gone.
     However, as one need faded out, a new one came to take its place;
in this instance, the company's desire to start its own distance
learning video network.
     "It's a whole new scenario of programming aimed at saving the
company money and travel and per diems," says Fazio, "by doing all of
our training out of the home office, and relaying it to 1,230 sites
via satellite." For a company such as JCPenney, such training is
crucial, since it operates in a world of expensive high-stakes
promotion and ever-changing consumer tastes. To cope, managers
nationwide must know what to do and when, or face the economic
consequences.
     Functionally, JCPenney is relying on an outbound feed of audio,
video and graphics, and an inbound audio and data feed (from 700 of
the remote sites) from students using the One Touch response keyboard.
It's a configuration that is proving to be extremely popular among
business TV users.
     Of course, the cost of setting up such a network under analog
conditions would have been prohibitive. But thanks to the timely
arrival of digitally compressed video transmission, JCPenney was able
to cut its bandwidth requirements from one full transponder to just a
quarter.
     Driving the whole system--which was designed and installed by GE
Capital Spacenet Services--is Scientific-Atlanta's PowerVu digital
video compression uplink. Capable of compressing up to 10 channels on
a single transponder, PowerVu is both MPEG 2 and DVB compatible,
meaning that the video being delivered is, at the user end, broadcast
quality.
     "Scientific-Atlanta's equipment is the same as that used during
the Olympics," notes Fazio, "which was a real confidence builder for
us."
     Today, JCPenney is producing about 1,200 hours of distance
learning programming a year, says Fazio; that's up radically from the
400 to 500 hours of merchandising video that used to go out on its old
analog network. It indicates just how potent an application distance
learning is for a company such as JCPenney, and how important digital
video compression is to keeping business television alive.

MEDSTAR

      Medstar is a distance learning application with a social
purpose: providing rural and remotely-based physicians in North Dakota
with top-quality interactive distance learning from the School of
Medicine at the University of North Dakota in Grand Forks.
     "We typically broadcast one-hour programs related to health
care," says Steve Gillespie, Medstar's coordinator of communications
services, "aimed at all the health care professions that you would
find in a small town, such as physicians, nurses, physical therapists,
and dieticians.
     "Our goal is to help small communities get better access to
things that larger communities take for granted," he adds. "This way
these professions get the continuing health care education they need,
without having to spend time and money traveling to larger centers."
     The Medstar application uses an analog network installed for it
by Satellite Network Systems. Courses are uplinked live from a
production control center at the School of Medicine.
Two cameras are used, along with graphics, which are then sent via
satellite to 35 sites across the state. These sites--usually small
hospitals--are equipped with 1.8-meter antennas, 26-inch monitors,
VCRs, and Harvard Elite audio return units. The Harvard Elite is built
by A.T. Products Inc. of Harvard, IL, a designer and manufacturer of
audioconferencing products. The Elites, which are connected to
microphones, allow students to "talk back" to the instructors via
telephone connections.
     Distance education via business TV has paid off handsomely, says
Gillespie. "Both the school and the communities involved recognize
that Medstar is a worthwhile service," he says.
"It's done very well."

RE/MAX'S NORTH AMERICAN NETWORK

      RE/MAX International Inc. is one of the few real estate
companies that has its own business TV network, says RE/MAX Vice
President of Information Technology Bruce Benham, and it's an edge the
company takes very seriously.
     The RE/MAX Satellite Network is used for a combination of
education, motivation and recruitment. 
     For instance, "we'll have live panels of RE/MAX people talking
about listings presentations," says Benham, "or how they do their
particular business in terms of how they prospect for new customers,
and what kind of materials and techniques they use, and so forth." 
     As well, RE/MAX takes pains to tape motivational speakers at its
conventions for later playback. To ensure good video and sound
quality, the company shoots these features on portable sound stages.
And the company also does live broadcasts where RE/MAX agents field
questions from prospective agents via a 1-800 telephone number.
     Technically speaking, RE/MAX transmits digitally using General
Instrument's SpectrumSaver equipment on a Broadcast
International-designed system, via Telstar 401 using 3.3 MHz of
bandwidth. At the receive end are about 1,200 sites, each equipped
with a 1.2-meter antenna. "They're anywhere from the far reaches of
Canada to the Caribbean," says Benham.
     The CLI equipment is addressable, he adds, "so once a month or
once every other month, we'll do a broadcast that's just sent to
certain parts of the country."
     Does this system work for RE/MAX? Yes, says Benham,
unequivocally: with both management and sales people impressed by the
network's content, "the system sells itself."

STATE FARM'S DISTANCE LEARNING

      State Farm Insurance Companies has recently signed-on its
"Interactive distance Learning Network" (ILN), a digitally-based
voice, audio and data system which keeps agents and employees
up-to-date on both company policies and professional education.
     "We're interested in sending a consistent message to all our
associates at the same time," explains ILN Manager Patsy Fortune. "We
want to get our promotions out in a timely manner, and we want to save
on travel expenses wherever possible."
     State Farm originates its distance learning courses from its
corporate headquarters in Bloomington, IL. Using equipment installed
by Convergent Media Systems, it sends out video, audio and graphics
via Galaxy 7 to students at 33 sites nationwide. It receives questions
via the One Touch keypad system.
     Although live, the classes offered by State Farm are anything but
off-the-cuff. 
     "It's all rehearsed and choreographed," says Fortune. In fact,
for every hour broadcast, State Farm requires four to eight hours of
rehearsal. As well, the company offers a workshop for instructors, so
that they can get a sense of how different distance education is from
conventional in-class teaching.
     "We work with the instructors to make sure the material they're
presenting is interactive, that it invites student participation,"
says Fortune. "After all, if you're just going to have a talking head,
you might as well just send out a tape."
     Although only officially launched on August 1, 1996, ILN is
already proving to be a big hit with both management and salespeople.
     "We're definitely getting a very, very positive reception from
the people taking the classes," says Fortune. "They see it as a
time-saver and a money-saver."
     As the examples we've just seen prove, business TV is not only
surviving the spectrum crunch, it's thriving, thanks to digital video
compression. However, it's also clear that another reason for its
continued health is its ability to branch out from traditional
videoconferencing to a host of new uses. 
     One thing appears certain: as technology progresses, so will the
size and scope of business TV. 
      James Careless is a freelance writer based in Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
VIA SATELLITE via NewsNet
November 1, 1996

BETWEEN TWO WORLDS--WHY SATELLITE DISTANCE LEARNING IS BOTH THRIVING
AND MERELY SURVIVING

by Britton Manasco
      The satellite distance learning industry is both expanding and
contracting at the same time.
The industry stands between two worlds--one vibrant and promising, one
trapped in political gridlock. 
     While the business world has embraced space-based tele-learning
technology and is investing the financial resources necessary to
create expansive new networks, the world of education faces cost and
structural issues that are preventing the rapid spread of
satellite-based learning networks. Satellite executives deserve a
clear-eyed assessment of this complex market.   

THE WORLD OF BUSINESS  

      For the immediate future, the real action in the distance
learning market is likely to revolve around the adult consumer who
wishes to upgrade his or her own skills and knowledge.
American companies now spend perhaps $100 billion on training and
education (not counting on-the-job training). Adults spend another
$200 billion to $300 billion on education at colleges, universities
and other institutions. Therefore, figures can be expected to grow as
learning becomes a lifelong pursuit. What will not expand, however, is
the individuals' available time.
That amount is fixed and the premium on it is rising precipitously.    
     Service providers who meet the individual's need to learn quickly
and conveniently can expect to reap tremendous rewards in the years to
come. Indeed, much of the funding now spent on instructural led,
classroom education is likely to shift to high-tech learning services
to meet consumer demands. Satellite-based learning services are
particularly attractive in this regard, especially if they can be
delivered direct-to-home or to the work-site. 
     Satellite services can transcend the geographical boundaries and
limits that constrain traditional education. They make a vast array of
learning opportunities available--no matter where you are. "Whether
the market is intra-enterprise or from universities to the enterprise,
we see exploding growth," says Joan Byrnes, marketing, sales and new
business development director for AT&T Skynet. (Editor's Note: As we
went to press, AT&T Skynet was purchased by Loral. When the deal is
finalized, the company will become Loral Skynet.)
     One organization that is successfully taking advantage of this
opportunity is National Technological University (NTU). Based in Fort
Collins, CO, NTU transmits advanced technical and managerial
telecourses via satellite to high-profile companies such as General
Electric, Intel, Motorola, Hewlett-Packard and Texas Instruments.
NTU's interactive programs--enabling participants to communicate with
instructors by phone, fax or e-mail--have become a critical aspect of
corporate efforts to encourage continual learning. 
     In the past decade, the number of NTU customer organizations has
risen from five to 207, the number of downlink sites has grown 16 to
993 and the number of non-credit short course enrollments (which
target people who need to strengthen or develop a special skill) has
climbed from zero to 100,000 annually. In addition, the number of
participating universities who provide content and other resources has
reached 46. NTU now has roughly 4,400 graduate course enrollments and
offers 13 master degree programs.   
     The growth has been spectacular. NTU has been able to offer an
array of educational programming to meet the growing needs of the
adult learning marketplace. NTU accomplished this in a cost-effective
way. It digitally compresses its signals at ratios of as high as 12:1
and sends them all over North America via AT&T's Telstar 401
satellite. 
     NTU's success, however, is a sign of change in the unfolding
information era. It reflects the ascendance of technical professionals
in the modern organization. Consider the numbers. In the last four
decades, the number of technical workers in America has risen 300
percent--or three times the growth rate of the overall workforce--to
20 million, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics in Washington,
DC. It is a segment of the workforce that is on the front lines of
organizational and technological change. 
     If technical professionals are to be effective, however, they
must continually learn new skills and competencies. "Technological
creativity today is strongly related to advanced education," says NTU
founder Lionel Baldwin. 
     Similarly, there has been significant growth in company-specific,
satellite learning networks. Some estimates suggest that there are
roughly 120 networks of this kind and more than 50,000 satellite
downlinks in North America alone. Ford Motor, for instance, has
developed a digital system (dubbed "Fordstar") that beams management,
technical and customer service-oriented telecourses to more than 6,000
dealerships. Ford executives estimate that the network will
dramatically reduce training costs that the organization absorbs each
year while expanding the number of training options. In a competitive
arena such as the automotive business, such dramatic moves can be
cost-justified and acted upon. Other companies such as K-Mart, Federal
Express and RE/MAX International have also devoted significant
resources to the development of satellite-based learning networks.
RE/MAX, for instance, is a real estate firm that transmits an array of
telecourses to 1,200 sites throughout North America and has a
potential viewing audience of 23,000 sales agents. K-Mart sends
managerial programming to 2,500 sites. And Federal Express reaches
1,000 satellite dishes. All are focused on enhancing the capabilities
of their employees while eliminating expensive classroom training (and
the travel and lodging it requires). It's unlikely that these
companies would be making such tremendous investments if they weren't
all in such highly competitive businesses. The market imperative is
clear.  
     Even the competitive higher education system is responding to
changing market demands. One of the most experienced distance learning
providers is Oklahoma State University, which operates a tele-learning
program. It transmits telecourses to students and companies throughout
the country from its base in Stillwater, OK, and has attracted
corporate clients such as Phillips Petroleum, Conoco Inc. and Seagate
Technologies.   
     On the West Coast, the California State University (CSU) system
is also reaching out via satellite. Its programs in political science,
social science and business administration, among others, are now
transmitted via Hughes Communications' Ku-band SBS 5 satellite
throughout the state of California and the rest of the country. CSUSat
uses digital compression to send two channels of video programming to
seven campuses and more than 30 receive sites. 
     "Distance learning is one way we can meet the challenge of the
coming enrollment boom," says Molly Corbett Broad, CSU executive vice
chancellor. "We don't have the physical facilities here or throughout
the system to cope with anticipated increases, but with distance
learning we can still expand access to the university. It is all part
of our strategic plan to bring CSU to the students, while enhancing
academic quality and improving productivity."  

THE WORLD OF EDUCATION 

      In the world of K-12 education, the picture is far less
attractive. "On the downside, I am a little discouraged that we have
not seen more innovation from an instructional standpoint," says
Sandra Welch, executive vice president of learning services for PBS.
"A few years ago, there was a great deal of creativity. Organizations
were creating advanced courses and we were connecting people together.
There hasn't been that kind of innovation in the last three to four
years."   She notes that the education sector is going through a
period when a lot of new technological capabilities--including
videoconferencing and the World Wide Web--are becoming available to
schools. "Schools want to experiment," she says.   
    Whereas satellite distance learning programs were offered on more
than 20 satellites a few years ago, there has been much consolidation
and abandonment of the market in the years since. Price-sensitive
educational entities have been unable to absorb stiff rate increases
for spot use. C-band rates have climbed to between $575 and $725 per
hour; Ku-band prices now range from $750 to $1,000. Grace Leone,
president of EFC Startime, a Los Angeles-based reseller of satellite
time, says that the percentage of her business devoted to distance
learning programming has shrunk from roughly 50 percent a few years
ago to about 15 percent today.  
     "What really was a vibrant, growing field in the education
industry has come to, if not a full halt, a slow pace," adds Shelly
Weinstein, president and CEO of Washington, DC-based NETO-EDSAT, a
non-profit organization representing educational institutions that
employ information technologies to deliver their products and
services.  
     Some educational leaders have publicly accused satellite
executives of greedily price gouging them. Satellite operators,
however, point out that space segment supply has shrunk in recent
years due to growing commercial demand for capacity and a limited
number of successful new launches over North America.
     The larger problem is the inability of government-run,
educational institutions to invest the money necessary to become
viable customers of satellite services. As a result, much of the new
activity in education is sponsored by states rather than school
districts or individual schools.
Satellite networks are now being funded by such states as Georgia,
Louisiana, South Carolina and Florida--all of which are part of the
"educational neighborhood" on Telstar 401 (which also includes NTU,
SERC and PBS). 
     The Florida Department of Education, for instance, expects to
make programming available to some 3,000 public school, according to
AT&T. But it's unclear what impact such broadly defined, "community"
networks can have. They often carry government and public service
messages of various sorts. They also tend to fill educational gaps in
such areas as the sciences, mathematics and foreign languages for the
most poorly served student rather than expand choices for the typical
student.
     Satellite-based education is at its best when it transports
students to distant places and generates enthusiasm for learning.
Glenn Kessler, director of legislative affairs and affiliate relations
issues at the United States Distance Learning Association, points out
that satellite-based, electronic field trips have enabled children
around the country to interactively participate in Civil War
reenactments, archaeological digs in South America, underwater
exploration efforts in several oceans and visit some of the greatest
museums on the planet. 
     Organizations such as PBS and Turner Educational Services have
been active developers of such programming. Welch mentions PBS's
recent and upcoming electronic field trips to the Costa Rican
rainforests, Ellis Island and the United Nations. Such efforts are
creating a demand among young people for better and more engaging
learning services. "Once the communication system is in place, you can
see what is possible and you are going to want it," says Kessler. And
while economic and political hurdles are the primary ones preventing
K-12 education from becoming a dynamic market for satellite services,
technical hurdles are not to be discounted. John Champagne, director
of broadcast products for network equipment provider Comsat RSI, notes
that many educators have been stymied by the question of
digitalization. In some cases, the costs of the transition from analog
to digital is deemed prohibitive. However, other institutions are
struggling to choose from a field of largely incompatible compression
technologies--whether they be provided by Scientific-Atlanta, General
Instrument, Comsat/Wegener or some other vendor. 
     Comsat RSI has created networks for Channel One (10,000 nodes),
Kentucky Educational Television (2,000 nodes) and, despite the
economic and technical challenges of potential customers, experienced
growth of between 50 to 60 percent last year. "The big thing is that
everyone will have to go digital eventually," Champagne says.   
     Of course, most of the near-term opportunities are likely to be
in business markets and, possibly, among agencies in the federal
government. The downsizing of government, presaged by the end of the
Cold War and the rise of the federal debt, has proved a surprising
opportunity for providers of distance learning capabilities. Jolly
Holden, executive marketing manager for distance learning at AT&T
Tridom, explains that the federal government's satellite training and
education network (GETN) is expected to grow from 900 downlink sites
in 1995 to 1,800 by the end of 1997 and 3,000 by the end of 1998.
Between now and then the number of telecourse hours will triple from
roughly 4,000 to about 12,000.  The network spans an array of civilian
and military agencies--everything from the Department of Energy to the
Department of Defense.

THE YEARS TO COME  

      In the years to come, satellite equipment and service providers
can be expected to focus on creating end-to-end solutions that
eliminate many of the risks and capital-investments that distance
learning customers are now forced to assume. Indeed, some companies
are beginning to introduce packages that enable organizations with
expansive networks of satellite downlinks to pay monthly service fees
and lease the equipment. As arrangements such as this become more
common, more companies and organizations--private sector and
public--will be willing to implement distance learning programs.   
     Still another promising development is the emergence of the
direct broadcast satellite business. While DBS players have for the
most part resisted calls for an "open architecture" consortium that
enables consumers to point their satellite dishes at multiple orbital
locations (see Via Satellite's June 1996 issue, "Open Architecture
DBS"), this would be an essential step if true narrowcast programming
is ever to be offered direct-to-home. This may ultimately be one
important route by which educational and learning service providers
cost-effectively reach diverse and targeted markets.
     One other route, of course, is the Internet. Satellite-based
content providers will have to incorporate dynamic, interactive,
online services into their program offerings in the years ahead if
they wish to succeed. It is no longer enough to merely transmit static
programming, especially if the objective is learning. The era of MTV
is effectively over. This is an era of multiple, reinforcing media.    
     One trend that bodes favorably for the future of distance
learning is the rise of business as a purveyor of educational
services. Stan Davis, Harvard lecturer and author of The Monster Under
the Bed (Touchstone), argues that the government school system will
become a relatively less important force in education than the
training and continual learning that occurs in the business world
during the individual's working lifetime. Due to both demographic and
economic trends, he argues, education will no longer be merely
"front-ended" in the two initial decades of a person's life. It will
at last be recognized as a lifelong pursuit. That suggests that the
market for learning is increasingly swinging toward adults with
working experience. Already, more than half of the people paying for
the services of colleges and universities are older than 25 years of
age and have entered the workforce, according Educom, a nonprofit
organization in Washington, DC that tracks higher educational trends
in the United States.
     Satellite distance learning is thriving in the open market of
business and merely surviving in the market of education. But the
smart money knows that the learning market, as a whole, represents a
tremendous economic opportunity. Satellites will unquestionably assume
a vital role in the infrastructure of the emerging knowledge economy.
Still, it's important to make distinctions and recognize that some
segments are more promising--at least, in the short term--than others.
For those who invest wisely, the learning market may turn out to be
one of the greatest business frontiers of the next century. 
      Britton Manasco is editor and publisher of Knowledge Inc.
(http://www.knowledgeinc.com/quantera), an executive newsletter that
covers trends in information technology and knowledge management. He
can be reached at 415/961-4106 or online at ManascoB@aol.com. He is
also founder of Quantum Era Enterprises, a Mountain View, CA-based
consulting firm.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
VIA SATELLITE via NewsNet
November 1, 1996

SATELLITE SITES ON THE WEB
by Gerald E. Oberst, Jr.

      Increasingly, the satellite industry is accessing the vast store
of information that is on the Internet, free or nearly so for the
taking. The Net can be a strong resource for regulatory or general
industry research, if you have time to play with the many different
sites that are available.
     A few practical warnings at the outset: you can spend an entire
lifetime sorting and sifting through the virtual maze of Internet
sites. Thus, surfers generally maintain a library of bookmarks for the
best or most-used sites. Some favorites are maintained by the Analysys
consulting firm in Cambridge, U.K., and the University of Michigan. 
     The "Regulator" page on the Analysys server includes links to
numerous regulatory agencies and many other topics within the domain
of telecommunications. The Michigan site is succinctly named "Telecom
Information Resources on the Internet." It is supported by the
Michigan Schools of Information and of Public Policy Studies, and
claims to provide links to over 2,000 sites. Another useful site is
"Diane's List" maintained at the U.S. National Telecommunications and
Information Administration. 
     A little Net secret is that many documents pulled up are in
formats that do not translate well into hard copy. This is a problem
if you need to download and maintain the original document. Reprinting
Internet documents, particularly those with built-in links to other
Internet documents, often requires reformatting the original. The end
result can either be difficult to read, messy, or starkly different
from the original in format and pagination. (Hint, use the "replace"
word processing function a lot to eliminate those pesky HTML codes and
useless paragraph marks.)
     Those caveats aside, the Net is a startling gold mine of
information. There are few laws or government regulations on Web
sites, the Canadian and U.S. telecoms laws being notable exceptions.
However, a large number of regulatory agencies now maintain Web sites
that can be useful for anyone working in the international arena.
     Two sites on which to focus are maintained by the U.S. Federal
Communications Commission and the International Telecommunication
Union. 
     The FCC site is a basic bookmark for the satellite researcher, of
course, since it is a quick source of recent FCC documents. You cannot
rely on it for older documents (go to the pay online databanks for
that). But for anyone outside Washington, DC, who does not obtain
hard-copy FCC documents regularly, the fcc.gov site is a great
resource.
     The Internet is now the primary source for updates on the FCC
working groups that are preparing for the World Radio Conferences
(WRCs). The FCC decided to stop preparing lengthy notices of proposed
rulemaking or notices of inquiry on WRC issues, but instead to publish
regular agendas, minutes and schedules for the various WRC working
groups. To follow the working group agendas and summaries, go to the
WRC-97 site within the International Bureau.
The International Bureau is the location for most satellite-related
items, so this is a site to "bookmark."
     The ITU maintains a treasure trove of information, but as with
most treasure hunts, there can be frustrating deadends. Some of the
most enticing documents might be available only for a fee, or to ITU
Members, or participating member companies that have passwords. Even
so, quite a few documents on current debates concerning, for example,
"paper satellites" can be found under the search term "Resolution 18"
on the function within the ITU site. The background on regulatory or
policy forums can be pulled off the Web as well.
     Even if certain documents are password protected, sometimes you
can find the same document freely available at another site within the
labyrinth of ITU levels. Unfortunately, you will not be able to access
ITU recommendations that way, since the agency wants to preserve its
ability to earn substantial revenues from selling these and other
documents to the paying public.
     One advantage of most ITU documents available on the Web is that
they suffer from fewer formatting problems than many others. ITU
documents can usually be downloaded and reprinted with little or no
reformatting. The same cannot be said for many European Commission
documents, even in the telecommunications and Information Society
area, which can suffer from messy formats.
     Want to follow the World Trade Organization telecommunications
trade talks that are reviewing how to liberalize international
satellite services? Look at the U.S. Trade Representative site. Want
to know about NASA? One of the many available places to look is the
Spacelink site. Want to keep track of satellites in orbit? There's the
site to follow site.
These sites scratch the surface of available resources, and more are
becoming available every day.
      :Mr. Oberst is an attorney in Hogan & Hartson's Brussels office
and can be reached by fax: +32/2-502-2860 or internet:
geo@br1.hhlaw.com.  

Satellite Sites:

www.ntia.doc.gov/oiahome/dianelist
www.analysys.co.uk/commslib
www.spp.umich.edu/telecom
www.fcc.gov/ib/wrc97
www.itu.ch
www.spacelink.msfc.nasa.gov



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>