
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B040-293</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te47.html 205.156.212.5 19970122052142 text/html 40478
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:19:42 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:00 GMT
Content-length: 40291
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te47.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 11, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PA. BEATS FEDERAL PREEMPTION DEADLINE WITH INTRALATA ORDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>FIVE MORE STATES MAKE MOVES ON INTRALATA TOLL DIALING PARITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(951 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>STATES REGAIN SOME GROUND AS TELECOM BILL ENTERS HOME STRETCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2157 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>CALIF. PUC KICKS OFF LOCAL COMPETITION IN $7 BILLION MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(606 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>SEVEN OTHER STATES TAKE STEPS ON THE ROAD TO LOCAL COMPETITION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1304 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>CARRIER TO BE INVESTIGATED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(151 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>PRICE REGULATION REVAMPED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>TOLL PLAN WON'T BE DELAYED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>VIDEO INTERESTS FIGHT TAX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

PA. BEATS FEDERAL PREEMPTION DEADLINE WITH INTRALATA ORDER

Pennsylvania has become the 17th state to order establishment of
intraLATA toll dialing parity, making it the last state likely
to beat a preemption deadline contained in the pending federal
telecom bill.

The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) has ordered all
telcos to implement intraLATA dialing parity during 1997.

By acting late last month, the PUC made it likely Pennsylvania
will be among the states escaping preemption under the intraLATA
toll dialing provisions of the pending federal telecom reform
legislation.

In its current form, the federal legislation would preempt any
multiLATA state that voted to order intraLATA toll dialing
parity after December 1995, until such time as the resident Bell
regional entered the interLATA long-distance market.  Single-
LATA states would be exempt from the preemption.  States that
acted prior to the cutoff date would be "grandfathered" and
their programs would be allowed to run to completion.

Under the PUC order, Bell Atlantic and other Pennsylvania telcos
with more than 250,000 lines must complete implementation by
July 1997, while smaller telcos have until the end of 1997.

The PUC went along with the November recommendations of an
administrative law judge (ALJ) for intraLATA parity, except on
the issue of timing.   The ALJ had wanted to give large telcos
just six months to comply, but Bell Atlantic successfully argued
for a longer implementation period, citing the need to make
network modifications that require relatively long lead times.

AT&T and MCI had opposed stretching the implementation period,
saying any extension would shield Bell Atlantic's near monopoly
in intraLATA toll from serious competition for the additional
time.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

FIVE MORE STATES MAKE MOVES ON INTRALATA TOLL DIALING PARITY

In addition to Pennsylvania, the states of Michigan, Wisconsin,
Arizona, New Jersey and Indiana also got in under the federal
wire with various requests for intraLATA toll dialing parity.

In Michigan, regulators have asked federal authorities to grant
Ameritech the interLATA long-distance waivers required for the
telco to comply with inter- and intraLATA toll competition
mandates contained in a 1995 state telecom law.

The Michigan Public Service Commission (PSC) has petitioned for
a waiver of the federal interLATA service restrictions so that
Ameritech can comply with Michigan legislative toll competition
requirements that link provision of interLATA long-distance to
intraLATA toll dialing parity.

In a letter asking the U.S. Department of Justice to petition
U.S. District Court Judge Harold Greene for interLATA relief,
the Michigan PSC said the requested waiver will enable Ameritech
Michigan to fulfill a directive in Michigan's 1995 state telecom
reform act that the company should begin providing intrastate
interLATA long-distance services as soon as possible, and be
offering such services to at least 50 percent of its customers
in competitive local markets by May of 1996.

Michigan Gov. John Engler Nov. 30, 1995, signed into law the
state telecom reform act (SB-722, Act 216) that, among other
things, prohibits mandatory implementation of full intraLATA
"1+" toll dialing parity in any market area where the serving
telco is not providing interLATA long-distance service.

In Ameritech's case, however, once that company receives federal
permission to begin interLATA service in Michigan, the 1995
state law makes intraLATA dialing parity mandatory immediately
in Ameritech market areas where interLATA service is legal and a
local exchange competitor has been certified.

Competitive local Ameritech markets include Grand Rapids and
Detroit.

The PSC implemented dialing parity for intraLATA WATS services
in 1991, and in August 1994 issued an order requiring Ameritech
to implement full dialing parity for all intraLATA interexchange
services by Jan. 1, 1996, an order that the telco still was
fighting to modify when the new state law was enacted.

The Michigan law also contains a directive to the Engler
administration and the PSC that they collectively pursue the
federal relief necessary to allow Ameritech to fulfill the state
law's toll competition provisions.

An Ameritech Michigan spokesman said the company fully supports
the state's efforts, but added that Ameritech will not be
providing any interLATA long-distance service in Michigan until
federal authorities issue a waiver or grant other relief from
the interLATA service ban.

The PSC is awaiting a reply from Justice before deciding its
next step.

In addition to the new waiver request submitted to the Justice
Department by the Michigan PSC, Ameritech has pending before
Judge Greene its own request for an interLATA service trial in
the Grand Rapids and Chicago LATAs, which Justice supports.

The big complicating factor in all this is what Congress will do
regarding interLATA relief for Ameritech and the other Bell
regionals when, or if, a final federal telecom bill emerges from
the House-Senate conference committee.

In Wisconsin, a state court has refused to stay a Public Service
Commission (PSC) order requiring Ameritech Wisconsin to begin
implementation of intraLATA dialing parity this month, with
completion of the process by July.

Dane County Circuit Court Judge Mori Krueger ruled that
Ameritech had not shown that it was incapable of fulfilling the
order or that it would suffer great harm if the PSC order were
implemented.

In Arizona, the Corporation Commission has given U S West and
other large telcos until April 20 to implement full intraLATA
toll dialing parity, as part of an order authorizing intraLATA
competitors to begin operations.

That deadline is about 10 weeks earlier than the original July
1, 1996, implementation deadline specified in the January 1995
order opening the intraLATA toll market to competition.

While the order did not detail the reasons behind the move, the
new date may have been a compromise to settle a pending dispute
between U S West and interexchange carriers over the validity of
intraLATA equal access requests filed by interexchange carriers
last summer when they applied for intraLATA certification.

The order authorizes AT&T and MCI to begin intraLATA toll
service; Sprint has a request for intraLATA authorization still
pending.

In the order authorizing the intraLATA competitors, the
commission also further streamlined regulation of interexchange
carrier services.  The new rules eliminate the 14-day notice
period for changes to toll discounts, allowing carriers to
modify or introduce toll discount plans the same day as notice
is given to the commission and the public.  However, no discount
can take the price below total service long run incremental
cost.

Changing the tariffed ceiling rates from which discounts are
figured still requires a commission review.

The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities is scheduled to release
a proposed order for intraLATA toll presubscription Jan. 16.

Comments on that order will be taken until Feb. 15, after which
the board will decide whether to adopt or modify its proposal.
A final decision could come as early as mid-March.

In Indiana, the Utility Regulatory Commission has scheduled
evidentiary hearings Feb. 7-9 on a joint petition by four
interexchange carriers seeking establishment of full intraLATA
toll dialing parity.

The petition by AT&T, Sprint, LDDS Worldcom and LCI
International demands establishment of intraLATA parity as soon
as technically feasible.

Final prefiled material must be submitted by Jan. 17.  Final
post-hearing briefs are due March 8 with final reply briefs due
April 1.  Under its procedural rules, the commission must reach
a decision before July.

However, by acting in 1996, Indiana may find itself preempted by
the pending federal act.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

STATES REGAIN SOME GROUND AS TELECOM BILL ENTERS HOME STRETCH

State utility commissions have retained some important areas of
authority over local telecom competition in a newly compromised
federal telecom act now getting the finishing touches in a
House-Senate conference committee in Congress.

But the federal act also will allow parties to seek Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) preemption of a state's actions
on grounds that they conflict with the federal law.

And the act gives the states no significant role in determining
whether a Bell company can enter the interLATA long-distance
market.

The final compromise between the differing House and Senate
versions of the act looks like it largely will hew to the House
version but with Senate language on some key issues such as
universal service, according to a 281-page draft obtained by
State Telephone Regulation Report.

Right now, the federal bill appears to be a compromise that
nobody really loves, but which the major interest groups think
they can live with.

The deal appears to be jelling as key factions release
statements endorsing the draft measure, including the
Telecommunications Industry Association, the National
Association of Broadcasters and the Alliance for Competitive
Telecommunications (which represents the Bell companies'
interests).

There's also been a lack of strenuous objection to the draft
from the United States Telephone Association (USTA) or the
Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel),  which
represents interexchange carrier interests.

Of course, there is always the possibility that further
jockeying among congressional leaders could upset the developing
accord or add to the time before the conference bill is put to a
floor vote in both chambers.

The draft conference bill requires states to remove all barriers
to competitive entry in telecom markets.  It also establishes
the checklist of services that all major telcos must make
available to competitors.

The bill allows states to set their own rules governing
competition, provided the state rules do not conflict with
federal rules and policies regarding competition.

The FCC must issue a set of national rules defining the
framework for interconnection, unbundling, resale and other
competition requirements within six months of the bill's
effective date.

Within the framework established by the FCC, states can
promulgate rules on interim number portability, access to
rights-of-way, reciprocal compensation and other issues.

But the bill allows the FCC to preempt a state rule if it
violates the federal bill's local competition requirements.

The bill makes physical on-site collocation the national default
option for network interconnection, but allows states the option
of letting a telco provide virtual, or offsite, collocation.

States also can exempt small telcos from competition
requirements where compliance with a particular provision would
be "unduly economically burdensome" or not technically feasible.

"Small" telcos are defined as those with fewer than than 2
percent of the nation's access lines.

The states retain jurisdiction over interconnection agreements
negotiated between local competitors and incumbents, and can
reject an agreement if it violates the public interest, among
other grounds.  If a state does not reject a proposed agreement
within 90 days, the pact automatically goes into effect.

If interconnection negotiations don't produce an agreement after
135 days of trying, a competitor can call on state regulators
for binding arbitration, where the state sets the rates and
implementation schedule.

If a state must set the rates for interconnection, transport and
termination, it must allow each carrier to recover its costs.

Although states "may include a reasonable profit" when setting
the rates, they cannot impose a rate-of-return ceiling on
interconnection services or penalize a provider that generates a
greater actual profit margin from such services.

However, the federal bill again allows the FCC to step in and
take charge of any interconnection proceeding upon a complaint
or other indication that a state is not regulating
interconnection services in a manner consistent with the federal
law.

Provisions barring states from imposing rate-of-return
regulation on noncompetitive services have been deleted from the
compromise measure.

On local resale, the legislation requires that all services a
telco retails also must be offered to resellers at wholesale.

The bill settles the wholesale discount squabbles by defining
wholesale rates as the retail rate minus costs such as billing,
collection and marketing that the telco avoids by selling to a
competitor.

States are allowed to bar local resellers from reselling
residential local service to business customers.

The legislation also mandates sharing of network facilities
where one telco, typically a smaller one, wants to rely on
specialized facilities of a larger telco in order to provide
services the small telco cannot afford to provide on its own.
But the bill says the small telco cannot force a large telco to
share facilities if the small company will use the shared
resources in the large telco's service territory.

The states retain jurisdiction over public safety requirements,
such as "911" emergency dialing systems, in a competitive local
marketplace.

State and local governments also retain their authority to
manage access to public rights-of-way, provided they don't
discriminate among carriers.

On universal service, the federal legislation allows state
regulators to determine which carriers will be eligible to
receive universal service subsidies from a fund, but requires
that all telecom providers contribute to the universal service
support system.

States can impose their own universal service requirements and
definitions of the universal service entitlement.  But those
requirements and definitions must be consistent with a national
policy framework to be established by a federal-state joint
board, acting under a set of principles embodied in the federal
legislation.

Such principles include a requirement that comparable rates and
services must be available in rural and urban areas.

Another principle to be embodied in universal service policy is
that public schools and libraries are entitled to a discount, to
be set by the FCC, on all telecom services.

This means providers will be able to seek compensation for their
losses on discounted school/library service through the
universal service fund.

While the states kept important areas of authority in the local
exchange, they did not fare so well in the federal bill's
sections on interexchange services.

The final bill does not give states a major role in the process
of approving interLATA long distance entry by the Bell

companies, and restricts the states' ability to require
intraLATA toll dialing parity.

The bill immediately lets a Bell company provide long distance
service between points outside its region, as well as
"incidental" interLATA long-distance connections used for its
other services such as cellular or video.

No FCC or state approval is required.

For authorizing Bell interLATA long- distance within the region,
the bill places the decision in the hands of the FCC, which must
find that Bell entry is in the public interest.

A Bell company can apply for in-region authority immediately;
the FCC has 90 days to decide.  The FCC can grant permission on
a state-by-state basis or region wide.

For each state, the applicant Bell company must show that at
least one facilities-based local exchange competitor is
operating in at least one city in the state.

The applicant must also show that it has made interconnection
available to competitors, offers nondiscriminatory access to
poles and conduits, and has unbundled local loops, interoffice
local transport and local switching.

The Bell also must demonstrate its willingness to offer services
for resale, provide reciprocal compensation and offer
competitors access to "911" services, directory assistance,
local operator call completion services, and white pages
directory listings.

Also, the Bell must offer number portability either by a state-
approved interim system or through full portability once the FCC
has issuesd the rules.

If after 10 months the Bell company has seen no local competitor
express serious interest in taking service under the state-
approved local interconnection provisions for a particular
state, or had only a taker that negotiated in bad faith, the
Bell can self-certify compliance with the competitive checklist
for that state.

The FCC must consult with the Department of Justice (DOJ) on a
Bell company's in-region interLATA application and must give
"substantial weight" to the DOJ's view, but the final FCC
decision does not have to conform to the DOJ opinion.

The bill does not permit a state to impose mandatory intraLATA
dialing parity on a Bell company until the telco enters the
interLATA long-distance business.

Single-LATA states, however, are exempt from this provision, as
are states that acted during or before December 1995.

Dialing parity, already in place in interLATA long-distance,
means the ability to place a call on a competing carrier's
network by dialing the same number of digits as needed to use
the incumbent carrier's network.

In other provisions, the bill also repeals a federal restriction
on the nation's 14 largest multistate electric utility
companies, which are regulated by a 1935 federal holding company
act that kept them from entering the telecom business.

These companies must establish a separate telecom subsidiary
that must obtain market entry permission from the FCC.

The parent electric utility cannot sell facilities or other
assets to the telecom unit without state approval.

All affiliate transactions between the parent and the subsidiary
are subject to audit by the state commissions, which can inspect
the books of parent and subsidiary alike.  The utility's telecom
subsidiary cannot issue its own stock or debt.  Nor can the
parent utility mortgage its operations to finance its telecom
operation.

The parent utility must also file reports with the FCC regarding
capitalization of the telecom venture.

The final federal bill allows a Bell company into manufacturing,
by means of a separate subsidiary, as soon as it is allowed to
provide interLATA long-distance.  A Bell operating company
cannot discriminate in any way in favor of the manufacturing
affiliate or its products.

For four years after enactment, the bill requires Bell
electronic publishing to be through a fully separate subsidiary
with its own marketplace identity.

The bill also bans all Bell companies other than Ameritech from
entering the alarm monitoring business for five years.
Ameritech already owns an alarm monitoring company, but would be
prohibited from acquiring any additional alarm companies for
five years.

The bill's sections on cable TV aim to give cable the
flexibility and profitability to compete against local telcos.

It deregulates cable rates for "upper tier" services at the
earlier of March 1999 or the date when "effective competition"
exists in a market, such as from a telco's video programming
services.

Small cable operators, those with fewer than 1 percent of all
U.S. cable subscribers, are rate deregulated immediately.

Until rates are deregulated, cable rate complaints to the FCC
can be made only by the local franchising authority.  And that
authority can't complain unless it has received subscriber
complaints within the first 90 days after a rate increase.

While retaining current federal regulations for wireless cable,
pure common carrier video systems and telco-owned cable TV
systems, the bill creates a new category called "open video
systems" where the transmission provider can own some of the
programming content.

Such open systems must leave one-third of the transmission
capacity open to other content providers.

Such systems are exempt from local franchise fees, but may be
assessed a local tax in lieu of the franchise fee.

The FCC has six months to write the rules governing this new
category of open video systems, and will decide telco
applications seeking this type of regulation.

Telcos under the bill cannot have more than a 10 percent
interest in a cable system in their service areas unless the FCC
issues a waiver.

Exceptions from this rule are made if the cable system serves a
rural area of under 35,000 population, or the telco itself has
below $100 million in annual revenues and the cable system has
less than 20,000 subscribers, or the cable system serves fewer
than 10 percent of the households in the telco's service area.

The bill also allows TV broadcasters to buy cable TV systems and
narrows sharply the grounds for the FCC to turn down renewal of
a broadcaster's license.  It also loosens current limits on how
many radio and TV stations one entity can own in the nation's 50
largest markets.

The bill also prohibits transmission of indecent as well as
obscene material over electronic networks under penalty of a
$100,000 fine and up to 10 years in jail.

And it requires TV manufacturers to include a special chip in
sets so that parents can program the TV to block display of
shows that carry high violence content ratings.

As a concession to opponents, the bill calls for expedited
judicial review of these provisions, meaning any appeals will go
directly from the federal district court to the U.S. Supreme
Court.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

CALIF. PUC KICKS OFF LOCAL COMPETITION IN $7 BILLION MARKET

The California Public Utility Commission (PUC) last week kicked
off local exchange competition in the nation's largest local
telecom marketplace as it implemented rules for the 31 companies
authorized late last month to compete for    $7 billion in local
exchange revenues from 15 million access lines.

The PUC rules for open competition are similar to rules proposed
in July 1995 when the PUC began accepting certification
applications.

Although competition is now legal for all switched and non-
switched local services, it will be at least a few months before
the new entrants can actually begin advertising for customers
and delivering competitive service.

During the interim, new competitors will be negotiating
interconnection terms with incumbent telcos Pacific Bell and GTE
California, as well as preparing tariffs or price lists for
their services.

For the first year, terminating compensation will be addressed
through the bill-and-keep method, where the originating network
keeps all the charges for a local call.

The rules also protect consumers against unfair business
practices, for disclosure of rates and terms of service, and for
resolving complaints.

The PUC rules require all local providers to interconnect with
"911" answering points, and to the state telephone relay system
for the handicapped.

New providers also must offer a lifeline rate, and must provide
customers with a written confirmation of each sale in the same
language as the original sale was made.

The companies certified as local exchange competitors include
GTE California and Pacific Bell, which now are authorized to
compete for local exchange customers in each others' service
areas.

The others authorized to provide competitive local phone
services include:  Advantage Communications, Associated Group
Inc., AT&T, five local units of Brooks Fiber Inc., Cable Plus
Company, Century Telecom, Continental Telecom, Electric
Lightwave Inc., Fiber Data Systems, GST Lightwave, GST Pacific
Lightwave, GTE Intelligent Network Services, ICG Access
Services, Info-Tech Communications.

Also, Linkatel Pacific, MCImetro, MFS Intellenet, NewTelco,
Nextlink, Pac-West Telecom, three local units of Teleport
Communications Group, Viacom Communications and Winstar
Wireless.

The rules also protect consumers against unfair business
practices, for disclosure of rates and terms of service, and for
resolving complaints.

In addition to its interconnection, unbundling and public safety
requirements, the PUC also has expanded its bans against the
unlawful practice of "slamming" (unauthorized changes to the
presubscribed carrier) to include unauthorized changes in local
exchange provider.

Also, all local providers are prohibited from "redlining," or
designating certain neighborhoods as low priority for service
installations or repairs.

In a related action, the PUC says it will seek a bill in the
1996 California state legislature to allow implementation of a
state universal service fund that will subsidize companies
serving high-cost areas.

The PUC's proposed universal service support system calls for
giving customers in high-cost areas a phone bill credit for the
difference between what they pay and what it costs their local
provider to serve them.

The local telecom provider will be compensated from the
universal service fund.  Any local provider would be able to
receive payments from the fund, provided it is willing to serve
all the customers in an area.

Instead of traditional cost studies, the PUC proposes
determining the costs of local service through a proxy formula
based on population, terrain, climate, technology and loop
lengths.

If enabling legislation is passed, the PUC in June plans to
define the universal service entitlement, establish the revenue
source for the universal service fund, identify the high-cost
areas eligible for subsidy, designate the reference rates, and
prescribe a standard format for notifying customers about
services and rates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

SEVEN OTHER STATES TAKE STEPS ON THE ROAD TO LOCAL COMPETITION

California is not the only state with action in local
competition.  Colorado, Ohio, Michigan, Nebraska, Maryland,
Virgina and Illinois have seen movement on local competition
issues.

The Colorado Public Utilities Commission (PUC) last week began a
series of evidentiary hearings, that will last until March, on
proposed rules for local exchange telephone competition.

Hearings will continue Jan. 12, 25 and 26; on each Thursday and
Friday in February, and March 7 and 8.  A proposed order is
expected around the first week in April.  The PUC must issue a
final order by May 31 in order for the rules to take effect July
1, as required under the state's 1995 local competition law.

A working group convened last June to find consensus on local
competition came to agreements on numbering portability and most
aspects of "911" provisioning, but on other local competition
issues was able only to outline alternative positions of the
major interest groups, which will be addressed during the
hearings.

Also figuring in the hearings will be public concern aired in a
series of public forums held around the state last fall.

Some issues raised in all 16 public sessions included concerns
that effective statewide local competition is an unrealistic
goal, and that less-wealthy or thinly populated areas will
suffer from diminished investment and attention in a competitive
market.

Rural residents were concerned that advanced telecom services
won't reach smaller communities, impairing their economic
development.

Many state residents recognized that the current definitions of
basic telephone service are 10 years behind technology, but most
don't want to pay for advanced capabilities until they are ready
to make  use of such services.

The forums showed most people recognize the need for a strong
government watchdog agency to police a competitive telecom
markeplace.

The forums also showed most people support the idea of a state
fund to preserve universal service, but that a sizeable minority
oppose any subsidized phone service rates.

Cincinnati Bell has asked the Ohio Supreme Court to void the
local exchange competition decisions of the Ohio Public
Utilities Commission, on grounds that the PUC exceeded its
statutory authority in approving local competition.

The telco contends that current law did not give the PUC the
right to issue the competitive local exchange certificate
granted to Time Warner Communications

in October for the 37 Ohio counties where Time Warner cable
systems operate, nor to certify any of the other local
competitors approved since then.

Under Cincinnati Bell's interpretation, the state legislature
must first pass enabling legislation giving the PUC the explicit
right to approve local competition.

Cincinnati Bell and other telcos previously asked the PUC to
reverse itself on authorizing local competition, but were
refused; Cincinnati Bell said its court appeal is the next step
provided by law.

In Virginia, MFS Communications became the first company to seek
switched basic exchange authority from the Corporation
Commission under a 1995 state law that allowed full local
competition as of Jan. 1.

MFS said it plans to offer one-stop-shopping for local and toll
services to smaller businesses in local exchanges of Bell
Atlantic and GTE.  MFS already provides non-switched services in
Richmond and Northern Virginia.

The commission has 180 days to rule on certification
applications.  The commission also is continuing to work on
local competition rules, with comments on resale issues due
March 1 and comments on universal service support due April 1.

AT&T has asked the Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC) for
authority to provide residential and business local service
statewide.

AT&T initially plans to resell local services of Bell Atlantic
but eventually wants to operate its own local exchange
facilities.

Before AT&T begins business operations, however, the company
said Maryland regulators must establish unrestricted resale and
cost-based wholesale prices, and implement interconnection
principles that guarantee access to other providers' networks on
fair and reasonable terms.

The Maryland PSC last week adopted some important rules for
implementing local competition in that state.

The commission established one of the lowest interconnection
rates in the country - a half-cent per minute.  This is far
below the 2.1 cents interim rate established more than a year
ago.

The commission rules also require interim numbering portability,
and require all providers to offer access to "911" services.

Under the rules, local competitors will be able to define their
own local calling areas.  They will not have to use the calling
areas established by Bell Atlantic.

Meanwhile, AT&T in Illinois has asked the Commerce Commission to
require Ameritech Illinois to offer deeper local resale
discounts comparable to the resale discounts that exist in the
long-distance business.

AT&T, which has been authorized in Illinois as a local exchange
provider, has been unable to negotiate a  satisfactory resale
agreement with Ameritech and wants the commission to impose more
favorable resale terms.

AT&T contends the 6 percent to 8 percent discounts offered in
Ameritech's wholesale local tariffs are insufficient to allow
AT&T to make money.  AT&T contended local wholesale rates for
resale should run closer to the 33 percent to 50 percent resale
discounts that AT&T says prevail in the long-distance business.

Also in Illinois, the Commerce Commission has approved a
petition by an affiliate of Southwestern Bell Mobile Systems
(SBMS) to sell wireline local services under the Cellular One
brand name that is used for cellular service.

The authority granted to SBMS Illinois Services Inc., allows it
to offer wireline local services alongside existing cellu-

lar services in the Chicago LATA.  The company will be filing
its wireline local exchange tariffs soon.

SBMS also is authorized as a wireline provider in New York,
where it operates in Buffalo and Rochester under the Cellular
One name.  The company is eying Massachusetts, Maryland and
Washington, D.C., where it already operates cellular systems.

Under the FCC waiver that allows SBMS to bundle cellular and
wireline services outside the Southwestern Bell region, the
wireline local services are handled through a separate corporate
entity that shares facilties, systems, personnel and management
with the cellular operation.

In Michigan, an Ameritech business unit, formed to provide local
exchange services and interexchange services once the federal
interLATA restrictions are lifted, has withdrawn its application
before the Michigan PSC for authority to provide local services
in Grand Rapids and Detroit (STRR Sept. 21, 1995).

Ameritech Communications Inc. (ACI) asked the commission to
dismiss its application without prejudice, saying it did not
want to pursue the matter at this time.

ACI had anticipated providing services either under terms of a
trial interLATA waiver pending before Judge Harold Greene, or
under the federal telecom legislation.  ACI planned to target
customers who prefer one-stop shopping for an integrated package
of local and long-distance services.

The ACI certification application had raised difficult questions
about what kinds of state regulatory safeguards are required for
a traditional telephone company who is both a local competitor
and the local incumbent in the same city.

The Nebraska PSC has opened a rulemaking with the goal of
implementing full local exchange competition in 1997.

The PSC's goals are to begin certification of switched basic
exchange competitors by the start of 1997, with competitors to
begin operation in switched services by July 1997.

The PSC has proposed several conditions that must be met before
local markets become fully competitive.

Those include reasonable local rates, provision of full
intraLATA toll dialing parity, provision of local numbering
portability, and a support system to preserve universal service
in a competitive environment.  A procedural schedule will be
developed soon.

Nebraska allows partial local competition in private lines and
other non-switched local services, but up to now has not opened
the switched local services.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

CARRIER TO BE INVESTIGATED

The California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) has decided to
take a more aggressive approach against slamming by keeping
carriers out of the state's markets who appear unfit to operate
or likely to operate illegally.

Accordingly, the PUC's safety and enforcement division has
recommended that the PUC reject a petitition by EqualNet
Communications for authority to provide intrastate interexchange
service in California.

According to the division, EqualNet should not be allowed into
California because it appears to be using deceptive and
misleading marketing practices, including slamming, which is the
unauthorized switching of a customer's presubscribed long
distance carrier.

In addition, said the division, EqualNet misrepresents itself as
being affiliated with AT&T in order to induce customers to
change.

During 1995, the PUC received 110 complaints against EqualNet
and, added the enforcement division, the company has been the
subject of slamming complaints in Illinois, Kansas and North
Carolina.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

PRICE REGULATION REVAMPED

The California PUC has decided to freeze the rates of Pacific
Bell and GTE California through 1998.

For Pac Bell, the freeze takes effect immediately, but GTE will
have to make one final price adjustment under the old indexing
formula in 1996.  GTE rates will then be frozen for 1997 and
1998.

The two telcos had petitioned the PUC to eliminate the price-cap
indexing formula used to regulate rates under California's
hybrid system of price and earnings regulation for its big
telcos.

The formula pegs annual price adjustments to the gross domestic
product price index minus a 5 percent productivity factor.  With
the low inflation of recent years, the telcos have had to make
substantial rate cuts each year.

Rather than setting a productivity offset that is less than
inflation, which would have resulted in rate increases, the PUC
made the productivity offset equal to inflation.  This in effect
freezes rates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

TOLL PLAN WON'T BE DELAYED

The Florida Public Service Commission has denied motions from
interexchange carriers to delay implementation of a BellSouth
message-rate plan for intraLATA toll pricing.

The plan, to go into effect Jan. 15, sets a flat price of 25
cents for a residential intraLATA toll call, regardless of
distance, duration or time of day.  Business customers will pay
10 cents the first minute and  6 cents per additional minute.

The plan, said BellSouth, will reduce its intraLATA toll
revenues by around $25 million.

AT&T, MCI and other interexchange carriers wanted the starting
date delayed so the competitive implications of the plan could
be more fully explored.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
STATE TELEPHONE REGULATION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

VIDEO INTERESTS FIGHT TAX

Cable and satellite video providers have filed a suit in the
Illinois courts to overturn a Chicago city amusement tax applied
to video gross receipts.

The video companies say the 7 percent tax on gross revenues is
unconstitutional because it taxes a selected mode of electronic
speech while exempting other equivalent electronic channels of
expression such as TV broadcasting.

The tax also allegedly discriminates against cable subscribers
by assessing them extra to fund city services that benefit the
entire population.

The plaintiffs also contend the city tax, if upheld, would set a
dangerous precedent for local taxation of online information
services, home shopping networks and other electronic
information media.

Further, the cable companies argue the tax is double taxation of
cable by the city, since there is no credit given for the local
franchise taxes cable companies already pay.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>