
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B036-337</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te52.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045657 text/html 39738
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:54:23 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:59 GMT
Content-length: 39551
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te52.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
FCC REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>FROM 281 TO FOUR PAGES, FCC REPORT DIGESTS NEW TELECOM BILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2497 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DEMOCRATS, BELLS SCORE ON TELECOM BILL - IF THIS VERSION FLIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1731 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>FCC STILL CLOSED, BUT LICENSE AUCTIONS ROLL ON - NETTING $1.5B</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(690 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SMALL CARRIERS NET BIG COMPLAINT TOTALS, FCC STUDY FINDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(372 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>'TOWER' OF 214S SHRINKS AS CARRIERS GIVE UP, LOOK TO CONGRESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(542 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>THE POST-BILL WORLD: MORE LAWSUITS, NEED FOR WELL-CRAFTED RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(369 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
FCC REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

FROM 281 TO FOUR PAGES, FCC REPORT DIGESTS NEW TELECOM BILL

The differences of House- and Senate-passed telecom legislation
have been reconciled by a House-Senate conference committee into
a compromise bill - a "conference report" - that largely hews to
the House version of the bill, but incorporates Senate language
on such key issues as universal service. The report still only
is being circulated on Capitol Hill and among key lobbyists, but
a copy of the 281-page measure obtained by FCC Report shows it
is full-scale legislation, ready to be passed by each chamber -
if key leaders give their go-ahead.  But while the legislation
looks like the stuff of future law, will anyone but lawyers be
able to read it?  FCC Report offers this condensed version.

TITLE I:  Telecommunication Services

In Part II, "The Development of Competitive Markets," the bill
gets down to the nitty-gritty, detailing the interconnection and
universal service requirements and eliminating federal and state
barriers to local-market entry.  This section includes the
checklist of services that all telcos, except some rural ones,
must make available to competitors.  They must offer
interconnection and unbundled access to network elements "at any
technically feasible point within the carrier's network" and on
"just, reasonable and nondiscriminatory" terms.  They must also
provide nondiscriminatory resale, number portability, dialing
parity, access to their right of way and reciprocal compensation
arrangements.

Regarding resale, the bill requires all services the telco
retails to also be offered at wholesale, but lets state
regulators ban competitors from reselling a telco's local
services to business customers if the regulators choose.  The
telco must also offer the competitor on-site colocation unless
the state regulators allow the telco to provide virtual, or
offsite, colocation.

The FCC is given six months to write these rules.  It also gets
to preempt state rules if those rules violate the bill's local
competition requirements.

The states, meanwhile, are allowed to set their own rules,
provided they do not "substantially prevent implementation" of
this part of the bill.  They also can issue exemptions to small
telcos (those with less than 2 percent of the nation's access
lines) if compliance with a part of the law would be "unduly
economically burdensome" or not technically feasible.  (But
rural cable TV operators offering telephony don't qualify for
this.)

States also get to review interconnection agreements - they can
reject them if they violate the public interest, among other
grounds - and they must act within 90 days or the agreement goes
into effect.  The bill also lets the FCC step in and take charge
of any proceeding if it is advised or otherwise learns that the
state is not carrying out its job under the new law.

States also get to review the terms and conditions offered by
their Bell company - they must act on the tariff in 60 days -
and they get to set the wholesale rates for a telco's telecom
services.  The bill defines "wholesale" as the retail rate,
minus the telco's "avoidable" costs such as billing, marketing,
collection.  (This resolves a long-standing dispute over what
terms should govern resale.)

All negotiations with competitors must be in good faith and the
resulting agreements, with prices, are to be submitted to state
regulators, who also can be called on to mediate negotiations.

If they don't get an agreement 135 days after their request, a
competitors may call on state regulators to impose compulsory
arbitration on the telco.  The state can then set the rates and
implementation schedule for a telco to provide the requested
service.  But, in setting those rates, the state cannot use
rate-of-return regulation and "may include a reasonable profit."
Charges for transport and termination of traffic must allow each
carrier to recover its costs.

The opposite side of the coin, for state regulators, is that
they must remove all barriers to entry to both the interstate
and intrastate telecom markets.  But they still get to impose
their own universal service and public safety requirements and
they and local governments get to manage their rights of way,
provided they don't discriminate among carriers.

On universal service, the bill requires all carriers to
contribute to universal service, but only allows eligible
carriers - common carriers selected by their state - to withdraw
from that fund.  Otherwise, it follows the route taken on that
topic by the House legislation by giving the job of setting the
universal service rules to a federal-state board.  The board and
the FCC, which will implement those rules, will act under a set
of principles, including a mission to ensure that comparable
rates and services are available in urban and rural areas.  The
definition of universal service can be expanded by the FCC, the
bill says.

On the other hand, the bill also requires that discounted
service be offered to  public elementary and secondary schools
and to libraries.  The FCC will set the discount.  Rural health
care providers - medical schools, county health departments -
also cannot be charged more for service than their urban
counterparts.

Unlike resale, sharing allows a telco, typically a smaller one,
to rely on the facilities of the larger telco, say a specialized
switch, to offer services in the small telco's own region. Thus,
the bill says qualifying carriers "lack economies of scale or
scope" but also says telco A cannot require telco B to share
facilities if telco A will use them in telco B's territory; a
different section of the bill governs local competition.

The bill also lets the nation's 14 utility companies that are
regulated by a 1935 federal law provide telecom services, but
requires those companies to first apply to the FCC and to abide
by several rules.  For instance, the parent company may not sell
its facilities to its telecom subsidiary without state approval
and the subsidiary may neither offer its own stock or bonds.
Even the parent company cannot mortgage its operation to finance
its telecom operation.  And the parent must file reports with
the FCC concerning its capitalization of its telecom venture and
states may audit the books of the subsidiary or the parent.

Part III, "Special Provisions Concerning Bell Operating
Companies," gives the particulars on the incentive - entry into
new markets - that the bill offers the Bells in return for
opening their networks.  The bill lets a Bell into out-of-region
long-distance immediately and lets a Bell company immediately
apply to the FCC to offer in-region long-distance.  It also lets
a Bell offer "incidental" long-distance immediately, meaning the
use of long-distance to carry its video or alarm monitoring
traffic or cellular calls.

The FCC, which must act within 90 days, will grant permission on
a state-by-state basis after reviewing the application and
consulting with the Department of Justice (DOJ).  The FCC must
give "substantial weight" to the DOJ's view, but that view need
not preclude the FCC from reaching a differing decision. Once
the FCC gives its OK on long-distance, that Bell is also
automatically allowed to enter the once-proscribed business of
manufacturing network and customer premises equipment.

If the Bell violates the terms of its approval to enter long-
distance, the FCC can also revoke its approval or impose fines.

To win FCC approval, the Bell company must meet the bill's
special checklist of open access conditions and have in each
state a local competitor that is predominately facilities-based.
The list requires interconnection be made available and that the
Bell offer nondiscriminatory access to poles, ducts and right-
of-way elements.  It also must offer these items on an unbundled
basis:

*  local loop transmission from central offices to customer
premises,

*  local transport from the trunk side of the switch and

*  local switching.

The Bell must be willing to resell its services, provide
reciprocal compensation and offer competitors access to "911"
and "E911" services, directory assistance, operator call
completion service, White pages listings of its competitor's
customers, interim number portability (via call forwarding), and
full number portability (when the FCC issues the rules ).

If the Bell has submitted its terms and conditions to a state
and gotten no takers after 10 months, or gotten a taker who
negotiated in bad faith, a Bell can "self certify" compliance
for that state.

A Bell also is required to offer dialing parity, but not for
three years, unless it enters long-distance or is in a state
that is all of one LATA or has required that service as of Dec.
19, 1995.

Hewing to the Senate bill's language, a Bell in long-distance or
manufacturing must house those businesses in separate
subsidiaries involving separate books and offices and a federal-
state audit every two years.  But, taking the language of the
House bill, the bill lets a Bell eliminate these separate
subsidiaries three years after it it wins entry into the long-
distance business.

On manufacturing, the bill requires each Bell company to
maintain a separate manufacturing subsidiary that does not
discriminate in favor of its parent.  Nor can the parent
discriminate in favor of that affiliate in terms of certifying
equipment for network use or by giving it information on its
competitors that the competitors haven't allowed.

When buying equipment, a Bell cannot discriminate in favor of
its manufacturing unit and must consider other makers' hardware
as well.

The Bell also must file with the FCC full information on the
protocols and technical requirements of its network and to keep
that information up to date.  The Bell also must keep
interconnected competitors posted on changes the Bell plans to
its network.  As for Bellcore, the Bell's research operation, it
continues to be banned from manufacturing until it is no longer
affiliated with more than one Bell company.

On electronic publishing by the Bells, the bill again requires a
separate subsidiary, one that can hold no property in common
with its parent nor use the parent's name or trademark.  The
Bell cannot engage in joint activities with this affiliate other
than to jointly do telemarketing or operate a "teaming
arrangement."  Such an arrangement, says the bill, could involve
the Bell providing its facilities or basic phone service to the
affiliate.

But this separate subsidiary is no longer required four years
after the parent Bell is allowed into long-distance.

On alarm monitoring, the bill bans the Bell companies from
entering that line of business for five year after enactment,
except for Ameritech, which already owns an alarm monitoring
company.  However, Ameritech cannot acquire other alarm
monitoring companies for five years.

TITLE II: Broadcast Services deals with changes that aim to
speed the renewal of broadcast licenses and to give broadcasters
more flexibility.  Presently, the bill tells the FCC to give new
digital "advanced television (ATV)" spectrum only to
broadcasters and not to auction it.  (If the broadcaster uses
ATV for for-pay services, the FCC gets the right to assess fees
on that service.)

This is the section of the bill most in flux.  Senate Majority
Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., would rather have the FCC auction that
spectrum to raise revenue to reduce the federal debt.  An
agreement on this could help solve the continuing dispute over
the federal budget.

This section of the bill also loosens current limits on how many
radio and TV stations may be owned per market.  TV station
owners, though, are still subject to the one station per market
rule, but now can seek FCC waivers of the rule in any of the top
50 markets.

Broadcasters also now are able to buy cable TV networks and
their licenses will run for eight years, not 10.  However,
renewal has been speeded since the FCC cannot ask for any
information that already has been supplied to it earlier by the
applicant, nor can it consider competing applicants' claims to
provide better uses of the licensee's license.

In fact, the FCC can only turn down a renewal application if
there was a pattern of violations of the law, a serious
violation or a failure to serve the public interest.

TITLE IV: Cable Services aims to give cable TV the flexibility
and the profitability to compete with local telcos.  It does so
by lifting cable TV rate regulation "upper tier" services in
markets where there is "effective competition."  For instance,
if a local telco offers video programming on its network.

Small operators, those with less than 1 percent of all U.S.
subscribers, are rate-deregulated immediately. And all cable
operators escape rate regulation of service packages, other than
the locally-regulated basic tier, as of March 1999.

Presently, complaints about cable TV rates can be filed by any
person with the FCC, which then launches an examination of
whether the rate meets the national "benchmark" of fairness.  If
not, the rate must fall.

Under the bill, the FCC will regulate rates until competition or
the "sunset date" arrives, but rate complaints will only be
allowed from the cable operator's local franchise authority.
And the franchiser can't complain unless it receives citizen
complaints within 90 days of the rate increase. Turning to
telco-provided video, the bill retains current Title III
regulation for wireless cable systems, Title II rules for pure
common carrier systems and Title VI rules for telco-owned cable
TV systems.  But the bill also creates a new category called
"open video systems" that are like a common carrier network, but
on which the carrier can own some of the programming. Those
systems may program up to two-thirds of their systems with their
own content, but have to leave the remaining third open to other
content providers - if "demand exceeds channel capacity..."

The FCC must write the rules for such system within six months
and then will sit in judgment on the applications of telcos that
want this form of streamlined regulation.  The category  exempts
operators from franchise fees, although the bill states that a
fee may be paid by the operator in lieu of the franchise fee.

Telcos, under the bill can own no more than 10 percent of the
cable system in their territory unless the cable system serves a
rural area of under 35,000 population or the telco has under
$100 million revenues and the cable system has under 20,000
subscribers (and no more than 12,000 are in an urban area).  Two
other conditions that allow such mergers are if the cable system
serves fewer than 10 percent of the households in the telco's
service area or the FCC issues a waiver.

Title V: Broadcast Obscenity and Violence is perhaps the most
controversial part of the bill, the part best known to the
general public and also the part most likely to face immediate
court challenge.  In general, it calls for TV set makers to
begin including a "V chip" in their sets so that parents can
program the sets to block shows that carry high violence content
ratings.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
FCC REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

DEMOCRATS, BELLS SCORE ON TELECOM BILL - IF THIS VERSION FLIES

Casey Stengel would be proud.  Turns out Stengel's axiom "it
ain't over till it's over" applies as aptly to telecom reform
legislation as it does to baseball games.

Late last month, Sen. Larry Pressler, R-S.D., chairman of the
House-Senate conference committee on the bill, thought he and
key committee members had struck a compromise that gave
concessions to the Clinton administration in order to avert a
threatened veto.  But when conservative Republicans heard about
the terms, they rebelled, forcing Pressler to call his deal just
a "framework agreement" and scuttling plans to bring the bill to
a pre-Christmas vote.

The new uncertainty left the bill vulnerable to more changes.
The latest draft of the bill is not public but a copy obtained
by FCC Report shows changes already have been made to Pressler's
framework deal.  One of them is the removal of language that
would have kept the Bell companies from joint-marketing long-
distance and local service until a year after their local
competitors were doing so.

There's still some uncertainty whether this version will do the
trick.  Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole says he has some
disagreements with the bill.  He and House Speaker Newt
Gingrich, R-Ga., will meet this week.

Gingrich called "time out" last month, advising House
Republicans to hold off on

voting on the report until after Congress returns to session
this week.  His staff said the speaker had not yet reviewed the
new language to see if it was sufficiently deregulatory.

On the other hand, Pressler and Rep. Thomas Bliley, R-Va.,
support the bill.

Perhaps recognizing that only the fine details of the bill
remain to be ironed-out, all sides in the yearlong battle appear
to be pulling back their forces.  Jim Smith, president of the
Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel), told FCC
Report his group of local competitors doubts it will get the
conference committee to reverse itself and toughen a condition
on Bell long-distance entry.

At the United States Telephone Association (USTA), chief
lobbyist Larry Clinton, said his group has given up hope of
getting the conference to undo a change to the bill that lets
states use rate-of-return regulation for competitive services.
The provision was excised early last month by the conference
committee, which is producing a compromise version of the
telecom bills passed this summer by the House and Senate.

Another measure of how the deal is jelling:  Key factions are
releasing statements endorsing the new draft bill, even though
it has not been released.  Supporters include the
Telecommunications Industry Association, the Alliance for
Competitive Communications - the Bell's lobbying group - and the
National Association of Broadcasters.

The USTA and CompTel haven't issued statements, but Clinton said
he expects the USTA "will be OK" on the bill and Smith said his
group will find the bill "minimally acceptable" as long as it's
not changed more.

A similar view was expressed by a long-distance industry source,
who warned that the game is not over.  If the bill remains
unchanged, he said, long-distance will grudgingly support it.
However, he noted that, "The ball has already been pulled out
from under us once" this year when a "manager's amendment" in
the House undid the pro-long-distance language of that chamber's
bill just before passage.

The heavy-hitters are checking their swings because they've
chalked up plenty of runs in the last inning of the bill's ball
game.  In recent days, the Bells have won the right to keep one
of their brethren, Ameritech, from expanding its alarm-
monitoring operations beyond the company's current holdings.

Ameritech, the only Bell the bill lets into alarm monitoring -
by "grandfathering" the company's current holdings - now cannot
expand its alarm monitoring presence until after the five-year
wait that the bill imposes on all of the Bells seeking to get
into that line of business.

Ameritech's next alarm monitoring move was expected to be
outside of its territory.

The nation's 14 largest utility companies also scored by
convincing the conferees to let them offer telecom services.
But the latest draft of the conference report - in effect, the
new telecom bill - shows that the biggest runs were scored by
the Democrats, including the addition of a role for the
Department of Justice (DOJ) in assessing the long-distance entry
applications of the Bell companies.

Though the role is only advisory, as the Senate bill originally
offered, the change was one of three called for by the White
House when the administration was threatening a veto.

Another recent change is adoption of the House bill's 35 percent
cap on the size of the national audience that any one TV station
chain may accumulate.  The cap, a part of the House telecom bill
added by Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass., addresses the "media
concentration" aspect of the bill, another prime White House
worry.

Those and other changes were added to the bill after a meeting
Dec. 13 between Pressler and Bliley and the two top Democrats on
the conference committee, Rep. John Dingell of Michigan and Sen.
Ernest Hollings of South Carolina.

For his part, sources say Hollings was able to convince Pressler
to remove from the bill entirely all language that would have
lifted the current 25 percent cap on foreign investment in FCC
licensees.

The next day, Pressler and Bliley were set to sell their deal to
House and Senate Republicans.  But that morning's newspapers
reported that Vice President Al Gore had endorsed the bill on
behalf of the Clinton administration, the entity most
conservative Republicans despise.

The error cost Pressler his run.  He was forced to call his deal
a "framework" - not an agreement - when key conferees, including
Rep. Jack Fields, R-Texas, the chairman of the House telecom
subcommittee and a key drafter of the House bill, rebelled.
Fields released a statement saying, "There was no deal" with the
White House, and then left to spend the holidays with his family
in Texas.

The Senate returned to session yesterday and House returns
today, but it's still uncertain when Congress will to take up
the telecom bill.  The chief item on the agenda remains federal
budget legislation and, if no new compromise is available for a
vote, some members may call for another recess so that they can
tend to their re-election campaigns.

Therefore, the best that can be expected is for the conference
report to be voted on by the conferees and released this week.
More likely, the report will be held back.

Besides the new role for the DOJ in deciding Bell entry into
long-distance, other key aspects of the draft version of the
report are:

*     "Grandfathering" states that, as of Dec. 1995, require the
Bells to offer dialing parity,

*     Expedited judicial review of the bill's "cyberporn"
restrictions, and

*     Inclusion of the Senate bill's requirement that discounted
telecom service be offered to schools and libraries.  Now,
however, the requirement is part of the definition of universal
service itself, meaning that providers can seek compensation for
their loss via the universal service subsidy.

The DOJ's role on Bell long-distance entry will come as part of
the FCC's imposition of a public-interest test on Bell long-
distance applications, a concept taken from the Senate telecom
bill.  The FCC must give "substantial weight" to the DOJ's
assessment, but that assessment will not be decisive in itself,
the new version of the bill states.

The Pressler compromise also requires a Bell to first have a
facilities-based competitor in place, as the House wanted,

and give the FCC the power to test whether there is "actual and
demonstrable" local competition in the Bell's local market.  But
the Pressler framework agreement eliminates language adopted by
the conferees just days before that would have required Bell
long-distance entry to be predicated on the Bell facing
competition throughout each of its states, not just in one city
in each state.

The bill does not require the Bells to provide dialing parity
until they enter the long-distance business, unless they operate
in a state that has only one LATA or which required the service
as of December 1995.  Dialing parity, already available in long-
distance, means the ability to place a local call on a competing
carrier's network by dialing the same number of digits as needed
by the local carrier's network.

The bill bans making indecent material available over electronic
networks, a hewing to the Senate bill's approach.  The bill's
penalties for sending "cyberporn" - a fine up to $100,000 and up
to 10 years in jail - are also the same as the Senate bill's,
but the draft bill uses the test of whether such material is
indecent, not the "harmful to minors" standard that has been
upheld by federal courts.

As a concession to opponents, the bill calls for expedited
judicial review of this provision, meaning that legal challenges
to the law will, if appealed, go directly from the federal
district court to the U.S. Supreme Court.

Contrary to the House version of the telecom bill, the draft
agreement has no language banning the FCC from regulating the
Internet or letting the FCC selectively lift the 25 percent cap
on foreign ownership of FCC licensees.  But these changes may be
subject to change.  The Senate appears willing to accept
Pressler's view that the latter matter should be dealt with via
separate legislation - he says a bill will be introduced this
spring - but some in the House still are pressing their fight to
return their foreign ownership language to the bill.

In the Senate, Pressler believes he has "a good majority" but
his compromise has won an ardent foe, fellow conferee Sen. John
McCain, R-Ariz.  A source with McCain's office told FCC Report,
"My boss and others were beside themselves" when they heard
about the framework agreement.  The deal, he said, was worked
out behind closed doors, with Hollings, the ranking Democratic
senator on the conference committee, carrying water for the
White House.

McCain voted against the Senate bill when it came to the floor
and now his staff hints he will use his considerable power as a
senator to slow the conference report's progress in the Senate
until he wins his revisions.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
FCC REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

FCC STILL CLOSED, BUT LICENSE AUCTIONS ROLL ON - NETTING $1.5B

The FCC's offices have been closed since Dec. 22, but that
hasn't kept the money from rolling in.  Since that date, the FCC
has netted nearly $1.5 billion for the U.S. Treasury from three
auctions of operating licenses.

The auctions were suspended for the holidays and resume this
week -which is more than can be said for the operations of the
commission itself.  Only a skeleton crew, most of them involved
with the auctions, is working at FCC headquarters.  The nearly
2,000 other FCC employees have been furloughed and won't return
until funding for the commission and other government agencies
is restored.

The shutdown of the FCC so far has had only limited impact on
telecom regulation - most of the action right now is on Capitol
Hill - but it has postponed release of the FCC's report and
order on the investment of Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom
in Sprint.  A Sprint source said the company cannot be sure of
how to proceed regarding the $4 billion investment until the FCC
releases its full report on the matter, which was decided at the
FCC's Dec. 15 meeting.

Also delayed will be the planned Jan. 18 meeting and any action
on proposed rulemakings, such as that regarding GTE's recent
request to deaverage its switched access rates and offer volume
discounts in five states.  Comments on the plan, which resembles
the Nynex Universal Service Preservation Plan the commission
adopted in 1995, were due yesterday, but the FCC is not
accepting filings during the shutdown.  Instead, all comments
due during the shutdown are due the day the FCC re-opens.

This means the FCC also may have to postpone its planned day-
long enbanc hearing on spectrum policy.  More likely, it will
hold that hearing, scheduled for Jan. 31, in lieu of its January
meeting.  However requests to participate in the hearing were
due Dec. 22.

While some actions have been delayed, the three license auctions
the FCC began in December were not.  Of these, the auction of 30
megahertz (MHz) personal communications service (PCS) licenses
has generated the most revenue.  The auction, which began Dec.
15 and is open only to small businesses, posted $1.2 billion of
the $1.45 billion earned so far in all three December auctions -
after just four rounds of bidding.

The top bidders in the PCS auction, which resumes Jan. 5, are
PCS 2000 LP, which bid $443 million and is high bidder in 124
markets; GWI PCS Inc., which bid $257 million and is high bidder
in 10 markets; and NextWave Personal Communications, which bid
$162 million and is high bidder in six markets.

The PCS auction involves the nation's 493 metropolitan trading
areas (MTA), as defined by the Rand McNally Business Atlas.  Of
these, PCS 2000 holds the top bid ($203 million) for any MTA,
that of New York City.  Next in the ranking are GWI PCS, which
bid $113 million for Los Angeles, and DCR PCS Inc., which bid
$70 million for Chicago.

The second auction, which resumes Jan. 4, involves specialized
mobile radio  (SMR) licenses and has netted $167 million in
revenue, a figure that  includes the fines assessed against
those that withdrew bids.  Without those fines, which surely
will be disputed, the figure is $100 million less.

In the SMR auction, Paging Network of America, Ram Mobile Data
and Geotek Communications are among the most prevalent bidders
for the regional licenses at stake.  Paging Network holds the
highest bid so far, the $925 million it offered for the New York
license, which also includes much of Northern New Jersey.

The third auction, which resumes today, involves a form of
wireless cable TV service called multipoint distribution service
(MDS).  The auction has generated $73 million after 37 rounds of
bidding.

Among the leading bidders is CAI Wireless Systems, a wireless
cable company jointly owned by Nynex and Bell Atlantic.  CAI
Wireless has the top bids in New York and Washington, D.C.,
which so far have generated the highest bids.  In those markets,
it has offered $3.1 million and $2 million respectively.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
FCC REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

SMALL CARRIERS NET BIG COMPLAINT TOTALS, FCC STUDY FINDS

Some of the nation's smallest carriers have garnered the highest
number of customer complaints, according to recent FCC data.
The data, contained in a "Common Carrier Scorecard," shows three
companies - Oncor Communications, Value Added Communications and
Zero Plus Dialing Inc. (ZPDI) - far exceeding the nation's
multibillion-dollar carriers, when all carriers are compared on
the basis of their annual revenue.

For instance, ZDPI garnered 9 complaints per million dollars in
revenue, while Bell Atlantic netted .03 complaints per million
dollars in revenue.

Other small companies leading the list of complaint recipients
include Operator Assistance Network (275), Sonic Communications
(130) and Matrix Telecom (114).  Matrix last month was fined
$40,000 for slamming, the unauthorized transfer of customers
from one long-distance carrier to another.

Slamming was one of the top three reasons for the customer
complaints, which routinely pour into the FCC.  The other
reasons were operator services and "800-" number information
services.

Oncor, an operator services provider (OSP), was a leader in this
type of complaint.  Other top complaint-receiving OSPs:  Polar
Communications and Cleartel.

But the FCC said a key finding of the study, which used 1994's
complaint totals, was how few companies were netting complaints,
when companies were equalized for size.  Of the total 11,350
complaints, only 67 companies received more than 10.

In fact, 20 companies were responsible for 73 percent of all
complaints, the FCC said.

Compared on a per-line basis, small companies lead the list of
complaint recipients, even though their total complaints were
sometimes smaller than those filed against major carriers.  For
instance, Oncor's 590 complaints equaled 1,140 per million lines
while Bell Atlantic's 385 complaints equaled 21 per million
lines.

The report found that some carriers have complaint rates 100
times greater than the rates held by large carriers, the FCC
charged.

The FCC also ranked the nation's largest local carriers on the
basis of their complaints (see chart), but noted that complaints
made about those carriers often involve services the customer
reached via that carrier and not the local carrier itself.

The commission said carriers can reduce their complaint levels
by improving customer service, maintaining better billing and
service records and resolving complaints quickly.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
FCC REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

'TOWER' OF 214S SHRINKS AS CARRIERS GIVE UP, LOOK TO CONGRESS

The towering pile of Section 214 applications that once loomed
over the FCC's Common Carrier Bureau is fast becoming a mole-
hill, partly because of industry reluctance to continue pursuing
the applications - which will be done away with under the
congressional telecom bill.

Last month, Ameritech became the latest Bell company to pull out
of the Section 214 process, which a phone company now must
follow in order to build a video dialtone (VDT) network.  It
acted just weeks before its applications were to expire under
the FCC rule that a permit holder must act on its application
within 12 months.

In December 1994, the FCC approved Ameritech's five applications
to construct VDT networks that would serve 1.2 million homes in
its service region.  But the telco has since shifted strategy
toward becoming a franchise cable operator.

"There were two main reasons for the withdrawal," Ameritech
spokesman Dave Onak said.  "We have been getting increasing
community support for us to operate as a cable franchise
operator.  And the FCC still has not finalized their VDT rules."

Ironically, the chief reason the commission has failed to act is
that it first must see what rules Congress sets for VDT in the
telecom legislation.

Ameritech currently has eight franchise agreements with the
local authorities, primarily in the outlying areas of Detroit.

Onak said Ameritech continues with its brisk construction pace
despite the fact that the FCC has yet to approve the
applications.  Additionally, Illinois cable operators are suing
the telco and the authorities in Glendale Heights.

Nevertheless, Ameritech intends to begin offering programming
service during the first half of 1996, Onak said.  "We've got a
court ruling that said we can do so, so why not?"

Ameritech is in engaged in franchise discussions with an
additional 40 communities across the Midwest, Onak said.  The
telco has no plans to attempt to provide cable service outside
of its five-state region.  "We've got enough to keep us busy in
our own backyard," he said.

During the past year a handful of telcos - including Bell
Atlantic and U S West -  have amended, and then outright pulled
their applications for commercial VDT before they ever got to
the approval stage at the commission.  Of concern is the rapidly
changing technological landscape and the commission's lack of
clarity on just how, when and where the telcos can operate VDT
service.

Bell Atlantic in the late spring withdrew two of its Section
214s and currently has only one 214 application pending, which
seeks to provide VDT service over a switched digital video
network in Florham, N.J.  The application was filed nearly three
years ago and spokesman Harry Mitchell said the telco is letting
it sit because it includes up-to-date technology.  Bell Atlantic
has no plans to file any other Section 214s in the near future.

"The wild card is the federal legislation," Mitchell said.  "We
are prepared to make the filings if necessary but we are not
going to tip our hand if we don't have to."

The FCC said it will finalize its VDT regulations by early 1996
if the federal government does not pass telecom reform
legislation making it a moot point.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
FCC REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

THE POST-BILL WORLD: MORE LAWSUITS, NEED FOR WELL-CRAFTED RULES

Now that the congressional telecom bill appears on track to
enactment, several industry experts say the bill will promote
litigation and that regulators have their work cut out for them.

That's because Congress can give a general statement of what it
wants but the rules must be detailed to get that view to work.
Augie Ros, adviser to the Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC)
chairman, noted how, recalled how, as part of its adoption of
the Ameritech Customers First plan, the ICC set a formula for
the cost of a loop.  Thus, Ameritech's tariff for loop costs
included at least one no-cost loop.   Yet, said Ros, the move
was completely within the new rules.

There's aspects of new rules "you can't even begin to think
about," he warned.

Attorney Jon Canis, of the Washington firm of Swidler & Berlin,
agreed and pointed to the FCC's efforts to produce rules on
colocation, virtual or physical.  He advised the FCC to turn to
states like Illinois for advice on how to proceed with some of
the ground-breaking rules the bill will require.

"Whether this [legislation] will work will depend on whether
[the FCC] will cooperate" with the states, said Joseph DiBella,
a federal regulatory attorney in Nynex's governmental affairs
unit.

Ros, Canis and DiBella all spoke at a December conference
sponsored by the accounting firm of Deloitte & Touche and
Business Research Publications.

There, DiBella and Canis warned that another outgrowth of the
bill's passage will be litigation.  Calling the new law "a boon
to regulatory lawyers," DiBella said the FCC and state boards
can avoid litigation by setting up step-by-step routes to
compliance - and offering carriers incentives along the way.

That's the idea behind giving the Bells a shot at the long-
distance market once they meet the bill's checklist of open
access and unbundling requirements.

Canis said the bill's passage is essential - because of lawyers,
who otherwise drive up the cost of any company trying to enter
local competition on a state-by-state basis.  It can cost
hundreds of thousands of dollars to mount these cases before
each state board, he said, because of the lawyers and expert
witnesses involved.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>