
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B03-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B046-84</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021831 text/html 20160
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:16:35 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:21 GMT
Content-length: 19973
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
APS DIPLOMAT via NewsNet <BR>
January 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS SERVICE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>1996 Will Be A Good Year For Business In The Middle East</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(356 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>The Turning Point</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>GCC Complexities</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(715 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>North Africa</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(368 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Red Sea Trouble</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(418 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
APS DIPLOMAT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

1996 Will Be A Good Year For Business In The Middle East

NICOSIA - The year ahead will be good for business as regional
economies, especially those of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC),
begin to re-emerge from under heavy burdens imposed by the Gulf
crisis. More Arab states will implement market-oriented
liberalisation measures.

Politically, 1996 will carry mixed blessings for the region, with
good and bad landmarks. Elections scheduled in the self-rule areas
of Palestine, Israel and Iran bear various elements of uncertainty.
Each of these polls will generate a different momentum, whether
positive or negative will depend on the outcome. With talks moving
forward on the Syrian-Israeli track, 1996 could mark the beginning
of a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace. The six GCC states will
continue to experience internal difficulties and tensions between
fellow-members. The situation in Saudi Arabia has improved. External
security for the GCC is guaranteed by the US. The possibility of the
UN lifting the embargo on Iraq - now in its fifth year - is remote
as US presidential electioneering gets into full swing in the autumn
(see Oil Market & Downstream Trends in this week's APS Review).

In North Africa, the struggle by governments against Islamic
militancy will continue, but the intensity will be less than in
recent years. The militants do not have the financial, military or
popular support required to overthrow regimes. Turmoil in the Red
Sea region and East Africa will also continue, amid military
hostilities between Yemen and Eritrea, while Sudan and Somalia sink
deeper into internal chaos - with Ethiopia not far behind.

Regional politics will become more complex. Questions such as border
disputes, water-sharing and trade imbalances will lead to a new set
of dynamics, some of which will be negative. The role of the US as
the main influence in the Middle East will remain unchanged, but not
unchallenged. The European Union (EU) will expand its linkages with
North Africa and the Mediterranean rim. Russia will be an
unpredictable factor, as the Communist Party has re-established
itself in that country; together with its leftist allies the party
is set to control 217 out of the 450 seats in the Duma following the
December elections.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
APS DIPLOMAT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

The Turning Point

1996 will be decisive for the peace process, mainly because of what
it holds in store for Israel. General elections in the Jewish state
are scheduled for October, but with the government led by the Labour
Party having a majority of one in the Knesset, the polls may be
brought forward as early as May. A victory for the right-wing Likud
would mean disaster, with the party having pledged not to return the
Golan Heights to Syria. On the other hand, Premier Shimon Peres has
said he would not hold a referendum on returning the Golan, saying
the people can show their opinion in the general elections. Peres,
with strong US backing, wants to have a Declaration of Principles
with Syria before the elections. As an added incentive to the Arab
side, Peres on Dec. 22 said: "Give us peace and we will give up the
nuclear (option). If there is peace we would denuclearise the Middle
East". Rewards for what has been achieved have begun pouring into
Israel, which has seen a huge rise in foreign investment in 1995.
Yet Israeli society remains deeply divided about peace and its
implications as shown by the assassination of Premier Rabin in Nov.
1995.

Jordan now is a "most favoured" country in the Middle East for the
US and Israel. It is moving quickly to reap the rewards of peace.
The economic aspects of peace will bear fruit as from 1996. Jordan's
geo-strategic importance will increase as its shift away from the
regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq becomes clearer. Ties with Iran are
strained as well, with a recent tit-for-tat expulsions of diplomats.

Lebanon will be ready to sign a peace treaty with Israel in 1996, if
the latter is able to reach an agreement with Syria (see below).
Beirut is prepared to ensure calm in South Lebanon, with Syrian
help, and has said it is ready to deploy 25,000 soldiers there if
Israel withdraws from the "security zone". Its businessmen are the
ones best poised to take on the opportunities and competition that
would result from a peace treaty. Syria will continue to have a
guiding role over all affairs of importance in the country, taking
into account concerns about Lebanon's sovereignty expressed by
French Defence Minister Herve de Charette during a meeting with
Syrian Vice President Abdel Halim Khaddam in Paris on Dec. 19, 1995.

Palestine, as a state, will not materialise in 1996 but key aspects
of statehood will be put in place. As self-rule spreads from the
Gaza Strip and Jericho to cover Tulkarem, Nablus, Qalqilya,
Bethlehem, Ramallah and other towns, a legislative council will be
elected on Jan. 20, 1996. Differences among Palestinian factions
will get narrower as the benefits of peace become more obvious (Vol.
43, 187-188). However, Arafat has denounced donor nations for
failing to keep aid promises; on Dec.18, he said that of $720m
promised only $120m was delivered. He was speaking on a tour of the
GCC states, which will boost funding to the Palestine National
Authority (PNA) in 1996, but not on the scale of the pre-Gulf crisis
era.

Syria holds the winning cards for 1996. With the latest initiative
for peace under a 10-point programme proposed by Peres, the US and
Israel have recognised Syrian control over Lebanon and Assad's
status as the key leader in the Arab World. In the small window of
opportunity available before Israeli elections, Assad would move to
ensure that Peres is re-elected premier in Israel. This could mean
an Israeli-Syrian Declaration of Principles in 1996, if Israel
agrees to pull out from the Golan in a limited time-frame. An Assad-
Peres summit, which "could take place in three to four months"
according to Israeli Foreign Ministry Director General Uri Savir,
would mark the start of a definitive peace between Syria and Israel.
Assad cannot afford to risk the alternative of peace in 1996, as
that would guarantee a Likud victory and isolation of Damascus by
Washington - perhaps by expanding the "dual containment" of Iran and
Iraq into a "triple containment" to include Syria. The peace process
will not survive such a scenario. An important goal for Assad is
"economic parity" with Israel.

Iran, which opposes the peace process, will be squeezed tighter by
the US in 1996. Prospects for an improvement in its economic
situation are slim. Parliamentary elections set for April-May 1996
appear likely to result in favour of hardline traditionalists who
are preparing a strong challenge against the pragmatists of
President Rafsanjani. The outcome of those elections will decide the
fate of the presidential polls in 1997, when Rafsanjani's final term
is to end. Tehran's regional ties are likely to get worse before
they get better, as countries neighbouring Iran build stronger ties
with the US. But Tehran is betting on a strategic alliance with
Moscow.

Iraq has no chance of getting the UN embargo lifted in 1996.
President Clinton will have no motivation to take such a risk in an
election year, and signs that Iraq has been trying to rebuild its
arsenal of long-range ballistic missiles will deter even those who
want sanctions lifted - like Russia, France, China and other
countries. The UN Special Commission's recent semi-annual report
took the US and British position that the embargo must remain in
force, because Iraq had not revealed all its secrets. On Dec. 21, UN
investigators found guidance systems for missiles of 3,000 km range
dumped in the Tigris River. US Ambassador to the UN Madeleine
Albright affirmed later that sanctions would be in place for a long
time to come. Yet chances of President Saddam Hussein being
overthrown are slim, despite regular reports of defections by army
officers. One way for Baghdad to get the embargo lifted would be to
indicate readiness to make peace with Israel, but Saddam is yet to
take this bait.

Turkey, having reached a customs union agreement with the EU in
December 1995, now faces a tough year ahead. The Islamic Refah Party
(RP) of Necmettin Erbakan won 21.32% of the votes in general
elections on Dec. 24, 1995, getting 158 of parliament's 550 seats.
Tansu Ciller, whose True Path Party came second with 135 seats,
resigned as prime minister and was soon talking of a coalition with
Mesut Yilmaz's Motherland Party (ANAP), which won 132 seats, and
other secular parties. Such a coalition would come under strong
pressure from RP, which is opposed to the EU agreement and many
other things. The elements of uncertainty were underlined on Dec. 22
when Chief of the General Staff, Gen. Ismail Hakki Karadayi warned
the Islamists: "The Turkish armed forces has adopted a contemporary,
democratic and secular outlook and is opposed to all kinds of
dogmatism and reactionary attitudes." In 1996, the next government
would have to deal with an estimated 100% inflation rate and strike
threats by public sector workers. Externally, such a government
would be less effective in dealing with Turkey's growing geo-
strategic worries arising from its role as a bridge between "oil-
rich" states in the Caspian Sea region and Europe. It will also have
to deal with the Arab League's Dec. 17 threat to take action against
Ankara if it refuses to discuss Euphrates water sharing with Syria.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
APS DIPLOMAT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

GCC Complexities

That internal security is a big problem for the GCC was recognised
at their 16th annual summit in Muscat on Dec. 4-6, 1995. The summit
was marked by a rift between Qatar and other members which may widen
in 1996. Bahrain, affected by unrest since December 1994, would have
to move fast to adjust to the implications of the peace process. Its
role as an offshore banking centre is no longer secure, and an
underlying cause of the unrest was economic hardship faced by
Shiites in the emirate. Employment of locals is now a top priority.
Alternative sources of income to boost the economy are being
pursued, such as tourism. Spending cuts slashed its budget defict by
some 40% in 1995 and a similar trend is expected for 1996.

Kuwait, which has the most democratic system in the GCC, has so far
been free of violent internal opposition. But on Dec. 15, 1995,
Defence Minister Shaikh Ahmad Hammud Al Sabah revealed that an arms
cache was seized at a farm in the emirate, hidden by a group that
"sought evil for Kuwait". Yet Kuwait has managed to overcome worst-
case scenarios forecast after its parliamentary elections in October
1992 gave Islamic parties a big number of seats in the National
Assembly. The ruling Al Sabah family will find ways to co-exist with
the vocal National Assembly, despite more embarrassments likely in
1996 as a result of corruption allegations against former oil
minister Shaikh Ali Khalifa Al Sabah.

Oman, having celebrated 25 years under Sultan Qaboos in 1995, will
continue to function as a positive force in the region. Its moderate
yet unique approach could become especially useful as subtle power
games within the GCC intensify. At the same time, it will boost
links with Israel, further consolidating its importance as a key US
ally in the region. The sultanate is moving ahead fast in terms of
economic liberalisation, with priorities in 1996 to include
privatisation and diversification away from oil.

Qatar would find itself in an uncomfortable position in 1996, having
alienated the other GCC members at the Muscat summit. The young
Qatari emir, Shaikh Hamad, and his delegation walked out in protest
at the appointment of a Saudi, Jamil Hujailan, as GCC secretary
general. Shaikh Hamad also said he would boycott all GCC meetings
attended by Hujailan. But his position changed immediately as
Hamad's father Shaikh Khalifa, whom he had ousted on June 27, 1995,
appeared in Abu Dhabi at the start of a GCC tour and vowed he will
regain power in Doha.

Saudi Arabia, for the first time in many years, recently experienced
a combination of uncertainties related to the Riyadh bomb explosion
in November and to the subsequent hospitalisation of King Fahd. But
the issue of succession to the throne had been resolved prior to
President Clinton's visit to the kingdom in October 1994. Now Crown
Prince Abdullah is the acting head of state and, according to the
1994 deal, he will be the next king. The more difficult power
sharing arrangement between Abdullah's conservative camp and the
progressive camp of Fahd's "Sudairi Seven" is yet to materialise and
could prove to be a difficult objective. At the same time, the
kingdom will have to deal with new external dynamics generated by
the peace process, the conflict between Eritrea and Yemen, strained
relations with Iran, etc. On the positive side, "good results" were
announced on Dec. 17 after talks between Riyadh and Sanaa on
settling their border dispute. Despite some inherent problems, the
Saudi economy will fare better than it did in the past three years,
marking a break with the difficulties faced from bearing the biggest
burden of costs related to the Gulf crisis.

The UAE will remain the most stable and relatively the wealthiest
among GCC states, unless its territorial dispute with Iran over the
islands of Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa escalates into
war. This is not likely in 1996, but some fiery rhetoric can be
expected from hardliners during the parliamentary elections in Iran.
Both sides want a peaceful solution but there are few prospects for
this as neither side would back down from its position. Iran has
said it is ready to fight an 80-year war for the islands.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
APS DIPLOMAT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

North Africa

The level of violence in Algeria has subsided somewhat, amid the
victory of President Liamine Zeroual in the November elections.
Having strengthened his position by gaining legitimacy inside and
outside the country, in 1996 Zeroual will try to further isolate and
divide the violent Islamic groups, while trying to strike political
deals with those willing to renounce violence. These could include
FIS leader Abassi Madani, now living in a villa in suburban Algiers
as a "detainee", as well as the FIS Executive Bureau's provisional
head Abdelkader Hachani and FIS leader overseas Rabah Kebir.

Egypt managed to crush Islamic militancy more effectively in 1995.
Crackdowns will continue in 1996 both inside and outside the
country. Cairo's insecurity about its regional leadership role will
reflect on the way in which it relates to Israel and other states on
issues such as (a) the hostilities between Yemen and Eritrea, in
which it has charged Israel of playing a role; (b) the nuclear
question, now that it is bound indefinitely by the NPT while Israel
is not; and (c) Islamic militancy, having accused Sudan of fomenting
instability in Egypt and warned it of retaliation.

Libya will remain isolated under limited UN sanctions, unless it
surrenders the two men wanted by Britain and the US for their role
in the Lockerbie bombing. That is not likely to happen. Added
external pressure may be applied in 1996, at the most perhaps
through a limited embargo on Libyan oil. A full embargo like the one
on Iraq would not get support from Europe or the Arab World. Qadhafi
will come under stronger internal pressure, as the pain from the
sanctions gets harder to bear.

Morocco and Tunisia will move closer to the EU in 1996. Tunisia in
particular is a test case for European economic integration with
countries of the Mediterranean rim. But inherent political problems
remain - lack of real democracy and human rights - in EU relations
with both Morocco and Tunisia. But both have implemented rigourous
economic reforms in recent years. The Arab Maghreb Union will sink
further into obscurity in 1996, as member states from Libya to
Mauritania follow their own course in diplomacy, including ties with
Israel.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
APS DIPLOMAT via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Red Sea Trouble

The flare up of military hostilities between Eritrea and Yemen on
Dec. 15, 1995, over the strategic but disputed islands, has sparked
off a new set of negative dynamics. The Arab League accused Eritrea,
which has close relations with Israel, of a premeditated attack.
Eritrean forces used Israeli-supplied boats and telecommunications
equipment, which according to Sanaa were provided in return for a
pledge by Eritrea to hand over one of the disputed islands to become
an Israeli military base. Asmara suggested arbitration by the
International Court of Justice at The Hague while Sanaa warned it
will regain the Hanish Al Kabir island by force. Egypt has warned of
the geo-strategic implications of the conflict - whoever has the
islands controls the Bab El Mandeb straits and access to the Red Sea
- while the Cairo newspaper 'Al Akhbar' accused Israel of backing
Eritrea. This was denied by Israel.

Sudan, a pariah among most Arab countries and the West, will
continue to deteriorate economically, while the political situation
would get worse. The military/Islamic regime has been unable to
deliver victory against the rebels of the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA), or any real improvements in the economic situation. As
relations with Egypt and other neighbours continue to worsen,
support to the SPLA from external sources such as Uganda and Eritrea
would rise. The regime will come under pressure from opposition
groups based in Cairo. In addition, tensions between the central
establishment and the various region are increasing as southern
politicians seek constitutional guarantees of more power, including
the reservation of the second highest post in the country - that of
first vice president - for a southern Christian.

Somalia has sunk back into chaos and civil war that existed before
the US-led UN intervention in December 1992. Things would get worse
in 1996; but this time the UN and the US would not step in to help.

Yemen, while engaged in a military conflict with Eritrea, is
beginning to face internal problems which would get worse in 1996.
Relations between the ruling General People's Congress (GPC) and the
Islamic Al Islah movement have been deteriorating steadily. Islah
efforts to impose strict Islamic practices in the south have turned
violent, including arson attacks against cinema houses and other
aspects of Western culture. A split between the GPC and Al Islah may
not mean a repeat of the May-June 1994 situation, when the country
was torn by civil war, but it could lead to further violence in
Yemen.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>