
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B31-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B010-235</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec74.html 205.156.212.5 19970114214500 text/html 22354
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:43:15 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:05 GMT
Content-length: 22167
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec74.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COMPUTER PROTOCOLS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>HAYES OFFERS OPTIMA PC CARD WITH STANDARD CONNECTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>NEW PRINTERS OFFER INDUSTRY-LEADING&nbsp;CONNECTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(638 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CROSS-PLATFORM AUTHORING SYSTEM INTRODUCED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(969 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SOFTWARE SYSTEM SOLVES E-MAIL INCOMPATABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1163 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER PROTOCOLS via NewsNet
January 1996

HAYES OFFERS OPTIMA PC CARD WITH STANDARD CONNECTOR

New Product Displays Company's Continued Commitment to PC Card
Technology

Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. has announced that it is
shipping its popular line of PC Card modems with a standard
cable connector. The new Hayes OPTIMA 288 V.34 for PCMCIA
demonstrates the company's continued commitment to PC Card
technology.

"The increasing demand in the PC Card market clearly
illustrates that customers want fast, reliable and
multi-functional mobile communication products," says Dennis
C. Hayes, Chairman and CEO, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc.
"From 1994 to 1995 PCMCIA modem shipments grew over 117% and
revenue increased over 75% in North America."

Special enhanced features of Hayes OPTIMA 288 V.34 for PCMCIA
include:

Feature Benefit

8x Data Compression Enhanced implementation of V.42bis
provides 8x compression and throughput rates of up to 230,400
bit/s --double the speed of most other modems.

Plug & Play Simplifies installation and configuration, and
enhances support of future Operating Systems.

Hot Swapping Allows users to plug in and remove the modem
without rebooting the PC.

Automatic Idle Mode Extends the PC battery life by drawing
only five milliamps of power when in idle mode.

Class 1 and Class 2 Supports industry standard fax protocols.
FAX support

Bong Detection Recognition of telephone company bong makes it
easy for you to use your credit card to pay for the call.

PBX Current Protection Provides additional protection to the
modem hardware from high current or power spikes.

Flash ROM Ensures product longevity--new features can be added
anytime via downloads of new firmware.

Hayes OPTIMA 288 V.34 for PCMCIA will be available for
estimated retail prices US$319 and CDN$469.

For further information please contact:

Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. Phone: 770/840-9200 x6365
Facsimile: 770/441-1238 Internet Address: adod@hayes.com Hayes
World Wide Web Site: http://www.hayes.com



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER PROTOCOLS via NewsNet
January 1996

NEW PRINTERS OFFER INDUSTRY-LEADING
CONNECTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE

LG08plus, LG12plus and LA30N Printers Meet User Demand for
Mission-Critical, High-Volume Printing Solutions

Digital Equipment Corporation has reinforced its position as a
leader in printing solutions with the announcement of the
LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers and the LA30N dot
matrix companion printer. These three new impact printers, all
of which will be demonstrated at the Digital Equipment
Corporation User Society (DECUS) trade show in San Francisco,
enable unparalleled connectivity in open office or industrial
computing environments. Offering unsurpassed openness and the
lowest cost of ownership in their respective classes, the
printers are ideal for users seeking mission-critical,
high-volume printing solutions.

"Not only does Digital continue to support its customers with
a new generation of ANSI printers, but is committed to
ensuring these products are compatible in open system
environments," said Jeb Hurley, acting vice president,
Printing Systems Business. "Digital uniquely offers users the
ability to distribute printing throughout the enterprise and,
because of our wide range of products, enables them to select
a printer with just the right price, speed and performance to
meet their needs."

LGO8plus and LG12plus Line Matrix Printers

The LGO8plus and LG12plus printers expand Digital's successful
LGplus family of high-speed line matrix printers (first
launched in May, 1995, with the LG04plus printer). These
printers are ideal for a variety of mission-critical
applications such as bar coding, multi-part forms, accounting
statements and internal reports -- in many cases supplanting
the need for more costly laser printers for these types of
applications.

Benefits of the LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers
include:

* unsurpassed reliability with an unlimited duty cycle and
10,000 hour mean time before failure (MTBF)

* high-quality output and the lowest cost per page in its
class

* support for a variety of platforms including OpenVMS, UNIX,
Windows NT and Windows '95

* compatible with a number of emulations including ANSI,
ProPrinter, LP, LG, Epson and P Series protocols as well as
optional emulations (including Magnum Code V [VGL] and
Printronix Graphics Language)

* maximum flexibility in multi-user environments with both
serial and parallel ports

* high-speed 800 line per minute and 1,200 line per minute
printing (for the LG08plus and LG12plus printers,
respectively)

* allows users to upgrade their printing speed with the use of
an upgradeable printhead for LGplus series printers

* backward compatibility with software applications written to
support existing LG models

* LAN connectivity via the RapidPrint 200 interface box, an
optional Ethernet interface device supporting TCP/IP, LAT, and
Novell network protocols

LA30N Dot Matrix Companion Printer

As a third generation product in Digital's ANSI dot matrix
printer family, the powerful LA30N dot matrix companion
printer is designed to withstand rigorous use and provide
outstanding performance for customers in a wide range of
industries. The LA30N printer supports not only Digital's ANSI
printing protocol, but also the IBM Proprinter X24E and Epson
ESC/P2 protocols, enabling it to function in workstation as
well as

Specific benefits of the LA30N dot matrix companion printer
include:

* outstanding reliability and performance with a 3,500
page-per-month duty cycle and 8,000 hour MTBF

* high-quality print output at speeds up to 330 characters per
second

* superior flexibility with two user-selectable configurations
as well as auto-switching serial and parallel interfaces

* advanced paper-handling capabilities that allow for either
rear or bottom paper feed as well as push or pull tractor feed

Pricing and Availability

Pricing and availability for the LGO8plus line matrix printer,
the LG12plus line matrix printer and the LA30N dot matrix
companion printer will be announced in January, 1996. All
three products will be available through Digital's worldwide
network of reseller and distributor partners. For more
information within the U.S. call 800-777-4343, or your
authorized Digital representative.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER PROTOCOLS via NewsNet
January 1996

CROSS-PLATFORM AUTHORING SYSTEM INTRODUCED

Mediaplex Application Development System Offers Best Of Class
Cross-Platform Authoring Environment

Digital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (San
Francisco) have forged an agreement to create a development
solution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,
the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.
Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will be
bundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, and
Macromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimedia
applications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximum
revenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part of
their agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in joint
technical development and marketing, and provide technical
support to developers.

"We've already achieved critical mass with the number of
telecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in their
trials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director of
worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and Interactive
Information Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoring
technology with Digital's Mediaplex Application Development
System, we can offer both the platform and middleware strength
of Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoring
capabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkey
content creation solution."

"Because we already have the Director Player running on a
variety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position to
bring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the device
they have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,
Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With their
cost-effective architecture and strong understanding of what
broadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is an
ideal partner."

Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, Sasha
Magee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,
said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already using
Director, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with a
smooth and continuous path to move our business to the
broadband marketplace, particularly because both companies are
committed to delivery on multiple computing and set-top box
platforms."

Complete Authoring Resources

The Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporate
several Macromedia authoring solutions, including: Macromedia
Director 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creating
multimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution image
editing and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering and
animation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge by
Sonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content for
the World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an application
for compressing and playing Director files on the World Wide
Web -- is included.

These products will enable developers to create client
applications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fully
integrated with the streaming capabilities of the media
server. For custom client/server applications such as
interactive home shopping, distance learning, and home
banking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit
(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes of
application services on the server.

Robust Content Design and Testing Platform

The Mediaplex Application Development System also includes
complete hardware resources for creating applications,
including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and a
Pentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using this
configuration, developers can design content on the PC and
test their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.
Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia network
extensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, the
World Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments from
Apple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).

The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equipped
with a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of hard
disk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,
and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. A
dual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIX
for testing interactive broadband applications, or Microsoft
Windows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating point
processor capabilities for graphics rendering and video
editing. The Mediaplex Application Development System comes
with Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.

The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentium
processor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB of
hard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,
16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, and
Ethernet connectivity.

Pricing and Availability

The Mediaplex Application Development System, with this full
complement of hardware and software resources, is priced
starting at $33,900, with significant discounts available for
qualified developers, and will be available from Digital in
the first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one year
membership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access to
support forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital's
SDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced as
separate options.

About Macromedia

Macromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts software
tools, offers a full range of products for the Windows and
Macintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:
Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design and
illustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standard
animation and authoring tool for multimedia production;
Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoring
environment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the most
powerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,
the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;
Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design and
editing; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentation
application.

About Digital

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, and
Westminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunications
companies using Digital technology include US West's trial in
Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in the
Northeast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's servers
are also being used in production environments to insert
advertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TV
headends served by Adlink in California, and to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER PROTOCOLS via NewsNet
January 1996

SOFTWARE SYSTEM SOLVES E-MAIL INCOMPATABILITY

Corporate America's growing dependence on E-mail to facilitate
high speed communication in the workplace, and the use of
different platforms to perform different tasks has given rise
to a new problem: Multiple, incompatible E-mail systems that
cannot communicate with each other. With fast, reliable and
cost-effective communication being essential to maintaining a
competitive edge in today's global marketplace, the inability
to communicate with clients, vendors, distributors, and other
employees can hinder growth and stifle profits.

With increasing frequency, companies are finding that they
have a mix of E-mail programs that don't communicate with each
other installed on PCs, Macintoshes, UNIX workstations and
legacy mainframes. When E-mail systems can't communicate with
each other, savings gained by effective communications cannot
be realized.

At some point, senior management wakes up to the fact that in
the "paperless office", corporate-wide E-mail is essential.
The task of integration is usually assigned to the corporate
Information Systems (IS) group who are faced with the
challenge of integrating the various existing departmental
E-mail systems.

This is a complicated task that involves making systems
interoperate, share directory information and documents across
different platforms.

This does not mean, however, that a standardized,
corporate-wide E-mail system needs to be purchased. Mail
integration technology is widely used to connect disparate
systems. The numerous benefits of integrating existing systems
make the concept a sensible alternative.

First, businesses preserve their initial investment. This
investment is not limited to the cost of the original E-mail
system packages, but includes the cost of servers needed to
run the system and the training of users.

These users often have limited computer experience and are
reluctant to give up their favorite E-mail system after
spending hours getting accustomed to its features and
capabilities. By switching E-mail systems in an effort to
standardize, users are taken out of their friendly computer
environment and placed into an unknown one.

Mail integration software solves this problem by allowing
users to seamlessly communicate with a variety of other mail
systems in a "friendly" manner. The address and message is
"switched" to make it appear as if users are communicating
with a computer on their very same E-mail system!

Second, mail integration can buy a company time to implement
an enterprise-wide migration strategy to wean users off older
legacy based mainframe systems and prepare them for a
standard-based information system. Additional benefits depend
on the particular features offered by the mail integration
software they select.

The technological demands of integration are extensive.
Choosing a mail integrator requires a careful examination of
features, benefits and reputation. Integration vendors
approach the issue differently and the results differ. Alisa
Systems has long been an industry leader in mail systems
integration. They have a reputation for being the best in the
business according to high tech computer publications and
other independent sources whose job it was to compare
integration systems.

Alisa offers a complete mail integration package called
AlisaMail. AlisaMail is a full-featured E-mail switch that
interconnects the most popular LAN-based electronic mail
systems. It provides seamless and transparent exchange of
electronic messages, fully editable documents and binary files
between WordPerfect GroupWise, Microsoft Mail, Lotus cc:Mail,
CE Software QuickMail, X.400, SMTP and Digital VMSmail,
ALL-IN-1 and Message Router. This includes spread sheets, word
processing documents, graphic and binary files. Most
importantly, AlisaMail is built on a relational database,
Sybase, that makes the system extremely flexible. "The really
strong point of the system is it's easy to customize how
information is presented." said Don Cole, president of Alisa
Systems.

The OpenDirectory, Automatic Directory Synchronization and
Message Switch are the strengths of the system and separate
AlisaMail from the competition.

The OpenDirectory is implemented using a Sybase SQL relational
database and can be used as a corporate directory service.
OpenDirectory, a unique AlisaMail feature, eliminates
complicated addressing schemes by maintaining a common address
book synchronized with each mail system.

This "master" directory can include an address book of
customers, employees and vendors that contains information
such as their title, organization, department name, E-mail and
postal address, telephone and FAX number, as well as a
photograph. The OpenDirectory provides a centralized address
book for all the E-mail users in their company. It is accessed
by either the user's E-mail client or an Alisa client/server
application called PeopleFinder.

PeopleFinder supports quick and easy on-line searching of the
AlisaMail Open Directory. Users may search specific fields in
the database such as Name, Title, Organization and Location.
Available for Windows, Macintosh and DEC VMS, PeopleFinder
allows users to browse the OpenDirectory and its contents to
display information not accessable in the user's address book.

Existing desktop client/server development tools and
applications can also be used to access the OpenDirectory.
With Sybases's openserver technology you can even connect to
other corporate databases.

Auto Directory Synchronization works hand in hand with the
OpenDirectory and is the key to mail systems integration.
Without Auto Directory Synchronization, the Open Directory
would be useless. Open Directory creates and maintains a
master directory of all E-mail users in by requesting
directory updates from each separate mail system. When changes
are made in one E-mail system such as adding, modifying or
deleting an E-mail address, the information is then
transferred to the master directory and then used to update
all the other directories.

In medium to large companies where there can be many changes,
AlisaMail allows the updating to be performed automatically.
The superior performance of our Auto Directory Synchronization
is made possible by the flexibility of the SQL database. "In
essence, AlisaMail makes each mail system's directory an
aggregate of all the users. It represents the entire
population and there is no distinction in where these people
live." said Cole.

AlisaMail utilizes a multi-port gateway which connects the
different E-mail systems to the AlisaMail Message Switch.

The gateway and Message Switch act as a store-and-forward
message hub and also handle the conversion of message formats
as required by the E-mail systems. The Message Switch
preserves the functionality of each mail system because it
stores the message in its unaltered format. The format of the
message is then converted only if the recipient mail system
requires conversion. If the receiving mail system does not
support all the functionality of the sender's, the Message
Switch will preserve as much functionality as possible.

Alisa Systems takes full responsibility for the success of
your E-mail integration. Alisa Systems will conduct on-site
surveys to determine your specific mail integration needs and
provide a customized solution. They will even install
AlisaMail on site for you, train you and help you fine-tune
the system to maximize performance in your environment.

"There's lots of bits and places for information to be stored
in a corporation and people need access to it," says Cole,
"There is a technology out there that can help you run your
business and save money."

For more information, call Alisa Systems at (800)628-3274.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>