
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B041-145</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te117.html 205.156.212.5 19970122052500 text/html 33329
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:22:59 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:33 GMT
Content-length: 33142
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te117.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
TELECOM PERSPECTIVES via NewsNet <BR>
January, 1996   <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>PLAYING FOLLOW THE LEADER&nbsp;IN OSS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1598 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CELLULAR DATA ...READY TO TAKE OFF AT LAST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2136 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CREATIVE DESTRUCTION IN GLOBAL PUBLIC NETWORKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(988 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
TELECOM PERSPECTIVES via NewsNet
January, 1996   

PLAYING FOLLOW THE LEADER
IN OSS

By:
Gayle Gaddis

Today's operations support systems vendors need a role model. Those vendors
who have taken the largest share of the OSS market in the past--most of
them network equipment vendors like AT&T, Bellcore, Nortel, Siemens,
Ericsson, and Alcatel--have suddenly found themselves in a changed OSS
market, one that values service over technology, one that expects
guarantees, and one that does not need to be told what its needs are. For
these traditional vendors--many of whom still believe that providing the
technology is the same as providing service--a new market strategy must be
found. They could develop this new strategy on their own, but that would be
reinventing the wheel; Andersen Consulting (along with some smaller
independent network management vendors) has already begun to set the
paradigm that OSS vendors will need to follow into the year 2000.
Certainly it would seem that Andersen, which has entered the telecom market
through the side door (i.e., business consulting), would have little to
teach AT&T, which practically founded the U.S. telecom market and has the
largest installed base of operations support systems to date. Yet AT&T,
like some of its fellow manufacturers, still suffers from an
equipment-based mentality that does not encompass service arrangements like
risk-sharing or joint marketing with customers. Andersen, on the other
hand, has pioneered some of these arrangements for OSS. Vendors like AT&T
also suffer (although AT&T less than some other OSS vendors) from an
attachment to the concept of management systems, rather than frameworks.
Alcatel still wants to sell the customer a box, where newer software
companies and integrators like OSI and TCSI want to sell the customer a
foundation upon which applications can be built (and thus are not selling
the customer any applications it does not need). Essentially, the OSS
market is moving in directions dictated by customers, and no longer by
vendors. And now that AT&T et al. can no longer tell customers what they
should need for OSS, they would do well to follow the lead of
customer-driven players like Andersen.

Changing the Rules
It is the OSS customers themselves--the local and global service providers,
whether wireline, wireless, or cable--that have instigated the
transformation of OSS, by beginning to demand the same types of guarantees
on performance and delivery from their vendors that end customers are
demanding from them. Until only a year or two ago, most telecom
carriers--and particularly wireline carriers, many of whom already had
years of engineering expertise upon which to rely--did a substantial amount
of their OSS development or customization in-house, thus reducing the need
for vendors to be concerned with customized approaches to OSS. Recently,
however, most of these carriers doing substantial portions of OSS work
internally have begun seeking outside sources, not only for systems, but
for customized applications. BellSouth, for instance, is now in transition
from having done 90% of OSS work internally to doing only 60% internally
and 40% on a contracted basis. With the drive to improve bottom lines,
carriers are seeking outside solutions in order to reduce the cost of OSS
development on the books. Given this fact, carriers are very sensitive to
cost issues for OSS, and price has become one of the key points on which
carriers are demanding guarantees, especially in light of the hidden costs
that had become a frequent occurrence as OSS contracts became more
complex.
   BT, for instance, found out first-hand that certain vendors would rather
tell the customer what it wants to hear about time and cost than risk
losing business by giving an accurate, if costly, estimate. BT purchased
products with the understanding that they represented a full, end-to-end
OSS solution, only to hear later from the vendor that additional equipment
or software would be required, thus adding both cost and time to the
implementation. Ultimately, the vendor lost business by telling the
customer what it wanted to hear, and increasingly, all OSS vendors with
this mentality will similarly be losing key clients. Stentor faced similar
situations with vendors, specifically with vendors who began to neglect
customer service once they had established a strong, embedded position in
the market (again, traditional manufacturers like AT&T and Bellcore, and
computing vendors like IBM and Digital are the chief culprits). As a
result, Stentor is now in the process of introducing supplier
reviews--which it characterizes as like a report card--to keep vendors on
their toes and let them know when service is beginning to slip. Such
stringent attention to service, cost, and time commitments will become the
norm as the decade wears on. Carriers today have had to become far too
service-conscious and technology-savvy in their own customer contracts to
simply accept what they are given by vendors.

Setting an Example
In order to meet these newly stringent requirements, OSS vendors must
significantly change the ways in which they do business, devising specific
schemes by means of which they can provide customized service and
guarantees to customers without compromising their own economies of scale
or their bottom lines. One such scheme is risk-sharing, which can take
different forms but nearly always results in increased customer
satisfaction. One form might simply involve project time-tables. If the
vendor completes the project (satisfactorily, of course) earlier than the
agreed-upon date, it receives a bonus. Completing the project later than
the agreed-upon date results in a penalty. GTE is beginning to require such
agreements with its OSS vendors, with an eye to the strict timetables under
which it plans to complete its business process re-engineering. Another
version of risk-sharing can result in a bigger payback for both carrier and
vendor alike, but also involves greater risk--that of joint development and
joint marketing of an OSS product or platform. It is in this latter form
that Andersen has taken a lead and provides a strong example for vendors
that are grappling with ways to both increase customer service and stay
lean in the OSS market.
   Co-development and marketing of a product not only allows customers more
control over the OSS development process at a point at which they would
otherwise feel control was being lost (with the cuts in funds for internal
development), it also increases customers' trust in the vendor. Under other
circumstances, the vendor has a perfect opportunity to resell an
application developed for a specific customer many times over. This makes
use of the customer's specs and expertise, but cuts the customer out of the
additional profits. While a great way for vendors to create economies of
scale, it has angered some customers. Because Andersen works so closely
with customers, however, getting to know their business organizations
intimately, it has recognized hot buttons like these, and hence has
capitalized on strategies (like risk-sharing) which avoid them. Andersen
has a steadily growing list of cost- and profit-sharing agreements with
high-profile carriers: Pacific Bell, Bell Atlantic, and BellSouth among
them (Andersen in fact does business with all the U.S. RBOCs; BellSouth was
the last holdout).
   Similarly, smaller, independent vendors of OSS software and services
have something to teach the traditional vendors as well. By necessity these
providers have a strong customer service ethic like that of Andersen, only
on a smaller scale. When one large carrier makes up a full 10%-20% of the
customer base--as is the case with some smaller vendors--clearly everything
possible must be done to keep that customer happy. These small vendors
offer another lesson as well to vendors like Siemens or Alcatel: how to
build economies of scale in an increasingly customized OSS market. The
answer is in the development of management frameworks, rather than the
traditional boxes that these more established vendors are accustomed to
selling.
   OSI, for instance, a vendor which is just beginning to make a name for
itself in OSS, has already begun to capture a significant portion of the
emerging market for wireless OSS. This is not because it built a system
specific to the management of wireless networks, but because it built a
platform on which wireless management applications could be built, as could
applications for legacy integration on wireline networks, or applications
for emerging network technologies, like AIN (OSI's NetExpert platform has
in fact been used for several AIN implementations already). To address the
same variety of applications, Ericsson would require that a customer
implement several different versions of the same system, and some other
vendors might require multiple different systems and still not be able to
address emerging applications such as PCS or AIN. (AT&T's ability to do
this particular OSS juggling act is still in question; the slow progress of
its OneVision platform suggests that this capability may be down the
road.)

At a Standstill?
While Andersen, OSI, and a few other vendors have taken these steps toward
increasing customer involvement and satisfaction, they constitute a
minority in doing so. Exhibit 1 illustrates the position of various OSS
vendors vis vis increased levels of customer service and willingness to
partner with the customer through risk-sharing arrangements (i.e., the
willingness to actually put their money where their mouths are, rather than
simply calling any contract a "partnership"). The cluster of vendors
scoring low on both fronts should question their long-term viability in the
OSS market; there is no doubt that their customers are. And long-term
viability is nearly as important to OSS customers as customer service
itself. These vendors should take their cues from players like Andersen,
which itself will undoubtedly be in the market for a very long time.


Illustration(s):
Illustration: Evolution of OSS Vendors in Terms of Customer Orientation
Source: Northern Business Information.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
TELECOM PERSPECTIVES via NewsNet
January, 1996   

CELLULAR DATA ...READY TO TAKE OFF AT LAST?

By:
Mirva Anttila

The wireless data market has not taken off as quickly as many industry
experts predicted. The rapid growth of cellular voice subscribership to
date has not led to a similar expansion of cellular data usage.
   Cellular data users (both circuit- and packet-switched) represent a
small portion of total cellular voice subscribership. Despite anticipated
growth over the next few years, cellular data users will remain a small
subset of the larger cellular voice subscriber population (see Exhibit 2).
Reasons for slower-than-expected development of cellular data are numerous:
the existence of multiple wireless data platforms (making it difficult and
confusing for customers to choose the right one); the unreliability of
circuit-switched data transmission; lack of standards for Cellular Digital
Packet Data (CDPD) software development; non-ubiquitous data network
coverage; clumsy, heavy end-user devices (some with no communications
capability and some with awkward handwriting recognition technologies);
incompatible modems; high-priced service; and a lack of cooperation in the
industry.
   Moreover, cellular data service differs greatly from cellular voice, and
the two services simply cannot be promoted in the same manner. The sales
cycle for wireless data solutions is much longer than the sales cycle for
voice users. Most of today's data users are corporations that must
cost-justify expensive new technology, with the result that the technology
must live up to its promise. At the same time, both users and cellular data
salespeople must be educated about the need for, and utility of, cellular
data solutions.

What Cellular Data Users Need To Know
The following items are the minimum requirements for cellular data users:
  -- Ubiquity of Service: Interconnect to wireline tele-phone networks or
to (other) packet-switched networks; use with a variety of termin-als;
adaptability to current in-house protocols (systems).
  -- Coverage: In-building capabilities.
  -- Portability: Small, light-weight terminals; reasonable battery life.
  -- Features: Voice backup; privacy and security; wide range of data
capabilities and applications.
  -- Price: Low pricing for ser-vices and terminals.
  -- Circuit-switched Data Problems and Solutions
Having been created for voice communications, analog cellular networks are
vulnerable to interference that causes fading and breakup, and that can
result in dropped calls. For voice communications this is irritating, but
for data communications these problems are fatal since the signal may
become so corrupted by interference that some information is lost. The
success rate on each data transfer attempt is estimated to be only about
55-60%, and if the user moves during a data call, normal circuit-switched
data transfer will be disrupted. Digital signals convert the analog wave
form into a numerical code (1 or 0) and are therefore more resistant to
errors. When signal corruption does occur, error-correction logic at the
receiving end can often reconstruct the corrupted signal. The digital
environment also allows the use of processing techniques that improve
signal strength without requiring any increase in power, so signals can be
transmitted over longer distances.
   To improve the success ratio, circuit-switched data transmission
cellular carriers have begun to install modem pools at mobile switching
centers in major metropolitan markets, thereby increasing the reliability
and transmission speed of circuit-switched data service. This development
enables cellular users with dissimilar modems to exchange data at speeds
comparable to landline rates.
   Operators are also introducing new pricing approaches. To date,
operators have been pricing circuit-switched data transmission in
one-minute increments (like cellular voice). However, this tariff structure
is not economical for users sending large numbers of short messages that
are less than one minute in duration. So operators are exploring the
possibility of offering specialized pricing packages for circuit-switched
cellular data. For example, Cellular One in Buffalo (an AT&T
Wireless/Southwestern Bell Mobile Systems joint venture) introduced a
separate pricing plan for cellular data. The "Data Gateway" service is
available for $4.95/month plus airtime fees: $0.15/minute during peak times
and $0.03/minute during off-peak hours. The network uses modem pool
technology developed by Primary Access Corp. that can differentiate between
voice and data calls for the purpose of separate billing.

CDPD Problems and Solutions
It's now widely recognized that technology developers are often prone to
overlook the marketing aspects of new services rollout and behave as if the
mere existence of a new product or technology is all that is required to
ensure market demand. A few years ago, CDPD was widely heralded as the
"next big thing" in wireless. However, as has been the case with other
heavily hyped new telecom technologies, the market has not developed yet.
Thus far, the primary barriers to the spread of CDPD services have been the
lack of ubiquitous network coverage and the lack of standards for wireless
data applications development. Recently, however, cellular carriers have
gotten the message and have begun to implement solutions.

Ubiquitous Network Coverage
CDPD had been commercially deployed in 41 U.S. markets by October 1995.
This translates to approximately 14% penetration in the country's 306
Metropolitan Statistical Areas. As illustrated in Exhibit 3, five of the
top nine U.S. cellular carriers have deployed CDPD. Nevertheless, the
establishment of an effective nationwide CDPD "network" has proceeded
slowly. To date, only two interoperability or "visiting" agreements have
been formed among the carriers. In mid-1995, GTE Mobilnet and Ameritech
Cellular entered into an agreement to provide CDPD service in each other's
markets, initially covering Chicago, Detroit, St. Louis, Houston, and San
Francisco. In late 1995, GTE Mobilnet and Bell Atlantic NYNEX Mobile (BANM)
concluded a similar agreement including all of GTE's metropolitan markets
and BANM's Connecticut market. BANM plans to expand its area in 1996,
pending regulatory approval. Under these agreements, each company retains
its own tariff structure but customers receive only one bill from their
home service provider. Before seamless nationwide network coverage can be
achieved, however, the cellular operators must coordinate their CDPD
billing and accounting efforts. Several operators forecast that 1996 will
be a big year for interoperability agreements and that a nationwide CDPD
network could be in place in late 1996 or early 1997.
   Most operators agree that it is vitally important for the carriers to
work together to create seamless nationwide data coverage instead of
fighting against each other. Nevertheless, several of the largest cellular
carriers--AirTouch Communications, BellSouth Cellular, Southwestern Bell
Mobile Systems (SBMS), and U S West--are not "sold" on CDPD. Most cite lack
of market demand as the major reason for not deploying CDPD. Some are also
not convinced that CDPD will ever be the packet data technology choice for
them. AirTouch and U S West, both deploying CDMA in their cellular
networks, are exploring CDMA's data transmission capabilities. Similarly,
BellSouth and SBMS are reviewing packet data options using TDMA, their
chosen digital cellular standard. Moreover, BellSouth has an ownership
stake in RAM Mobile Data, which provides wireless packet data services on a
Mobitex-standard network, and views CDPD as a competing technology.
   Lack of Standards for Wireless Data Applications Development
In the short term, the success of wireless data depends on the software
developers' ability to create applications that satisfy customers' needs.
Circuit-switched data technology allows the modification of wireline
applications fairly easily, but CDPD currently lacks the software standards
that would encourage developers to create programs. A major industry
problem is that most software applications are specifically created for
certain wireless data platforms. Consequently, some customers are afraid
that once they sign up for certain CDPD applications, they will be stuck
with them (and who knows if CDPD is going to be around in five years).
Wireless data applications today can be divided into vertical (industry
specific, database/host connectivity), horizontal (messaging, fax,
information/news services, file transfer, Internet backbone
communications), and networking (desktop, LAN, and database access). Most
of today's CDPD solutions are specialized applications for vertical
markets, but the demand for horizontal applications is growing.
   One solution to the software problem may be the emergence of middleware,
a software engine that allows data applications to run on multiple, diverse
networks. Middleware bridges surface incompatibilities between different
mobile technologies that all have different protocols. Middleware also
fosters cooperation by allowing multiple applications to run concurrently.
   Some middleware solutions are broadly oriented toward creating fully
open-system telecom platforms with a common application programming
interface; others simply enable land-line applications over wireless or
target multi-platform applications for specific activities like electronic
commerce. Middleware is also helpful for networks employing the same
protocol. It can be used to provide sign-in scripts that suit different
types of CDPD modems. Most wireless data carriers support the middleware
concept because it encourages applications development and gets more
customers into the wireless data mode. In the future, middleware functions
are likely to be integrated into network protocols as carriers realize the
importance of allowing customers to access multiple networks.

End-user Device Problems and Solutions
User-friendly hardware is as important as service reliability, ubiquitous
coverage, and reasonably priced service. The cellular data market will
develop hand-in-hand with the growth of the notebook/laptop computer
market. Some of these products have been streamlined and simplified during
the last few years. Instead of using external modems and interfaces, many
notebook computers today employ Personal Computer Memory Card International
Association (PCMCIA) modems. The cellular phone is connected to this
credit-card sized modem via a slim cable and quick-release data cradle that
holds the phone during data transmission. In the future, the cellular radio
chip-set may even be incorporated into the PCMCIA modem card. Another way
to integrate the cellular data device and the radio is to design products
like IBM's PC Radio, which has an RF data unit comprising a cellular radio,
modem, and antenna.
   One of the first attempts to combine computing and communications
functions was the introduction of Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) in
spring 1993. The early PDAs, such as Apple's "Newton Message Pad,"
EO/AT&T's "EO-Personal Communicator," Tandy's "Zoomer," and Motorola's
"Envoy," had the form factor of a handheld computer. The products were not
successful due to premature launching. Early end-user device developers and
promoters made many mistakes with the technology, overhyped the industry,
set unrealistic expectations, and targeted the wrong market (the consumer
instead of the business market). Many of these mistakes were typical of the
early stages of high-tech product development.
   Most early PDAs were too awkward to use, too bulky and too heavy to
carry around, and too expensive. They were like sophisticated electronic
organizers with limited communications features, primarily allowing users
to write notes, keep appointment calendars, and maintain telephone/address
lists. In some cases, users could send and receive wireline and wireless
e-mail and faxes with optional modems and cellular phones, but the devices
did not provide wireless connectivity as a standard feature. The problem
with these early PDAs was that they were not designed for communications
and both end-user devices and applications were computing- and
data-centric. Some of the new products (to be introduced in 1996), such as
Compaq Computer's "WinPad," still concentrate on the computer form factor
and emphasize the backward compatibility with corporate desktops.
   One step in the right direction was the introduction of a cellular
phone-type device. In late 1994, BellSouth rolled out "Simon," a product
combining voice and data functionality. However, Simon was still too
awkward to use, relied on inadequate handwriting recognition, lacked a
clear screen display, and had insufficient battery capacity.
   Motorola's newest versions of "Envoy" and "Marco," and PCSI's new
prototype "PAL," can also be included in this category of
communications-centric devices. In late 1995, Air Communications Inc.
introduced an "AirCommunicator" device that combines cellular voice, data
messaging, and fax functionalities. Several operators, including AirTouch
Communications, Ameritech Cellular, Sprint Cellular, and U S West Cellular,
decided to bundle their analog cellular services with this multi-function
communicator. For the cellular data market to take off significantly,
additional voice-centric devices, more appropriate for the largely untapped
mobile executive market, must be available.

Systems Integrators to the Rescue?
To expand usage of cellular data services, carriers can increase network
coverage, introduce additional features, support the development of
user-friendly devices, and intensify their marketing efforts to better
reach the target business user market. However, the carriers cannot do this
alone. Cellular operators will rely increasingly on systems integrators to
provide a complete service solution. Systems integrators will package the
various elements: the cellular data service, the communications device
(cellular phone, cellular/radio modem, pager, etc.), communications
"middleware" (interfaces computing environment to communications
environment), applications software (horizontal, vertical, networking), and
central processing unit (CPU). To ensure the widest possible distribution
for wireless data solutions, systems integrators have certified resellers
who in turn sell the solution to the marketplace. Unlike cellular voice
service (which appears to "sell itself"), cellular data service,
particularly CDPD, requires more coordinated efforts on the part of
hardware and applications developers, distribution agents, and the cellular
operators themselves.


Illustration(s):
Illustration: Cellular Data Subscriptions, 1994-1999
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.
Illustration: CDPD Deployment by Operator
Source: CDPD Forum and Northern Business Information.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
TELECOM PERSPECTIVES via NewsNet
January, 1996   

CREATIVE DESTRUCTION IN GLOBAL PUBLIC NETWORKS

By:
Michael Arellano, Vern Mackall, and Courtney Munroe

The title of this article is taken from Josef Schumpeter, a 19th Century
economist who said that entrepreneurs create "new combinations" that can
rapidly create wealth for risk-takers and, in the process, undermine the
position of established competitors. Overall, economic activity increases
and wealth is created, but competitors who cannot adapt fast enough will
see their assets decline markedly in value: hence, "creative destruction"
or "productive chaos."
   These phrases are apt descriptions of today's global public network
market in the sense that established and emerging carriers, in the U.S. and
globally, seek to expand their current service portfolios to provide voice
(both local and long distance), video, high-speed data, home shopping and
banking, and other types of communications services. As operators seek to
enter new markets and protect their positions in their existing markets,
old ways of doing business, as well as the infrastructure used to deliver
services, will undergo radical transformation.
   Given regulatory changes and technological development, stable
monopolies and guaranteed market share are things of the past.

U.S. Local Services Market
In the U.S. market, the long-awaited reform of the telecommunications
industry appears increasingly close to reality. As a result, telecom
operators can become "one-stop shops," offering customers several different
types of services, provided they can raise the capital for the necessary
network upgrades.
   Exhibit 4 illustrates what is at stake in terms of revenue. Although the
pie is getting bigger, competition means that the current size of each type
of operator's slice is not guaranteed. Exhibits 5 and 6 show the same set
of services by carrier group market share in 1995 and 2000, respectively.
Local exchange carriers (LECs) provide local phone service (the first four
rows); interexchange carriers (IXCs) offer long distance service;
Competitive Access Providers (CAPs) also offer local service; and Multiple
System Operators (MSOs) are large cable TV operators.
   These carriers currently operate primarily within their own well-defined
markets, but distinctions between the different carrier groups will become
less meaningful following the implementation of telecom reform. Indeed,
combinations between operators from different groups are inevitable. The
IXCs will compete in the local access market by offering local loop and
wireless bypass solutions. The LECs will lose billions of dollars as IXCs
target business markets with private line alternatives and, eventually,
provide switched access for both wired and wireless communications.
   In the residential market, LECs will continue to lose market share in
the toll call segment to IXCs. Pacific Bell, which already faces
competition in the toll call segment, has experienced revenue declines in
this area as new rivals exert pricing pressure. The same pattern will no
doubt be repeated in the other Local Access Transport Areas (LATAs).

International Service Markets
A similar transformation will take place in international markets. Exhibit
7 presents global telecom service revenues and shows that wired voice and
data services, the "bread and butter" markets of incumbent operators
(PTTs), will represent the major source of revenue over the next five
years. However, many incumbent national operators' markets are being
transformed by liberalization, modernization, and competition. Other
Licensed Operators (OLCs) such as Mercury in the United Kingdom and Optus
in Australia, as well as Global Carriers (GCs) such as Concert (MCI and BT)
and WorldPartners (AT&T and other carriers), are challenging the economics
and cost structure of the traditional monopoly telecom operator.
   Exhibits 8 and 9 illustrate each carrier group's share of the different
telecom service segments in 1995 and 2000, indicating that as
liberalization and competition proceed worldwide global carriers and other
licensed operators will make substantial gains at the expense of the
traditional PTTs. As a result, incumbent operators are preparing their
strategic responses, which include privatization (both to augment financial
resources and to increase managerial flexibility), new business practices,
introduction of new services, and entry into new lines of business. Some
incumbent operators are also positioning themselves as global carriers. For
example, Deutsche Telekom is gearing up for competition in Germany while
working with France Telecom and Sprint as part of the Phoenix global
carrier alliance. Incumbent operators such Deutsche Telekom and France
Telecom will rapidly lose wired voice and data market share to the
competition, and will lose it much faster than AT&T did in the United
States. The global competitors have the advantage of greater experience and
agility in scaling national boundaries, while other licensed competitors
will have the advantage of newer, state-of-the-art networks.
   Service operators' responses to loss of market share and management of
potential new opportunities will be key to their success and survival. The
main issue is for carriers to move from high-cost/low-revenue sectors to
high-margin sectors. This will vary depending on market sector and
position. New entrants must target the low-cost, high-revenue customers.
Incumbent operators whose monopolies are being attacked must, at a minimum,
ensure that their service tariffs match their cost structures. Operators in
markets that are already competitive must understand potential entrants'
cost structures and increase their service differentiation and price
competition efforts. For new entrants in all types of markets, the name of
the game is "cream skimming," at least in the early days. The creative
destruction wrought by telecom reform, market liberalization, and
competition will result in short- to medium-term turmoil, with many new
players. In the end, however, we could see a case of "deja vu all over
again," with "supercarriers" providing all types of services to all
customers.


Illustration(s):
Illustration: U.S. Service Revenues, 1995 and 2000
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.

Illustration: U.S. Share by Carrier Group, 1995
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.

Illustration: U.S. Share by Carrier Group, 2000
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.
Illustration: Global Service Revenues, 1995 and 2000
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.

Illustration: Global Share by Carrier Group, 1995
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.

Illustration: Global Share by Carrier Group, 2000
Source: Northern Business Information estimates.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>