
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B27-184</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000320-B031-451</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ad13.html 205.156.212.5 19970114194841 text/html 32325
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 19:46:54 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:45:01 GMT
Content-length: 32138
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ad13.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 11, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>***************&nbsp;SLANTS & TRENDS&nbsp;***************</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SPLIT MAILING EARNS VICTORIA'S SECRET&nbsp;A LAWSUIT FOR GENDER DISCRIMINATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>THE MILLION-DOLLAR MARCH:&nbsp;L.A. BLACKS SWITCH BANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(315 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>BANKERS DISCOUNT CREDIT CRUNCH,&nbsp;EXPECT SURGE IN HOME BANKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(681 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>WHAT'S IN A NAME? WOULD HEALTHY&nbsp;FOOD PRODUCTS TASTE AS SWEET?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(585 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>HOW TO SELL MORE GASOLINE:&nbsp;KEEP RESTROOMS 'IN ORDER'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(695 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ONLINE MARKET-RESEARCH VENTURE&nbsp;OFFERS FREEBIES TO RESPONDENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(562 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>GEE WHIZ!: FUTURISTS DESCRIBE&nbsp;CHANGES INFO-TECH WILL BRING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(550 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN HALTS STATISTICS,&nbsp;LEAVING ECONOMISTS REALLY CLUELESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

***************
SLANTS & TRENDS
***************



     WHEN SNOW blanketed New England right after the New
Year, so many commuters reverted to telecommuting that the
phone lines were jammed. Nynex officials are used to
upsurges in usage during bad weather and thought they had
plenty of capacity this time, but there were more phones,
faxes, pagers and computer modems switched on than they
could handle. Many customers experienced delays in getting
dial tones.

     NATIONWIDE, there were 45 million home-based workers in
1994, up from 6 million in 1984, according to the National
Association of Home-Based Businesses. That included both
self-employed people and employees who work from home. The
number continues to grow.

* * *

     GOLDILOCKS, who preferred her porridge not too hot and
not too cold, has lent her name to the current economy. Most
analysts think the Federal Reserve has engineered it "just
right," and they expect it to continue through 1996.

     THAT WOULD make the new year the sixth straight year of
economic expansion since the last recession. If inflation
remains under control, it could also be the fifth straight
year with consumer price increases under 3 percent. (The
high-inflation 1970s look more like an aberration every
day.)

     UNEMPLOYMENT should also remain low, according to the
consensus, but that won't stop Americans from worrying.
Corporate downsizing has given them a permanent sense of
insecurity. Also, real income growth has been stagnant for
two decades, leaving many middle-class families hard-pressed
to make ends meet.

     THE ECONOMIC YEAR may start slow as automakers and
retailers struggle to move unsold inventories, but the
cavalry is already on the way in the form of lower short-
term interest rates from the Fed. Rates were cut twice last
year as the economy faltered, and analysts say continued
tame inflation will allow further cuts in 1996.

     IN SUM, there are so few clouds on the horizon that
most economists expect stable, if boring, economic growth
right through 1997. David Berson, chief economist at the
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae), says
"modest economic growth and benign inflation" are the most
likely outlook for the next two years.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

SPLIT MAILING EARNS VICTORIA'S SECRET
A LAWSUIT FOR GENDER DISCRIMINATION


     Denise Katzman was outraged by the obvious
discrimination: She and a male coworker had each received
seemingly identical lingerie catalogs from Victoria's
Secret, only his offered a $25 discount on orders of $75 or
more, while hers offered only a $10 discount.

     On Jan. 2, she filed a class-action lawsuit in U.S.
District Court in New York City. She sought $15
reimbursements or credits from the Columbus, Ohio, company
for anyone who received the smaller discount.

     The suit alleged discrimination based both on gender
and income, because the company presumably had done enough
market segment research to know that Katzman made less than
her coworker. The suit further alleged a historic pattern of
discrimination, on the grounds that the company had done the
same thing previously.

     Wrong! In a brief statement released the next day,
Victoria's Secret called the suit "baseless." Industry
insiders said Katzman was apparently the victim of nothing
more sinister than a "split mailing," whereby marketers test
the pulling power of various come-ons by including different
ones in two or more segments of a given mail drop.

Deja Vu

     In 1991, American Express became embroiled in another
controversy involving a split mailing. The Joan Cook mail-
order house, which sells housewares, wanted to mail out some
of its catalogs, but not all, with the message that
customers could charge orders using the AmEx card.

     The president of Joan Cook got the idea to try a split
mailing at a time when many retailers, restaurants and other
merchants were objecting to - and publicly revolting against
- the high fees they had to pay to AmEx on each transaction,
and the long time it was taking AmEx to reimburse them for
charges. Schwartz wanted to see whether "The Card" was
paying its freight, so to speak.

     AmEx was trying to stamp out the revolt, and threatened
to stop doing business with Joan Cook if the company went
through with the split mailing. The catalog company
relented, but AmEx was later forced to cut its fees for many
merchants after Land's End, L.L. Bean and Laura Ashley
stores joined the revolt (AM, Feb. 27, 1992, p. 44).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

THE MILLION-DOLLAR MARCH:
L.A. BLACKS SWITCH BANKS


     Hundreds of Los Angeles-area African-Americans
responded to a self-help campaign Jan. 6 and switched their
bank deposits to four black-owned institutions. In one case,
Founders Bank of Los Angeles saw its deposits increase by
$600,000.

     The event was called "Change Bank Day." It was part of
a larger campaign called Recycling Black Dollars that called
on blacks to patronize black-owned businesses.

     Campaign organizers estimate that blacks have about $9
billion deposited in various Los Angeles-area banks.

     "If we were able to get just 25 percent of our money
into black banks, we can see a hotel on Crenshaw, a hotel at
the Convention Center, new manufacturing plants in South-
Central, which in turn would provide more jobs for young
blacks," says Muhammad Nassardeen, head of Recycling.

     Founders Bank President Carlton Jenkins is ready to do
his part to further such dreams. He has promised to invest
his depositors' money in the black community, while also
giving his customers excellent service. Five-year-old
Founders has $100 million in assets.

     "It's just phenomenal!" said Jenkins of the $600,000
windfall the bank received Jan. 6. Sounding somewhat like
movie banker Jimmy Stewart, he added, "What they're saying
is, 'We've finally arrived with you, Carlton!'"

     The other institutions participating in Change Bank Day
did not immediately release information on the amounts of
their new deposits.

Don't Call It Separatism

     Nassardeen insists that the campaign is about self-
help, not racial separatism. "We're into survival," he
declares. "Nobody ever called it racism when other people
were doing it."

     The concept of financial solidarity within the black
community has been around for years, but it was recently
revitalized by the Million Man March on Washington, D.C.

     "It was time to let people know that we are not the
poor people that many people have depicted us to be,"
Nassardeen says.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

BANKERS DISCOUNT CREDIT CRUNCH,
EXPECT SURGE IN HOME BANKING


     As the new year approached, the Consumer Bankers
Association (CBA) polled its board of directors for their
outlook on a number of vital issues. They were emphatic on
two issues of interest to marketers: 1) They do not believe
the recent increase in consumer debt levels will lead to a
significant pullback in spending; 2) They are certain that
home banking is about to become very hot.

     "There will most likely not be a major financial shock
in 1996 as a result of the consumer loan situation of 1995,"
says William MacDonald III, president and CEO of National
City Bank in Cleveland and chairman of the CBA.

     MacDonald concedes that many banks "extended" their
credit standards in 1995 to make more money on interest
payments. They were particularly aggressive about issuing
new credit cards.

     But although the ratio of consumer installment debt to
income has risen as a result, "the good news is that credit
card debt is but one segment of consumer debt," he says. "To
fairly assess consumer debt you must also include loans from
home equity and personal and revolving credit lines." Viewed
from this "macro" perspective, he argues, "the debt level
numbers are not as alarming."

     And given a relatively high level of consumer
confidence, "experts are not looking for consumer
retrenchment in the near future," he continues, but adds, "I
expect to see some tightening of consumer credit standards
and an increase to more historically normal loss and
delinquency ratios."

A Naysayer in Dixie

     MacDonald's sanguine outlook is not shared by John
Kirby, who heads the Consumer Lending Group at SouthTrust
Bank of Alabama, headquartered in Birmingham. (His boss,
Chairman and CEO Julian Banton, sits on the CBA board.)

     "In my opinion, 1996 will be a year when we see higher
delinquency and loan losses as the consumer becomes
overextended," Kirby says. "Consumer purchases will soften
because of this trend as the year proceeds."

     Kirby says too many banks have lowered their credit
standards to maintain earnings in the face of growing
competition. They have engaged in a race to the bottom on
rates for credit cards and auto loans. That forces prudent
lenders into a Hobson's choice: accept more marginal
applicants, or leave their business to someone else.

     In either case, the marginal applicant gets the loan,
and Kirby fears many of them will be unable to keep up the
payments in 1996.

Home Banking

     "It is no longer a question of whether clients want and
are willing to use home banking; the question is how many,
how soon and how much will they pay for it?" says Richard
Hartnack, vice chairman of Union Bank in Los Angeles.

     "A number of factors are converging to make 1996 the
year of electronic banking," says Linnet Deily, who is
chairman, president and CEO of First Interstate Bank of
Texas, based in Houston.

     She explains: "Consumers are increasingly comfortable
with online technology; time is an ever-more precious
commodity; and millions of Americans are already
enthusiastic users of personal financial management software
packages such as Quicken and Microsoft Money.

     "Judging by the level of enrollment in the first weeks
after First Interstate Bank began offering online services
and our usage trends on check cards, electronic banking will
be a significant part of how we do business in the future."

FTC Warning

     At the CBA's recent annual conference, an official from
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) warned bankers to be
careful with the Pandora's Box represented by online
banking.

     "Technology provides unprecedented opportunity to
gather information on consumers," said David Medine, the
FTC's associate director for credit practices, but bankers
must control the temptation to sell such information to
marketers. "The challenge will be to educate consumers about
how information is gathered and used, and then provide them
with a vehicle for exercising choice."

     When in the Washington, D.C., area, be sure to listen
to American Marketplace Editor Dave Speights Monday mornings
at 9:38 on WBZS, Business Radio 730 AM.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

WHAT'S IN A NAME? WOULD HEALTHY
FOOD PRODUCTS TASTE AS SWEET?


     America's love affair with healthier foods has made
many government truth-in-labeling standards obsolete. Why
insist that "peanut butter" contain 90 percent peanuts when
a less-concentrated version can taste as good and be far
healthier?

     That is essentially the question asked by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in twin Dec. 29 notices in the Federal
Register. The notices invite public comment on proposed
changes to a wide range of naming and labeling rules.

     The regulators say many old-fashioned rules are denying
food processors the opportunity to offer healthier and more
convenient products. But some processors and consumer
advocates worry that looser rules will allow watered-down or
even adulterated versions of common foods.

On the Table

     Without apparent ironic intent, FDA food labeling
official Betty Campbell says "everything is on the table" in
the current review. She insists that food labels will still
have to list ingredients and nutritional values, regardless
of any other changes that may be enacted.

     That does not satisfy Larry Davenport, president of the
Atlanta-based International Jelly and Preserve Association.

     "Without federal standards," he warns, "it opens the
field to a free-fire zone where people can do whatever they
want, which is to, say, make a sweet-tasting paste of some
sort, with coloring and sugar, call it a jelly or jam or
preserve."

     Currently, strawberry jelly has to be almost one-half
strawberries to wear that name. Beef stew must be one-
quarter beef by weight. The rules date to 1938, when they
were intended to keep processors from watering down their
products or stretching them with fillers. Perversely, the
rules often encourage high fat, sugar and salt content.

     Even our everyday language has left the old standards
behind. People who say, "Pass the butter" or "Pass the
cream" these days do not necessarily expect to receive the
real thing. Yet, technically speaking, butter must be 80
percent butterfat, and cream must be cream, not half and
half.

     Dairy farmers have actually lost business because they
could not lighten up their products without relabeling them,
says Fergus Clydesdale, head of the Food Science Department
at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst.

     To be sure, health considerations have already led to
changes in some rules involving water, fillers and labeling.
The FDA has ruled that the product once called "ice milk"
may now be sold as "low-fat ice cream." But the agency
complains that each such change requires a cumbersome and
expensive special review under current rules.

The Specific Proposals

     The USDA wants to allow reduced-fat versions of hot
dogs, ground meats and other meat products to go by the
traditional names, so long as their labels clearly state
that water or fillers have been added.

     Both the USDA and the FDA are proposing to allow the
use of such common terms as beef stew, peanut butter, etc.
on healthier versions, provided that the percentage of beef,
peanuts or other key ingredient is revealed on the label.

     Michael Taylor, who supervises meat inspections for the
USDA, says, "Presumably, there's some point at which there's
so little beef it's misleading inherently to call it beef
stew, but what's magic about 25 percent?"

     For further information, see the Federal Register, Dec.
29, pp. 67474-67487 and 67492-67503. % Copies of the two
notices (26 pages in all) are also available from the
Business Publishers DocuDial Service as document number 78-
1114. See ordering information below.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

HOW TO SELL MORE GASOLINE:
KEEP RESTROOMS 'IN ORDER'


     Unocal 76, a chain of 1,400 service stations on the
West Coast, launched a brand advertising campaign Jan. 1
based on the premise that "a gas station is a gas station."

     That's what consumers said, essentially, in focus
groups made up of regular Unocal customers and drivers who
patronize other stations. They were far less interested in
alleged performance differences between brands - the
traditional pitch - than in convenient squeegees with soapy
water, paper towels, and clean, well-supplied restrooms.

     Accordingly, the TWBA Chiat/Day advertising agency came
up with a campaign of TV and radio spots with the theme, "We
Get It." It started running in Southern California on the
first, and is slated to run in Northern California soon. It
emphasizes the "little things" people want.

     "We learned that gasoline is not a primary factor in
choosing a service station," says Cindy Hearn, Unocal's
marketing director. "We get it: people want more than good
gasoline; they want the little things that make their
experience at the station as efficient, quick and pleasant
as possible."

Focus Group Art

     During the focus groups, participants were asked to
share their feelings about service stations - not just
orally, but through a sort of arts-and-crafts exercise. They
made collages of words and pictures relating to service, and
they drew cartoonlike "thought bubbles" filled with their
feelings about the fill-up experience.

     Hearn says the "We Get It" campaign is less a promotion
than a new way of doing business, designed to maximize
customer convenience and minimize hassle. As part of this
new push, all local dealers have been asked to sign pledges
committing themselves to the new philosophy. Point-of-sale
materials reinforce the message.

     "We are making a long-term commitment to consumers,"
says Lawrence Higby, president of the 76 Products Co., the
refining, marketing and transportation unit of Unocal. "The
76 ball has always stood for gasoline quality, and now it
will become a symbol of guaranteed good service, too."

     For further information, contact Nancy Miller of 76
Products Co. at (714) 572-7114.

Express Lines

     Minority Marketing Conferences - Market Segment
Research & Consulting, a firm specializing in minority
groups, has teamed up with a conference-management firm to
offer a series of conferences on "Marketing to the New
America." The first will be held in Los Angeles Jan. 29-30.
Others will follow in Miami (March 7-8) and New York (May
22-23). Attendees will get the lowdown on "the most
comprehensive ethnic study ever released," which involved
more than 5,000 interviews nationwide with African-,
Hispanic- and Asian-Americans. Attendees will also hear
reports about both the over-50 and teenage segments of these
ethnic groups. Case-study presenters will include
representatives of AT&T, Allstate Insurance, JC Penney Co.,
McDonald's, the Hilliard-Jones Marketing Group and others.
Attendees can also participate in three interactive focus
groups featuring real, live minority consumers. The
registration fee is $1,195, which includes a copy of MSR&C's
1996 Ethnic Market Report and all meals except dinners. For
further information, contact the Strategic Research
Institute, 500 Fifth Ave., 11th Floor, New York, NY 10110;
(800) 599-4950 or (212) 302-1800.

     Customer Satisfaction and Quality - The American
Marketing Association, in cooperation with the American
Society of Quality Control, will hold its 8th Annual
Customer Satisfaction & Quality Measurement Conference Feb.
18-20 at the Washington (D.C.) Hilton & Towers. Separate
tracks will be geared to companies that are "Getting
Started," "Evolving" or "Becoming a Leader" in these arcane
arts. Presenters will include representatives of Johnson &
Johnson, UPS, American Express, Compaq Computer Corp., Pizza
Hut, Chase Manhattan Bank, Eastman Kodak Co., plus several
leading consulting firms. The registration fee is $595 for
AMA and ASQC members and $695 for nonmembers until Jan. 31.
For further information, contact ASQC, Education Services
Dept., P.O. Box 3005, Milwaukee, WI 53201-3005; (800) 248-
1946 or (414) 272-8575.

     Hard Core on the 'net - Future Communication Systems
Inc. has just released "The Hard Core Internet Marketing
Video," a two-hour follow-up to their "Internet Marketing
101" video/software set. The whole package is available for
$99 from FCS Inc., 92 Summit Way, Syosset, NY 11791; (516)
496-7121.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

ONLINE MARKET-RESEARCH VENTURE
OFFERS FREEBIES TO RESPONDENTS


     How do you recruit cybersurfers to participate in
online surveys and focus groups? Offer them free online
hours, electronic "coupons" good for purchases at the
virtual mall, and, if all else fails, use the oldest of all
come-ons, cash.

     That's how the Greenfield Online Research Center does
it. The new venture, a subsidiary of a Westport, Conn.-based
market research firm, is one of only a handful specializing
in online consumer and business-to-business marketing.

     The heart of the operation is an in-house hardware and
software system linked to the World Wide Web, the Microsoft
Network and Prodigy. Private research studies are conducted
among an exclusive base of respondents who have registered
with Greenfield and receive compensation. Public studies are
open to participation by anyone who visits the three sites.

     Greenfield's quantitative research includes opinion
polls; attitude and usage studies; customer satisfaction and
tracking research; market segmentation, concept and product
testing; plus advertising and Web site testing. Qualitative
research includes focus groups, in-depth interviews, idea-
generation sessions and management problem-solving sessions.

Who Needs It?

     The company expects many of its clients will be
marketers with World Wide Web sites. Spokes-man Hugh
Braithwaite says online research studies "will help clients
to optimize their corporate and brand imagery and overall
site effectiveness, measured against specific marketing
objectives."

     Andrew Greenfield, president of the parent Greenfield
Consulting Group, says online research is not only logical
for online marketers, but an almost mandatory means of
intelligence-gathering.

     "With speed to market emerging as a key corporate
strategy for success, we believe online research will become
an increasingly valuable means of achieving project
efficiency and cost control," he explains.

     Although online research is an infantile offshoot of
traditional research methods, the Greenfield group says it
has proven to be statistically comparable to them. In a
recent test, survey results collected via Prodigy proved to
be virtually identical to results obtained by telephone.

     In other respects, the company says, online research
has clear advantages. It can reach people who have little
inclination to participate in traditional phone and mail
surveys, and in-depth interviews can be conducted across
wide geographic regions without the time and expense of
travel.

     "Traditional research studies that previously took five
to 10 business days will now be designed, administered and
analyzed almost overnight and ready for the weekly marketing
meeting," says Paul Jacobson, v.p. for marketing for
Greenfield Online.

     Contact the Greenfield Online Research Center, 274
Riverside Ave., Westport, CT 06880; (203) 221-0411; e-mail
addresses: greenfield@msn.com;
http://www.greenfieldgroup.com


Profiling the Online Services

     Greenfield offers these profiles of the three venues it
uses to conduct online research:

     The World Wide Web - Accessible by 24 million people 16
or older. About 2.5 million use it to make regular
purchases. Typical adult users are upscale, professional and
well educated. Influx of college students makes the medium
excellent for studies of young adults. Currently skewed to
males (70 percent), but female percentage is rapidly rising.

     The Microsoft Network -  Has enrolled more than 625,000
members since launch in August. Available in 50 countries,
with access software in 26 languages. Offers unique content,
including buyers' guides.

     Prodigy - Total audience of more than 3.4 million.
Users are affluent, well educated and 58 percent male. More
than half are parents. The median age is 38.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

GEE WHIZ!: FUTURISTS DESCRIBE
CHANGES INFO-TECH WILL BRING


     Editor's Note: A new report from the World Future
Society, "The Cyber Future," describes "92 ways our lives
will change by the year 2025," thanks to innovations in
information technology and communications. The WFS says
these are not forecasts or predictions, which imply a high
degree of probability, but "futuribles," or realistic
conceptualizations of possible future developments. Some are
merely linear projections of developments that are already
well under way, but others are more visionary:

     y A microchip implanted somewhere on our bodies might
serve as a combination credit card, passport, driver's
license, personal diary - you name it. Implants might even
help us think.

     y Local languages will disappear at an accelerating
pace as global communications induce people to adopt common
ones. English, which already dominates global computer net-
works and communications, among other fields, may become the
dominant language worldwide.

Cyberghettos

     y Neighborhoods may become more, not less, homogeneous,
because people who "telecommute" to their jobs will be able
to live wherever they feel most comfortable. Generally, that
means among people of their own demographic groups.

     y Digital assistants, using artificial intelligence,
will surf through thousands of online catalogs and consumer
information banks to identify the products and services we
want. They will then solicit bids from competing suppliers.
Although highly efficient target marketing will eliminate
the proverbial "wasted" half of all advertising costs, much
of the savings will be spent on getting around the digital
assistants, which will be programmed to filter out "junk"
messages.

     y "Smart cards" and crime fears will finally make paper
currency obsolete. Federal Express has not accepted cash at
most of its air freight locations for 10 years now, and many
retailers are following suit. This may put a severe crimp in
the so-called "underground economy," because it will become
increasingly difficult to exchange funds without creating a
record of the transaction.

     y Government officials and dissidents, as well as
businesses and consumer advocates, will increasingly use
cyberspace to spread disinformation as well as facts.
Anonymous individuals will share the online forum with
government information bureaus and Madison Avenue. Small-
time snake-oil salesmen, cranks, radicals and slanderers
will have a potential audience of millions.

Dollars for Data

     y Much of the information on the Internet will remain
free or nearly free, but a growing amount will be available
only for a fee. Information providers who can't or won't
finance dissemination through advertising or other
underwriting will have to charge for it (see box, below).

     y The new media may make people increasingly insular,
egocentric and selfish. First, it will allow them to avoid
many in-person contacts. Meanwhile, content providers and
marketers will compete for their attention by courting them
as all-important members of a special elite. The result may
be widespread narcissistic self-satisfaction.

     Finally, the society notes that not even its best minds
can foresee everything in the future:

     y Many of the biggest payoffs from informa-
tion/communications technology will come as surprises. "They
will be serendipitous benefits that nobody planned but
everyone will want to take credit for," says WFS President
Edward Cornish.

     Single copies of "The Cyber Future" are available for
$4 from the WFS, 7910 Woodmont Ave., Suite 450, Bethesda, MD
20814; (301) 656-8274.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ad13.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
AMERICAN MARKETPLACE via NewsNet
JANUARY 11, 1996

GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN HALTS STATISTICS,
LEAVING ECONOMISTS REALLY CLUELESS


     The partial government shutdown has abrupt-ly halted
the flow of government economic statistics, leaving
forecasters, Federal Reserve interest-rate setters and Wall
Street analysts lost in an economic wilderness with no
compass.

     Most of the employees at the government's chief number-
crunching agencies - the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the
Commerce Department's various statistical branches - were
furloughed in mid-December because Congress and President
Clinton could not agree on a continuing resolution. Their
leave was extended into the week of Jan. 8 by a blizzard
that paralyzed the East Coast.

     Without those statisticians, the economic and business
communities had no data on such things as consumer spending,
unemployment, new housing starts, inflation, the Gross
Domestic Product and international trade.

     That caused immediate nervousness on Wall Street, where
markets often rally or tumble based on the latest economic
number. Traders were left to their own devices, and they
began to make decisions based on the latest word about
budget talks between the White House and Capitol Hill.

     But many businesses also use government statistics.
According to Labor Secretary Robert Reich, "The private
sector really does rely on this information [for] everything
from what to order, when to order, how optimistic to be
about inventories and sales. Without these reports, it is
not just the financial community that's handicapped, it's
also the entire business community."

     Many trend watchers fell back on "the understudies," as
Commerce Undersecretary Everett Ehrlich called privately
compiled numbers on manufacturing and sales of previously
owned homes, autos and chain-store goods.

     "But they're just not as reliable," says Morgan Stanley
Chief Economist Stephen Roach. "It's pretty hazardous to
draw solid conclusions from these types of numbers."

     In the end, though, Roach says even lost data will have
little effect, so long as the flow resumes soon. "If we lost
a month or two along the way, it won't be a disaster. But if
it lasts a long time, it will [create] problems...,"
especially if the Fed makes a misstep with regard to
interest rates.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>