
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B037-291</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te136.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050304 text/html 38251
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:00 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:28 GMT
Content-length: 38064
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te136.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>REALITY MAY CATCH UP TO HYPE THIS YEAR&nbsp;Opportunities Abound, But So Does Competition and Consolidation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2081 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SECURITY MARKET TO BOOM TO '96:  AUTHENTICATION, ENCRYPTION,&nbsp;ELECTRONIC PAYMENTS WILL BE WIDELY DEPLOYED THIS YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(640 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>ACCESS:  PHONE COMPANIES BEGIN DIVING INTO THE INTERNET&nbsp;Several Major Players Poised to Roll Out Service in Early 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1815 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>CONTENT:  DIRECTORY SERVICE CHANGES STRATEGY TO COMPETE&nbsp;555-1212.com Targets Niche, Locks in Area Codes as Domain Names</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(725 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HOTNEWS BUSINESS BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(322 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

REALITY MAY CATCH UP TO HYPE THIS YEAR
Opportunities Abound, But So Does Competition and Consolidation

      Overall, growth in the Internet marketplace will not slow in
1996. 
      Net software firms will barrel into the new year fueled by
product introductions that will dominate the first half of the year.
Internet service providers will continue to expand their networks at a
breakneck pace, and new content providers will enter the marketplace
with ever richer multimedia content featuring 3-D, audio, and video.
      But despite the opportunities that such growth represents, the
Internet industry also will show signs of growing up this year. The
number of firms racing onto the Net will slow somewhat from 1995
levels as companies struggle to justify the expense of their sites. 
      Despite this slight slowdown, last year's hype about the Net
will continue to draw more competitors into the access and software
businesses, sharply increasing the amount of competition and leading
to an industry shakeout. Increased competition also will spark the
often-predicted access wars as Internet service providers vie with
telcos and cable firms to capture market share. Competition also will
inspire firms to consider introducing proprietary applications that
work with the Net's open systems to capture customers.

Will Open Standards Survive?

      Although the Net has always been based on open systems, the race
to get a competitive edge has encouraged firms to introduce and
implement new specifications long before standards bodies or other
industry members can evaluate them. Firms with sufficient marketing
muscle and innovative ideas have set de facto standards. To keep up,
others have begun incorporating the standards -- sometimes before the
specifications are even available to the public.
      "No one is waiting for final specifications to begin
incorporating new capabilities into their products," said Stratton
Sclavos, president of VeriSign. "We can adapt to final specifications;
we can't wait around for them to emerge."
      Since many firms -- most notably Netscape Communications Corp.
-- have benefitted from this practice, many plan to copy the strategy
in 1996 -- something that could lead to a confusing jumble of possible
standards introduced in 1996, warn industry experts. Inevitably, some
firms will back the wrong standards.
      But an even bigger threat to open systems are the increasing
number of application programming interfaces (APIs) that are popping
up. Offering an API encourages firms to adapt to a particular
technology that may or may not be open, said Gary Eichhorn, CEO of
Open Market.
      Many suspect that Microsoft Corp. will use that strategy to
capture a large portion of the Internet market, even though the firm
has pledged to use open standards. "I don't really see Microsoft
participating in the open systems, cross-platform environment," said
John Patrick, vice president of Internet technology for IBM. 
      Despite the fears, many major firms have renewed their
commitment to open standards, which should ensure that the openness of
the Net will survive at least another year.

Partner, Partner Everywhere

      The quickest way to get ahead in the Internet business is to
partner with -- or acquire -- a company with a promising technology.
As a result, partnerships will continue to drive much of the Internet
market in 1996, and mergers and acquisitions will be on the rise as
firms try to buy into the Internet market.
      "We expect to see a lot of mergers and acquisitions activity in
the market, and, of course, partnerships will continue to drive the
market," said Mary Pat McCarthy, partner and national director for
software and services practice at KPMG Peat Marwick. "There will be
some alliances you would never expect."
      IBM will actively seek partners for everything from simple
marketing agreements to possible technology acquisitions. "We want to
show how well we can work with others," said IBM's Patrick. Most other
major firms plan to pursue a similar strategy.

Consolidation Continues

      However, partnerships won't be enough to save some firms. Every
software firm in the country is expected to jump into the Internet
market with some product in 1996. Yet few have clear plans for how to
compete in the market or even in what products to develop. "Software
firms don't have a clear strategy and no one knows what it should be
doing on the Net," said KPMG's McCarthy. "Companies are vying for
positions and everyone is trying to cover their bets without knowing
what the successful strategy will be." 
      As a result, many firms could get burned. "I think there will be
continued consolidation in the software industry, and it will be
harder for small companies to survive unless they have a strong niche
or staying power," said McCarthy. "Large firms will continue to gobble
up small ones, and there will be a lot of jockeying in the Internet
and web arena."
      One of the main Internet software areas to take a hit will be
the browser market, predicted Laura Hanny, an analyst with First
Albany-META Technology Research. Hanny asserted that Netscape will
lose its market dominance in 1996 as other firm's browsers become more
widely available. The integration of browsers into software packages
as the ubiquitous client could further shake Netscape's leadership
position, she said. 
      However, that may not matter, since few firms will ever profit
from the sale of browsers. "Everyone agrees that browsers will become
commodities," explained Gaston Bastiaens, CEO of Quarterdeck.
      But the software market isn't the only one to face consolidation
in 1996, according to the Yankee Group. Internet service providers
(ISPs) also will feel the pinch as long distance firms, local telcos,
and cable firms begin to offer access (see related story on page 3).
The Yankee Group predicts that the number of ISPs will drop from
around 1,400 to 600 in 1996. In 1997, the firm predicts the number of
providers will plummet to less than 300.
      Content providers and service firms also will feel the pinch,
added Yankee Group analysts.
      In fact, the only firms that seem immune to consolidation are
the hardware and chip manufacturers. These businesses can expect to
see sales increase as demand rises for existing products and new
products -- such as so-called dumb terminals or browser boxes -- are
introduced.
      Quarterdeck's Bastiaens believes that the home computing market
will take off, boosting penetration from 37 percent of homes today to
65 percent by 1999. However, although growth will come from home
users, he asserted that the money will still come from corporate
markets.

IPO Mania

      But even a predicted industry consolidation won't be able to
dampen the financial market's enthusiasm for Internet stocks -- at
least not in the short term, said Hanny. Expect to see a rush of
Internet firms going public this year.
      "The market is a frenzied environment and it is very chaotic.
Many clients are talking about going public," said KPMG's McCarthy. 
      "Firms want to ride the craziness while it lasts and while they
can raise money," said Hanny. "We expect to see a lot of IPOs next
year."

Legal Troubles Brewing

      Experts also expect to see a lot of lawsuits next year. Several
cases, including Statton Oakmont vs. Prodigy and the Church of
Scientology vs. NETCOM (see Internet Week's May 29 and December 4
issues and a related brief on page 4), have set some precedents, and
attorneys expect that more lawsuits will be filed this year.
      In particular, copyright and trademark infringement suits are
likely to become more commonplace as firms struggle to protect
intellectual property on the Net, says Doug Wood, executive partner of
Hall Dickler Kent Friedman & Wood, a New York law firm. The number of
libel and slander cases also is expected to increase.
      Besides legal actions, 1996 will probably see some laws enacted
as well. Congress is unlikely to leave the Internet alone, and its
continued attempts to legislate privacy and pornography could cause
problems for many Internet firms. Also, the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), which has already begun monitoring the Internet for deceptive
advertising claims, is expected to beef up its efforts in 1996 and
make Internet advertising a major priority, say FTC sources. Other
government agencies also will monitor web sites for infringement in
areas of their jurisdiction.

Uncovering Opportunity

      Despite potential legal tangles and industry consolidation, more
firms are expected to jump on the Net. New products, delivered in the
first half of 1996, will help these firms expand their web sites
beyond simple advertisements into real tools to expand sales and cut
costs while improving customer service. In short, experts believe that
the Internet industry will deliver solutions rather than just hype in
1996. These solutions will spell opportunity for many.
      "There remains a significant opportunity to help firms establish
a presence on the web -- especially in other countries around the
world," said IBM's Patrick. "Firms will realize that just having a
page or an ad on the Net is just the tip of the iceberg. Business
applications will be added, and more firms will bring Net technology
inside the network."
      As this takes place, companies will need to improve the way they
manage information -- opening the door for consultants and integrators
as well as software firms, added Patrick.
      Meanwhile, the often-hyped but little-shopped electronic
shopping malls also will become more popular in 1996, especially when
firms update their approaches and security solutions become more
widespread. "They are using models of the past, and it's not working.
Retailers need to rethink their approaches rather than just putting a
paper catalog online," said Hanny. The widespread introduction and
acceptance of electronic payment methods will further boost sales (see
related story on page 2). When tied into exchange systems, worldwide
commerce will begin to take off, with many sales going to Japan.
      With sales going global, many firms will rethink the way they
serve overseas markets, while others will rush to expand into Europe,
Asia, and Latin America. Already, ISPs have pushed into Europe,
followed by the online services and other content providers. Netscape
established several overseas offices in 1995, as did Quarterdeck. That
trend will continue as more firms expand overseas.
      While some firms expand geographically, others will concentrate
on increasing their market presence in the U.S. Experts believe that
an Internet industry marketing blitz is coming, goaded by increased
competition. Already Digital Equipment Corp. has begun running
Internet-related TV ads, while Net ad space in the Wall Street Journal
continues to fill several pages.
      Competition also will drive firms to differentiate their
products and services and hone their marketing messages. IBM plans to
emphasize its ability to deliver complete solutions, while Open Market
will tout the security options and other features of  its server
software. Targeting niches will continue to be popular.
      Other firms will seek new products to help differentiate
themselves. Quarterdeck has heavily invested in collaborative
computing solutions. Although the webification of Lotus Notes could
stunt some of the market potential, collaborative computing is
expected to be hot in 1996 and beyond.
      "Imagine being able to cut travel time and expenses by having
telephone conferences that cost next to nothing since you are using
the Internet," said Bastiaens. Quarterdeck plans to introduce its
voice conferencing and document sharing software in 1996.
      Also expected to debut in 1996 are the so-called browser boxes
or dumb terminals. Although the market is hot on the idea, VeriSign's
Sclavos cautions that encryption and other security solutions must be
incorporated for the technology to really become useful. Sclavos
expects encryption chips to emerge in the next 12-18 months that will
help add security to such "dumb" terminals, which could help drive
their popularity. 
      "I think browser boxes are a wonderful concept. In the next six
months, we expect to see demos showing how they will work, but I think
they may have problems meeting the price point without running into
power management and security issues," he said. "They will have to
have security for people to use them.
      "It will be noteworthy to see if $500 is a good cutoff point,"
said KPMG's McCarthy. "Is that too expensive with some people? I see
prices coming down. I also think the baseline computer price will go
down over time, offering competition for the boxes."
      Meanwhile, 1996 will see Java going beyond the simple,
animation-type applications that it is currently being used for to
power real business applications. Java applets will power more
interactive applications on the web and will enable firms to offer
valuable information and services. By the end of the year, most
browsers will support Java, and Java applications will become
commonplace, predicts IBM's Patrick. IBM licensed Java from Sun in
December.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SECURITY MARKET TO BOOM TO '96:  AUTHENTICATION, ENCRYPTION,
ELECTRONIC PAYMENTS WILL BE WIDELY DEPLOYED THIS YEAR

      Security breaches made headlines in 1995. In 1996, security
solutions will make inroads into everyday workings of business and
lives of consumers as encryption, digital signatures, and
authentication systems become ubiquitous in server and client software
packages, say industry executives and analysts.
      "1995 was a great year for security. [Security] went from being
talked about by cryptographers at security conferences to becoming a
common topic in financial and Internet conferences and talked about by
businesses," said Stratton Sclavos, president of VeriSign. "In 1996,
you will see security solutions moving from the realm of specification
debates and political jockeying about protocols to being actually
rolled out."
      Such widespread deployment of security solutions will accelerate
the acceptance of electronic commerce and make doing business online
more commonplace, predicted John Patrick, vice president of Internet
applications for IBM [IBM]. "In 1996, we will see the beginning of a
new level of trust and understanding about authentication and
encryption. This will bring the next major round of growth, fueling
major growth in electronic commerce," he said. 
      To help consumers become more comfortable with online
transactions, banks and credit card companies plan to launch an
education campaign in the spring. The campaign will encourage
consumers to shop and bank online and will assure them that security
standards (especially those proposed by Visa and MasterCard [4823Z])
will protect credit card numbers and other information.
      Meanwhile, software firms are expected to incorporate electronic
payment modules into both client and server software packages by
midyear. Initially, most will focus on credit card payment methods,
with cash and check systems catching up late in 1996 or early in 1997,
say analysts. This could allow other solutions to enter the race,
although those with existing products will continue to be regarded as
market leaders, they say.
      But although secure payment methods will continue to receive the
most attention, consulting and intranet solutions are expected to
generate the most revenues.
      Many security experts believe that consulting will provide one
of the biggest opportunities for the security market in 1996. Besides
helping clients implement security solutions, consultants also will
help them develop security policies and procedures -- something many
firms don't have. "Having a set of policies and procedures in place to
authenticate users is critical for setting up a network security
system," said Sclavos. VeriSign plans to introduce a formal consulting
branch this year (the firm already provides consulting to clients).
Meanwhile, firms such as IBM and others with existing consulting
businesses will reap the benefits of their service.
      Deploying firewalls and user authentication systems within
company networks also will be lucrative in 1996 as firms begin using
web technology internally for a wider variety of tasks. At the same
time, public/private keys will begin replacing passwords for network
access, predicted Sclavos.
      Meanwhile, security vendors also will introduce longer
encryption keys. Sclavos predicts that 128-bit encryption keys will be
replaced by 256-bit keys in the next two years. Authentication keys
will grow from 1,024 bits to 2,048 bits.
      The security market's opportunities will continue to draw
competitors. Sclavos expects competition to heat up this year when the
U.S. Post Office, IBM, MasterCard, and Visa join VeriSign in the
public key certificate management business. But VeriSign welcomes
these firms into the market. "When public keys are enabled in all
browsers and servers, tracking the keys will be a big job," he said.
"We think there is room for competition." 

E-data Takes Action, Offers Licenses

      E-data Corp. is negotiating licenses with eight companies and
has notified 32 others that they are violating its patent. E-data
holds the Freeny patent, an electronic distribution technology for
audio, video, software, and other digital data. The company has
targeted more than 100 firms for infringement. IBM [IBM] received a
license in September; other firms are negotiating terms. For more
information, contact  E-data at (201) 866-8456.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACCESS:  PHONE COMPANIES BEGIN DIVING INTO THE INTERNET
Several Major Players Poised to Roll Out Service in Early 1996

      By the end of 1996, there will be at least one telephone company
competing for a share of the Internet access business in every major
U.S. market. Long distance companies won't be the only ones taking on
Internet service providers (ISPs) in the access business; most local
telcos plan to push into the market place this year. 
      The newest telco to enter the access market is GTE Intelligent
Network Services (GTEINS), a GTE Corp. subsidiary. Last week, GTEINS
introduced a dial-up and dedicated line Internet access service called
GTE.net. Dial-up rates are $8.95 for five hours of access (additional
hours cost $1.95 each) or $24.95 for unlimited access. 
      The firm will provide its customers with Netscape Communications
Corp.'s [NSCP] Netscape Navigator browser (thanks to a licensing
agreement between the firms) as part of the package, and it is beta
testing Microsoft Corp.'s Internet Information Server (code-named
Gibraltar) and Internet Studio Visual Publishing System authoring tool
(code-named Blackbird). GTEINS already offers the service in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area and plans to expand service nationwide by the
end of the year. GTEINS is part of GTE's long distance branch.
      Meanwhile, local carriers also are starting to move into the
field. Bell Atlantic plans to begin offering access in the
Washington-Baltimore area in February, and other local carriers are
not far behind. 

Planning to Take Over

      Speaking as if they already owned the access business, senior
telco executives discussed plans for the Net at, "Building the Optimum
Business Model: Telcos Providing Internet Access and Services," held
Dec. 13-14 by International Communications for Management (ICM) in
Washington D.C. 
      Local telcos are already gunning for the ISPs. Douglas Bulleit,
chief strategist at BellSouth, referred to ISPs as "interlopers,
laying on the public network, getting fast packet on one side, slower
dial-up on the other, and doing remarketing." 
      Bell Atlantic Media Ventures President Robert Beran predicted
that ISPs will have to get used to the fact that local and long
distance carriers will provide the bulk of access in the future. "The
big gorillas are getting into the game," said Beran.
      Telco executives see themselves as obvious providers of access
services because they consider Net access to be essentially the same
thing as voice telephony and believe customers feel the same way. Jeff
Cragan, director of new business development at Pacific Bell Internet
Services, cited a company survey which found that 87 percent of
residential customers would be interested in obtaining Internet access
through their local telephone company. 
      Telco executives also believe they have an infrastructure
advantage since their networks are designed to aggregate traffic at
their own switching points instead of at a server placed on the
network by one of their customers. This view could mean that the
recent struggle between Bell Canada and its ISP customers (see
Internet Week's Dec. 4 issue) over traffic levels may repeat itself in
the U.S.

Taking on Telcos

      This trend worries some in the ISP industry, since the access
providers will soon have to compete with the supplier of its product.
However, not all ISPs fear the entry of telcos into the market. "It's
a question of how well they can do it. They have the basic network
infrastructure to provide service, but how good is the service going
to be?" asked Brian Muys, a PSINet spokesman. Muys pointed out that
existing offerings from Sprint and MCI have not "taken the market by
storm," and he maintained that there are differences between providing
voice service and Internet access.
      "The way [the telcos] are approaching it is kind of 'we're
already in the phone business, and Internet is a no-brainer for us,'
but it's not that easy to be a good Internet provider," said Muys.
"They may provide adequate service, but when it comes down to
providing the tech support, keeping the network up, and keeping the
customers happy, I think there's going to be a longer learning curve
for the telephone companies than they would anticipate."
      GTEINS disagrees. Bob Zinnel, director of network operations for
GTEINS, said that although the businesses are not identical, the core
competencies in telephony will help the firm provide Internet access.
"The infrastructure we're putting in place is sized and planned for
the same kind of quality assurance we planned into the telephone
networks," said Zinnel. "Reliability is high on our list -- no
customer busy signals, no customer outages, no degradation in speed --
all those things had to be taken into consideration in our offering."
      Zinnel also points out that the people staffing the GTE.net
project came from GTE's internal data network group that ties the
company's dispersed operations together -- something that includes
significant experience in IP networking.
      In addition, Zinnel says, "We have an advantage in the billing
and backend operations, since that infrastructure is already in place.
Our telephone operation issues millions of phone bills per month.
That's one of the things that's killed off some of the smaller ISPs.
Once the user base gets to a certain level, they just can't keep up
with the billing."
      If the Internet is such a natural place for phone companies to
be, why haven't they been involved all along, and why have they chosen
this particular time to move into the field? One reason: Telcos are
notoriously conservative, and making money on the Internet has been a
speculative proposition until recently.

Profits Provide Motivation

      That is changing, however, and telcos have come to see the
Internet as a potential profit center. "Internet services will provide
the RBOCs [Regional Bell Operating Companies] a new high-growth source
of revenue in a business with attractive margins," said Pete Renner,
vice president, business information and advanced communications at
NYNEX Entertainment and Information Services.
      However, Renner and others pointed to another driving force
sending telcos into the Internet arena: the rapid approach of local
loop competition, which will pit local carriers, long distance
carriers, and the cable industry against each other in a multibillion
dollar, life-or-death struggle. In this kind of environment, even
something as big as the Internet is ultimately important as a
defensive weapon. "This will keep people on the NYNEX network," said
Renner. 
      Bell Atlantic's Robert Beran agreed that telcos have to be on
the Net if they want to remain industry leaders. Their customers are
demanding access, and they must be able to compete with other carriers
who will offer it if they don't. "We have to do this to retain our
customer base," said Beran.

Grand Strategy

      Each of the telcos' Internet strategies are similar and break
Internet opportunities into the general categories of access, content
provision, and hosting customer sites. 
      GTE.net, like most of the local carriers, will offer access,
along with a package of hosting and content development services for
business customers. "We do not plan to get into content development
per se," said Fred Walters, GTEINS' director of business and product
development. "But where there are applications where we see an unmet
market need, then we will become a content developer to serve that
market." Walters cited several vertical market segments, such as
education, where the firm may offer content.
      Although Farouk Hussein, MCI's senior manager of international
Internet marketing, described content as an "unstable" business at the
moment, most telcos see content as an eventual opportunity since
content can help telcos differentiate their services in the market.
Proprietary content will not be part of most initial service roll
outs, however. Both Bell Atlantic's Robert Beran and NYNEX's Pete
Renner said their companies will begin as simple access providers and
will develop their content strategies as they go. Beran said Bell
Atlantic likely will start by providing hotlinks to content, along
with a search tool. NYNEX has begun moving existing content, such as
its yellow pages, onto the Net. The firm debuted its Internet Yellow
Pages last year.
      Hosting web sites provides another opportunity, although it is
still not a big profit center for most firms, said AT&T's [T] David
Hughart. "It is probably breaking even and will eventually make
money," he added.
      That leaves access as the big money maker, and telcos plan to
squeeze it for profits while they can.

Turning on the Meter

      Telcos have demonstrated a strong preference for measured
access. Although Internet users prefer flat rates, providers have
learned that flat rates bring more difficulties than they solve. Users
occasionally interpret "unlimited access" literally and leave a
connection up continuously. The result is strain on the network and
impaired service quality for other users who begin to encounter busy
signals when dialing in.
      Although MCI's Hussein claimed MCI had found that only a very
small fraction of users will do this, other carriers maintain that it
is impossible to offer flat rate access and provide quality service.
Pacific Bell's Jeff Cragan said his company learned this lesson when
it tried to provide flat rate ISDN service earlier this year. Enough
users left connections "nailed up" that Pacific Bell eliminated flat
rate access.
      GTEINS, which does offer flat rate access, has established a
policy to deal with those that abuse the unlimited service. "In our
end-user contract, dial-up access is exactly that. It was meant to be
dialed up access," said Walters. "If we find that a customer is on 24
hours a day, then we're going to ask them to move to one of our
dedicated access services."
      Walters said that GTEINS does not have a predefined figure above
which usage would be considered excessive. Instead the company will
handle this on a case by case basis. 

Prodigy Appeal Denied

      In a ruling last week, New York State Judge Stuart Ain
reasserted his opinion that Prodigy Services Co. was a publisher,
rather than a common carrier. The decision opens the door for future
lawsuits against firms that allow users to post messages on
newsgroups, bulletin boards, or other online forums. In his opinion,
Judge Ain stated the need for a precedent as his reason for upholding
the earlier ruling.
      Judge Ain had made the original ruling in May when investment
banking firm Stratton Oakmont filed a lawsuit against the online
service provider. Stratton Oakmont later dropped the suit when Prodigy
agreed to apologize for an incident in which someone allegedly libeled
the firm on one of Prodigy's bulletin boards. The judge found that
since Prodigy passed messages through a filter to screen out obscenity
and derogatory terms, it exercised editorial control over the material
and therefore could be charged with libel. 
      Last week, Prodigy also acquired an interest in SonicNet, a web
site offering rock and music content owned by Sunshine Interactive
Network. Funding came from Prodigy's Wildflower Partners division,
which supports Internet-based content providers. SonicNet will provide
Prodigy with original, exclusive content as part of the deal. Prodigy
will provide support as well as funds for additional staff members.
Contact: Prodigy, (914) 448-8700.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CONTENT:  DIRECTORY SERVICE CHANGES STRATEGY TO COMPETE
555-1212.com Targets Niche, Locks in Area Codes as Domain Names

      When Jeff Field began surfing the Net last February, he couldn't
find an online directory that offered information about local
businesses. So he decided to create one.
      Launched in October, the directory, called 555-1212.com, was
designed to be a cross between a yellow pages directory and Yahoo!, a
popular Internet directory. By listing companies under their telephone
area codes, as well as more than 8,000 categories, Field hoped to
provide additional online information about companies -- especially
ones like hotels, restaurants, movie theaters, and services -- that
web surfers couldn't find anywhere else.
      "There's one site (http://www.thelist.com) where you can go and
find a list of ISPs broken down by area codes. We think that's a
useful service in itself, but we also want to do the same for hotels,
movie theaters and such," Field said. By using the popular telephone
information number as the name for his service, he believes the
directory's URL will be easy to remember and will draw visitors.
      To lock in that advantage, Field registered every telephone area
code, plus 555-1212.com, as a domain name. This will allow web surfers
to find businesses in their area quickly by typing in the familiar
telephone information number -- something that could prove a major
competitive advantage as local phone companies put phone directories
online.
      But despite that coup, competing with those services  has been a
challenge, forcing Field to change his strategy.

Change Is Inevitable

      As it was originally conceived, 555-1212.com would have no
advertising and minimal graphics. To generate revenue, Field planned
to charge companies for listings on the site. He thought businesses
would pay $5 for a 2-line listing and $10 for a link to a home page or
ad page. Although the model is popular with yellow pages -- which the
directory is modeled after -- it proved unsuccessful on the Internet.
Field found that firms were reluctant to pay for a listing offered to
them free by competitors such as Lycos and Yahoo!. Now basic listings
are free.
      Basic listings allow businesses to include their names in three
subject categories and two different area codes. Field charges an
additional fee for listings in extra categories or area codes.
      555-1212.com allows the companies to select the categories they
are represented in. Field said he was disappointed with how other
search services handle their listings. "It took me nearly three weeks
to get listed on Yahoo! and when I did get listed, the tagline was
very different from the one I supplied," he said. Yahoo! has since
changed the way it handles listing requests.
      But since it is not charging for listings, 555-1212.com had to
begin selling sponsorships to generate revenue. Although it uses the
traditional sponsorship style, sponsors' graphics are smaller than on
other sites, since Field believes graphics slow performance.
      Although this new business model more closely resembles that of
search tools such as Yahoo!, WebCrawler, and Lycos, Field emphasized
he is not trying to compete with those services. Instead, he describes
his creation as between NYNEX's Yellow Pages and Yahoo!. "I didn't
start out with the intention of making a telephone directory," said
Field. "I just wanted to make it easy to find a local business using
the Net."

Building It Up

      Since the site has only been online a few months, its directory
is still sparse. Field said this will not keep visitors from returning
to the site because they will see the value of his simplified format.
Nevertheless, "our number one priority is getting content," Field
said. "I may not have the content at the moment, but I have ease of
use and a familiar name."
      To fill the directory, Field will initially concentrate on
California's 408, 415, and 510 area codes. He said studies show that a
large percentage of Internet users are based in those regions and
would  likely use the service.
      Although he is actively seeking content, Field is relying on the
speed and ease of use of the directory to draw users. So far he has
shunned the complex graphics and content features of other
directories, saying they slow users down. "I want to get people their
information and get them on their way," he said.
      Once he has built up the number of listings, he thinks that
555-1212.com will become "invaluable as the Internet's business
directory." 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HOTNEWS BUSINESS BRIEFS

Frontier Introduces New Pricing: Frontier Technologies plans to
provide its SuperTCP Suite 96 on a CD ROM. Customers will be able to
purchase just the applications they want, or they can purchase the
entire 32-bit suite of tools. The entire package will cost $595.
Components will cost: SuperTCP Internet, $125; SuperTCP, $295;
SuperTCP/NFS, $395; SuperNFS, $195; SuperX, $295; and SuperTCP Kernel,
$95. Contact: Frontier, (414) 241-4555.

Terisa Receives Additional Financing: Olivetti Telemedia made a
strategic investment in Terisa Systems Inc. The agreement will allow
Olivetti Systems to deploy Terisa's security products in Europe.
Olivetti Telemedia is an Italian telecom provider. Contact: Terisa
Systems, (415) 919-1752.

Vermeer Drafts API: Vermeer Technologies will release an application
programming interface (APIs) for its FrontPage web publishing tool.
The firm also will introduce extensions that allow users of three
public domain web server software packages (NCSA, CERN, and Apache) to
use the tool. Extensions for commercial web servers are in beta
testing and will cost $200. Contact: Vermeer, http://www.vermeer.com.

Fax Server Debuts: NetManage Inc. introduced the Chameleon Fax Server,
which allows users to send and receive faxes via the Net. Faxes are
delivered into e-mail boxes. The software includes fax features and a
fax number directory function. The server costs $299 for a 30-user
license. Contact: NetManage, (408) 973-7171.

FTP To Acquire HyperDesk: FTP Software plans to acquire HyperDesk
Corp. a workgroup and groupware software developer for $10 million in
cash this quarter. The firm also will establish a development and
marketing relationship with HyperDesk's principal shareholder, ASCII
Corp. of Japan. Contact: FTP, (508) 685-4000.

Quarterdeck Spins Out European Firm: Quarterdeck Corp. formed two
operating companies: Quarterdeck North America/Rest of the World (ROW)
and Quarterdeck Europe, which will be headquartered in Ireland. Each
firm will have its own president; Jim Moise will head the North
America/ROW firm. A president for the European firm has not yet been
appointed. Contact: Quarterdeck, (310) 309-4261.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>