
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B33-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B028-70</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec102.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224755 text/html 107898
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:45:45 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:29 GMT
Content-length: 107710
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec102.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet <BR>
January 01, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>                  "IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD,&nbsp;                         AND WE KNOW IT"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3575 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>                APPLICATION PARTITIONING ASIDE:&nbsp;                     WHAT'S FORTE GOOD FOR?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3067 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>                   NEW WINE IN OLD BOTTLES:&nbsp;                        CINCOM AND UNIFY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3416 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>                RATIONAL SOFTWARE: THE ADA KIDS&nbsp;                       WIDEN THEIR APPEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2139 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>                 LET'S GET USER FRIENDLY: THE&nbsp;                      DSDM APPROACH TO RAD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2240 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>                     MY OWN PRIVATE I-WAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(898 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>                         INPUT/OUTPUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(385 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>                       NEWS AT A GLANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(878 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>                          UK PRODUCTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(831 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                  "IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD,
                         AND WE KNOW IT"

When you read these words, it'll be early January 1996. To put
that in a perspective that might cause you a minor spasm of
panic: there are less than 210 weekends left before the end of
the century.

The Year 2000 will start on a Saturday, which is probably very
good news. Because you will be spending between now and that
Friday night, December 31st, 1999, spending vast amounts of time
and development dollars combing through code. And no, you won't
be re-engineering, re-developing or re-vamping. You'll be engaged
in a simple, desperate drive to stop your company - and maybe
your country - breaking its neck on the banana slip of the
infamous Year 2000 problem.

Say what? You probably know the routine by now, but you decided
to forget about it until third quarter of 99. It goes like this:
When a lot of business computer applications were first deployed,
in the 1960s (some were rolled out in the 1950s!), space was at a
premium, and languages like Cobol typically stored dates in a
truncated fashion. Thus programmers quickly became habituated to
writing date routines in the form 01-01-96, or MM-DD-YY.

That works fine until programs start having to compute around
dates that cross (bi-directionally, remember!) century
boundaries. This began to happen to some companies in the
insurance industry in the mid-1980s. Because of course there's no
"CC" for "19" or "20" in a lot of those (now buried? lost? still
active?) system calls. So when we deal with "2000" do the two
zeros indicate to the computer that it is 1900, 2000, undefined,
or an error condition? Well, could be any of the above, right?

So slowly but surely there's been a rising sense of danger in
some quarters as organizations begin to fearfully wonder if
they're going to be presented with some Godawful headaches around
the turn of the century to do with century invalidity.

These problems range from the trivial to the catastrophic. You've
probably already heard the ones about sweet little old ladies of
104 being invited to kindergarten because the local school
records system sees they were born in "88" (only it was 1888, not
1988!). Then there's the weird danger of things like planes not
taking off because computers thrash in panic at the "discovery"
that they haven't been serviced in 100 years. Then there'll be
headline stories about customers being presented with a hundred
years' worth of unpaid interest on their credit card bills, or
perhaps more happily, a hundred years of "unearned" interest on
their savings. Going up the scale of danger, how about old folks
not being sent urgent age-related medical screening reminders,
because they're too "young"? How would you feel if your Dad
doesn't get his prostate test in time because of some dumb
hospital program that thinks he should be being fixed for braces
instead?

And then there's the danger that companies will screw up their
financial health by non-payment or over-payment or mispayment-
payment or whatever. The Gartner Group's Bruce Hall has said in
all seriousness that less than half of US companies are likely to
be century compliant by the year 2000.

Ed Yourdon (Application Development Strategies, June 1995)
produced a quite sobering account of some of the time-line
problems. Last year - though you may have been unaware of it -
many five year financial forecast programs failed. This year,
we'll have (at least) some five year driver license expiration
problems in the US. Next year, look for insurance policy crashes;
the year after, credit-card expiration snafus; the year after
that, purchase order and one-year contract bugs; and the
millennium will herald the start of those age calculation errors
that the press will so enjoy writing (remember all those $10m
telephone bill stories we thought we'd lived down in the
Seventies?).

More startlingly - Gartner has done some calculations based on
the amount of Cobol out there (no-one really knows - 50 billion
lines in production use, according to IDC, with 80% of all code
written in the language?) and the industry average cost of fixing
lines of code (at least $1.50). It's seriously predicting a
global IT spend on the Year 2000 problem of anywhere between
$300bn to $600bn. The lowest figure anyone can come up with is
$17.5bn for the US alone.

If you want to cross-check with some other ways of putting a
metric on all this proposed work, Gartner's minimum suggested
resource allocation is 24 people working for one full year. And
also please bear in mind that since you'll have to test the
system practically to death, you'll need ideally to be at that
stage one full year before that possibly cataclysmic Friday night
- ie you need to do all this between this month and December
1998.

(Gartner has also been so concerned as to suggest that as many as
10% of IT-using companies could go bust directly as a result of
the Year 2000 crisis.)

Think about that. Then think about the fact that the IRS is just
starting to look at fixing the problem. Then do what Ed Yourdon
recommends - check all your money out in gold coins and go and
live on a Pacific island for two years until the dust from the
crash of civilization settles!

Hence the "End Of The World" scenario we've cheekily quoted from
REM. And do you feel fine?

Maybe you do if you were one of the far-seeing individuals who
made it to the Software Productivity Group (of Westboro, Mass)
sponsored Year 2000 conference in Orlando, Florida last October.

Of the over 300 attendees, 13% were of IS director level and 18%
were CIOs, Senior VPs or VPs, with over half (52%) other
management and only 17% on the developer or consultant level. The
preponderance of management can be taken as a good sign, for as
we'll see the Year 2000 is not so much a technical as a
management issue.

Century date change and re-engineering specialist Adpac, of San
Francisco, took the opportunity to poll attendees on their
current level of awareness and action on Year 2000 (see diagram).

                     1 PER CENT ARE FINISHED

As you can see, quite a few folks are still very much at the
planning and early adoption stage - only 1% were at the final
test stage! But the scale of the problem can be glimpsed by other
aspects of the survey. Over ten per cent of the respondents have
over 100,000 Cobol programs - not lines of code, programs. Most
(27%) have between 2,500 and 10,000, and nearly a fifth simply
don't know how many they've got. When asked if there were
application or database files that do indeed have only 2-digit
years, an astonishing 85% admitted that was so. And a bare
majority - 51% in this survey - said they were confident that
application components are "easily identified" by naming
techniques.

It would be easy to continue to throw around some of these mind-
numbing statistics, but we think the point is clear: the Year
2000 problem is a problem, and there is a scale of possible dire
consequences ranging from no effect to worldwide economic and
social catastrophe. Obviously it's prudent to believe the actual
impact on you and your development team is going to be somewhere
in the middle - and like it or not, chums, that means that those
200-odd weekends left to the end of the century are more likely
than not to be taken up with fixing this problem, rather than any
fun stuff (like new development) or sensible stuff (re-
engineering badly deteriorating systems).

Software Futures was interested in participating in the Orlando
experience precisely because we wanted to sift away some of the
Armageddon hoopla, so we could try and determine what real live
situations and strategies are going on regarding the "Millennial
Bug."

If we heard any phrase in Orlando more often than "The year 2000
is a serious problem and we've got to start doing something about
it," it was "Start with inventory management - it's important!"
We say this because of all the user war stories (and yes, there
are a few - some people are already doing the right thing!) the
inventory management issue stands out as the common theme. Like
they say in metrics, if you don't measure something, how will you
know how you've done when you're finished? Inventory management
is the right first step because it can help you answer such
firefighting questions as, How much source code is missing from
your application portfolio? How many systems can be retired in
the next four years with no impact? And so forth.

As Jennifer Schmidt, managing partner for Chicago-based systems
renovation consulting firm SPR, puts it, you'll find that the
actual physical changing of lines of code will be the smallest
element of your cost, ironically. Based on her experience of a
number of Year 2000 projects, a good rule of thumb would be 40%
planning, 50% testing, and only 10% rewrites, she estimates.

(By the way, that inventory check isn't meant to just cover your
in-house developed code - what about all your packaged software
applications. Yes, that means you, Mr Smug Client/Server. How
sure are you that all your glittering new distributed
applications are century-compliant?)

The inventory management angle was in any case a factor in the
experience of Mike Smith, director of the Great American
Insurance Company, of Cincinnati,who co-ordinated the company's
recent Year 2000 fix.

"We have a bit of everything," he admits cheerfully, detailing a
mixed legacy and PC environment where systems using CICS, Cobol,
Assembler, VSAM and PC upload to mainframe screens are all happy
equals. And buried in this richness? At least 75 combinations of
letters and characters that dealt with dates, in the case of the
PICTURE, REDEFINES and VALUE literals of his Cobol applications.

We're sure Mike isn't the only one who might have to say after
looking at some of his working code, "I didn't know you could go
on for that many pages before a full stop." Assembler proved an
easier language to date decode, he adds, but warns that macros in
the language need careful handling.

                      NOT MERE CODE PARSING

In terms of fixing as a percentage of time spent, he agrees with
Schmidt. "We found that impacted code was only about 5% - but
impacted logic was 80%."

In other words, tracing the Year 2000 impact on all systems as a
Gestalt was more important than mere physical code parsing. Two
other valuable insights into getting the Year 2000 fix right:
source and project management. As we said about that inventory
(have we told you it's important yet?!?), using JCL is actually a
surprisingly good way of doing easier impact analysis - but if
you have missing source, problem. He suggests using your JCL
resource as a good roadmap. As for project management: "It's too
dangerous to think you can do all this in one go. The only reason
I'm able to speak to you today about it is we did it in phases."

One thing that you must take away from Mike's project is that in
the end, with the right tools and approach, it became a
manageable problem. A lot of the hard coded procedural logic
proved acceptable so long as the right top level interface is
changed, for example. In over 95% of cases of needed code change,
a simple expansion to include a century date field was all that
was necessary. And he was able to use a cheap and plentiful
programmer resource - "A task force of college kids did most of
the mechanical work," he grins.

But don't take that one user story as a safety blanket: "There
are three certainties in life - death, taxes, and the Year 2000,"
says Hall. "And it doesn't matter about the statistics - in the
end, it's all about your situation."

Dan Spragle, seconded from Andersen Consulting to the Yellow
Corp, a mid-Western trucking firm, does have some statistics,
though. "Inventorying was easily the most time consuming aspect
of our fix," he notes, since 9,000 programs were involved. In the
end it took 17 people 3 years of effort to complete the work, or
50 person years (350 in dog years, as he says...). That averaged
out at about $75 an hour per programmer, a not inconsiderable
sum. The team had also used the Adpac source editing tool to
facilitate that process.

Bank of America's Year 2000 team had a neat way to persuade
senior management that this apparently "empty" way to spend good
IT investment (remember, you only have time to fix the Year 2000
bug - you would be reckless to think you can do that long-
postponed systems re-engineering at the same time). One of its
VPs, Howard Adams, declares, "We sold it to management purely and
simply as a business opportunity - we will use this work to gain
market share and win customers in the face of our competitors'
non-compliance."

Howard contracted James Martin & Co, the Atlanta-based consulting
firm, to use its TSRM (The Systems Redevelopment Methodology). He
found a massive 75 million lines of code needed scrubbing,
including 50 different dialects of Cobol alone. "No tool can cope
with all that code on its own; a methodology for process and
project management is vital," he believes.

                        BUSINESS DRIVERS

Abbott Labs, a Chicago-based pharmaceutical and health care
company, used a combination of product and consulting from
Quintic Systems, Inc (also of Chicago). Again, this was a
situation involving not just mainframe but DEC and AS/400 and,
yes, over 30,000 PCs.

The reason the organization took on trying to pick over this
gigantic IT inventory was simple - a system fell over in 1990 and
another produced incorrect results. Since a lot of its system
output has to go to the Federal Food & Drug Administration since
the 50,000 strong outfit develops and sells new drugs, this was
kind of an important business driver...

To trap the problem before it got more out of hand, the company
instigated a programming standard in May of 1990 to ensure that a
four digit year was always used. It then divided up the problem
into four areas of concern; its mainframe legacy, PC and
unsupported code, the software it purchased and the software it
produced or sold.

The next step was to decide that as far as possible a four digit
year code could be simulated as often as practical, rather than
physically trapping and changing occurrences. This is similar to
the Great American Insurance approach, and also puts all those
perhaps simplistic Year 2000 Cost = Lines Of Code x Change Per
Line doomsday equations.

If that was the case the Abbott Labs inventory would have been
potentially cripplingly expensive - 8,700 external sorts, 8,800
separate programs and 445 production systems needed attention.
And as we said before, the decision to carefully carve out the
systems that will die a natural death soon anyway can reduce the
workload even further - 320 of the production systems were thus
eliminated as Year 2000 fix candidates.

Using this project management tip, the user was able to go back
and cut the projected Year 2000 cost by 50%. But note that based
on this particular case, the systems inventory work isn't a once-
only - quarterly updates may be advisable (old systems have a
habit, as we all know, of never quite dying on their own).

Sandy Carroll, the Year 2000 project manager for Business and
Student Information Services at the University of Minnesota, in
the twin cities of St.Paul-Minneapolis, faced a similar
apparently vast problem with 5 million lines of code (5,000
programs). Thankfully, she too was able to revise her original
costs down by bringing in the help of Phoenix, Arizona based
Viasoft's Impact 2000 product, cutting the impact analysis phase
alone down from 8.5 months to 6 weeks. Of the 5,000 programs,
again, it turned out that not all needed changing - only 3,500
were actually in need of attention.

Don't think Software Futures is saying that this Year 2000 is a
trivial problem simply because in practical terms it's the
feeling from some of these plucky century-date change pioneers
that in practice the actual amount of effort involved is simply a
lot - not crushing. All that means is that don't be so daunted by
the thing that you throw up your hands and don't start at all.
But obviously the sooner the better.

You might object that without support from the corner office, you
might as well hunker down and wait for the food riots. If you
hear the slightest note of objection, you might want to point to
the example of Lou Gerstner.

The financial engineer now turning IBM around has thrown his
considerable presence into supporting Big Blue's own efforts to
clean house for Year 2000.

If you download the very useful IBM's 180 page document on its
approach to the crisis (at http://www.software.ibm.com) you'll
only get more confirmation that Gerstner knows it's vital IBM
gets this right.

The word from IBM spokespeople on the Year 2000 project is that
Gerstner expects a full update every two months on the ongoing
rollout of compliant products, and a 17-strong customer council
has been established to help him get it right. In terms of IBM
products and system software that need fixing, apparently VSE and
MVS are on the minor casualty list, while VM needs quite a bit of
work (not surprising, being that much older). While AS/400
software is kosher, AIX is pretty much okay with a hint of
caution - make sure routines that work with the counter all use
four digits for years, not two.

On the PC BIOS side (and you've probably made the private joke to
yourself about resetting the systems clock to 2000 and looking at
the, er, funny things the computer does), IBM claims a hardware
BIOS fix will be in place this year. (However, don't be surprised
if you have to get up a bit early from the "big party" to reset
some system clocks once again, just in case.) All in all, IBM
faithfully promises to be clean on the products side by the end
of 1996, and on applications by the end of next year.

IBM will also warn you about the Millennial Bug in a responsible
way, (quoting, once again, Gartner), "The time is now, the
problem is real, the solution is ugly."

                   OUTSOURCING MIGHT NOT WORK!

Well, one solution a lot of customers might immediately be
tempted to go for is outsourcing the whole wretched mess once and
for all. Simple, no? Hang on to your card from that nice guy at
EDS or Andersen for a while longer. In a good article on the
crisis in the July, 1995 issue of CFO, technology editor John
Xenakis pointed out that the fixed-price contract nature of a lot
of typical outsourcing deals doesn't fit well with the open-ended
nature of a 2000 fix.

"This problem is so big that we will consider these bugs to be
out of the scope of our normal maintenance contract," says Benny
Popek, managing partner for applications management for Coopers &
Lybrand LLP in Burlington, Massachusetts. "For those clients who
insist that we should take responsibility, we'll exercise the
cancellation clause and terminate the outsourcing contract."

One firm we've already namechecked as active in both Year 2000
fixes and outsourcing, Cap Gemini America, now specifically
mentions the issue in its contracts. More than mentions; its
inclusion raises the cost of a typical five year contract by
between 5 and 20 per cent a year!

Just to rub it in, Computer Sciences Corp has been quoted as
saying it doubts "[any outsourcing vendor] will ever assume the
cost of fixing this problem."

There are any number of strategies like thinking you can ignore
the problem until the weekend before the century change, or
through outsourcing, or hiring a bunch of cheap and cheerful
programmers in India or Russia to do it for you. The Web page
devoted to the issue (http://www.2000.com) even has an amusing
David Letterman style Top Ten reasons for ducking the issue; our
favorites are, Nostradamus never mentioned this, I believe in the
sanctity of all life - including computer bugs; and What date
problem? Bill Gates will solve it.

The Year 2000 problem is upon us. It's not a joke, but it's not
like a comet crashing into the Earth - ie, you can do something
about it. And it won't cost billions for you - just time and
effort, now.

An analogy we'll steal from the management consultants is the
story about the frog in hot water. Put the little green fellow in
a pan of boiling H20 and he'll naturally spring right out.

But put him in a pan of cold water and slowly heat it up, and the
poor thing will stay happily there not noticing the temperature
rise until it is far, far too late. Feel that water bubble?




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                APPLICATION PARTITIONING ASIDE:
                     WHAT'S FORTE GOOD FOR?

Californian start-up Forte Software has always shouted loudest
about the joys of application partitioning. Clare Haney wonders,
now that AP is becoming pretty commonplace, what else the company
has up its sleeve?

Being first with a technology (or even first to coin a groovy
buzzword) can garner you lots of praise. But often the
breakthrough artiste rapidly loses its appeal as the world and
his dog jumps up on the bandwagon. Suddenly, the lone player on
the stage is swamped by the entire company of actors and his or
her message is drowned out by the loud acclamations of the
chorus.

No one, as we saw last month, would dare to dispute the fact that
Forte Software, based in Oakland, California, has made the most
noise about application partitioning (AP) and all but forced the
rest of the application development tools vendors to declaim
(whether truly or falsely) that they have it too. Today's concern
about Forte is: Has it won enough user hearts and minds to ensure
its continued position as a leading three-tier second generation
client/server enterprise tool? Since most development tools
vendors are now practicing the black art of AP, does Forte need to
pull another interestingly shaped rabbit out of its top hat to
get its magic tricks elevated above the jostling ranks of other
would-be conjurers?

Forte management has already admitted that maybe it's overplayed
the application partitioning card to the detriment of the rest of
its technology. Company president and CEO Marty Sprinzen told us
last month, "We over-emphasized AP; now we're much more balanced
in our approach. We don't push technology. We're both an
engineering and a sales driven company."

We still tend to think of Forte as a tiny Californian start-up,
but it's been nearly five years since ex-Ingres managers Sprinzen
and Paul Butterworth founded the company, and it now employs
around 180 people. Of course, it took a while for real product to
appear, with Forte Application Environment 1.0 only being released
to general availability in August 1994. This month should see the
shipping of version 2.0 of the tool (see diagram).

                      FORTE'S NEW RELEASES

Release 2.0 is really a response to Forte's critics who savaged
version 1.0 for being too proprietary. The company has opened up
the system, meaning that Forte middleware independent servers are
now accessible not only through the Forte messaging system itself,
but also via DCE and CORBA and users can employ the Encina
transaction processing (TP) monitor to manage Forte services. The
tool now additionally supports OLE 2.0. There's increased
platform support for NT (as both clients and servers on either
Intel or Digital Alpha chips), native PowerMacintosh clients and
added database support for ODBC, IBM's DB/2 6000, Microsoft SQL
Server and Informix Online. It's added international language
support and, on the object-oriented side, now allows developers
to use cross-platform window inheritance.

If that wasn't enough, Forte is already looking for another
differential in the overcrowded tools market. Sprinzen was
uncharacteristically tight-lipped when we met him recently, but
he did say that Forte has already acquired some exciting new
technology from an unnamed company which it will release this
September. "It's a new area, but it's still application
development. It'll be a fully Forte product. We've got a group of
people already working on it and we'll keep it secret. The
company that sold the technology to us has no motivation for
letting the news out," he confided. Intriguing. Apparently, this
development doesn't necessarily require Forte, another signal that
the company is becoming less proprietary in its tools approach.
Meanwhile, this month should see the release of an automatic
application generator for Forte which has been under beta testing
since September and was solely developed at the tools vendor's
Oakland HQ.

All this acquisition and development takes plenty of green stuff,
so how does the heavily venture capitalist-funded company's
financials look? As of last month, Forte says it did around $25m
in revenue. We use the word "says" since the company is still
privately owned. Its first full year of sales, ending in June
1995, netted Forte $15m in corporate revenues. It's hoping to make
the surprisingly ambitious $60m revenue mark over the course of
this year.

Critics will of course point to the whacking $36m VC investment
Forte has taken over the course of four equity financing rounds,
the last of which occurred in October 1994, as obligating the
company to perform over and above the usual expectations of a hot
start-up. However, Sprinzen, who doesn't expect to add to that
$36m seed funding, retorts that the VCs which hold about 58% of
the company, among them Greylock Management Corp and Norwest
Venture Capital, exert very little pressure on his management
team. Interestingly, among the Forte VC ranks nestle hardware
veteran Data General, owning 4% of the company, and Mitsubishi,
which is described as Forte's "master" Japanese distributor,
holding a 3% stake.

Sprinzen plans to take Forte public sometime this year, probably
in the summertime, and its banks are already carrying out due
diligence. Just watch for the predictable "company adds new board
members" announcement as signalling the IPO process is truly
underway. "Going public will give us a significant amount of free
publicity. We are doing very well financially, and it's a way of
getting that information out there," he says. According to
Sprinzen, Forte has about $10m left in the bank, and he points out
that the company's also now generating cash. "This quarter marks
a major milestone for us - we'll turn profitable."

On the user side, Sprinzen reckons Forte has around 170 companies
currently using its tool, with the average system supporting
between 50 and 100 users. The company puts the average number of
developers involved in a Forte project at seven. Competitors will
carp that Forte is getting vast chunks of its business through its
relationship with Digital, which allows DEC to sell and support
Forte worldwide as a Digital product. Sprinzen replies that
Digital sales of Forte account for between 20% and 25% of total
company sales and only contributes 10% to Forte's revenues. That
notwithstanding, VARs and systems integrators have been vital to
Forte winning deals, with Sprinzen saying a half to a third of its
sales are done through partners.

The Forte story in the UK hasn't been anything like as starry as
its Stateside success, but Sprinzen reckons that the appointment
of Mike Hedger, another ex-Ingres staffer, as head of European
business, based in Bracknell, Berkshire, should turn that
situation around... fast. Currently the UK accounts for a meagre
10% of revenue with a paltry eight customers. Europe as a whole,
taking into account both indirect and direct sales, makes up
about 20% of total revenues. The company is just putting the
phones into French and German satellite operations. The UK
operation employs 14 people, which will swell to 20 by April.
Both Sprinzen and Hedger are keen to see Europe contributing 40%
to revenues, but Hedger admits this is unlikely to be achieved
before the millennium. He told us, "I think the UK will grow 300%
next year. OK, that's off a pretty small base, but the average
software deal will be #250,000 ($400,000) plus. We feel quite
bullish."

What of those users signing up for Forte? Well, SHL Systemhouse is
currently hard at work redeveloping the 911 emergency IT system
for New York City in Forte. Definitely a mission critical system!
It should be deployed later this year and the systems integrator
is hoping to be able to modify it and resell it to other cities
due to the tool's object-oriented capabilities.

In order to gauge Forte's appeal among the user community, we
spoke to two US organizations which, like NYC, are starting to
use the tool in anger to build mission critical systems.

                       WHO'S USING FORTE?

First up we talked with Mark Joyce, supervisor, Fibre Systems
Engineering, Computer and Information Services at Corning
Incorporated's Telecommunications Product Division, based in
Wilmington, North Carolina. Global sales for 1994 for the Fortune
500 organization which splits its businesses into three areas -
communications, environment and life sciences - totalled $4.8bn.
Corning's Wilmington plant is the world's largest manufacturer of
fibre optic waveguides and is currently in the pleasant position
of not being able to produce enough product to satisfy demand. To
this end, the organization recently undertook a $150m expansion
and a further $250m expansion is currently going ahead.

As part of Corning's order fulfillment process, it provides all
the relevant data to its customers at product delivery time,
including quantitive information about the length and strength of
the fibre. Each customer expects this data in differing formats.
Using Forte, Corning is developing an application that will gather
all the data, format it according to specifications, and then
generate it automatically. Corning expects the application to go
into production early next year. "It's a beat your business on
application because it's part of what the customer will see,"
says Joyce.

Despite being a Digital Rdb shop, Corning didn't get into Forte
via DEC, identifying the tool instead primarily by trawling
through IT publications. About two years ago, it begun the
process of identifying and selecting a new application
development environment. It considered Visual Basic, PowerBuilder
and Dynasty; and having rejected these, then spent six or seven
months evaluating IEF from Texas Instruments because it seemed to
fit its Rdb with Digital's ACMS TP Monitor environment reasonably
well, but decided against it on grounds of inflexibility in
November 1994. Forte was the next product on its list. Corning
then carried out a five to six month evaluation of the tool and
did a dozen or so pilot projects using Forte.

Was Corning worried about Forte's relative youth and small size?

"One of our primary concerns was that Forte was a version 1.0
product, and was new to the marketplace. However, several reasons
weighed in favor of the tool. Its partnership with Digital was a
strong selling point for us; we thought we would get good support
for our existing environment given that relationship. Also, the
entire market for distributed objects was so new, it was hard to
find any vendor with a history of any kind. Finally, we saw Forte
as a market leader and were impressed by the company's
technology. Our concern about the newness of the product was
mitigated by these factors," says Joyce. "Forte will become our
development tool of choice." The company currently has about a
dozen developers on Forte - six working on the original order
fulfillment project and six on smaller projects.

Around 80% of Corning's desktop units are Macintoshes. "One of
Forte's primary selling points for us was that it supported all
different kinds of clients straight out of the box as version
1.0, for example, Mac."

As for future plans, "We believe in distributed computing and
distributing objects over the network. We intend to implement a
CORBA backplane some time this year to make that happen. What
really excites us about Forte version 2.0 is that you can now
define your own objects inherited from base classes. You couldn't
do that in version 1.0. International support is important to us
because we have international customers. We're looking closely at
Encina TP integration. Performance improvements are also
important to us, such as native PowerMac and some native thread
support."

Next we talked with David St. Clair, president and chief
executive at MEDecision, based in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. His
company specializes in producing software for healthcare
insurance companies aimed at ensuring that in-patient and out-
patient procedures for individuals covered by such policies are
medically necessary. Half of MEDecision's business comes from
Blue Cross/Blue Shield and its software is used to determine
coverage for requested procedure for around 20 million Americans.

MEDecision decided that it needed to rewrite its current MUMPS-
based application known as Utility Control System (UCS) which
runs on PC LANS early last year. The company wanted to be able to
create a series of GUI screens which could be used both by
insurance companies and hospitals.

St. Clair explains, "As the whole area of technology evolves, we
see more and more of the decision support technology being used
by the hospitals themselves, based on rules that insurance
companies are happy with." The company also knew it needed a
three-tier product, since the bulk of the new application was
going to be implemented in the middle application services tier,
independent of desktop presentation services and input/output
mechanisms such as databases and Electronic Document Interchange
(EDI). "We want to have all the clinical intelligence available
and put the logic out on the network and create an invisible
three-tier application," he adds. The first decision the company
had to make was whether to build the application itself in-house
or go out and find an integrated development environment
elsewhere in the marketplace. St. Clair vetoed his technical
staff's suggestion that they should build the application
themselves. He felt that with only 70 employees, 30 of whom were
programmers, MEDecision didn't really have the necessary
capability both to support and maintain the product, given that
each of its customers would have their own variants of the
system. So in the first quarter of last year, he turned to the
marketplace. "We looked through everything from PowerBuilder to
Visual Basic. There were only a few that were true three-tier
architectured products - Forte and Dynasty."

So why choose Forte? "The key distinction between the two for us
was that Forte used true messaging and had more of its tools built
in and integrated. With Dynasty we could've made messaging work,
but it already existed in Forte. With Dynasty you had the option
to build tools, but it was really both an option and a
requirement. The more a vendor can deliver to us in an integrated
way, the less we have to do on that side and the more we can
concentrate on developing the application," St. Clair told us.

We wondered if MEDecision was at all phased by Forte's relative
immaturity and heavy VC-backing. "We're a start-up ourselves.
It's very difficult to fault someone for being in the same
position, certainly that issue was a topic of conversation when I
visited them in Oakland. However the technology was new enough
and creative enough that it was highly unlikely that someone like
IBM would have come out with it," he replied.

A key essential was scalability, both up and down. As St. Clair
puts it, "The interesting thing in all these discussions is that
everyone is talking about scalability in terms of how large you
can get an application, very few people are discussing how small
you can get it."

"A significant area of growth for us is with start-up companies,
for example, managed care ventures. We've been very successful in
helping companies start with two to four users and then grow.
Often they grow explosively and that means they pay more license
fees to us. Some of the alternatives to Forte and Dynasty, in
order to make them work at all, you would have had to buy very
expensive transaction monitors, which made something like that
totally unfeasible for a company with a small number of users.
With both Forte and Dynasty we had the opportunity to go very
small and grow."

Just to prove scalability upwards is just as important to the
company, MEDecision's average customer site has 120 users, but
some sites number 250 users and the company is keen to pursue
business with customers who have 500 to 800 users. Having opted
for Forte by the end of March 1995, MEDecision then spent the next
four months training its staff on the tool and developing three
significant prototypes. It only really begun its true development
efforts in early September. The company's currently in the middle
of the design and development phase of the as yet unnamed
successor to UCS. St. Clair expects to have the application ready
for the market by the end of 1996. It will run on Unix boxes as
the database servers, remaining with Windows on the client side.

He adds that the company intends to develop rather comprehensive
core products and then be able to add enhancements for individual
customers. It intends to make use of Forte's object-oriented
capabilities, in particular, inheritance, in order to handle
customization. So that, for example, users can either stick with
the MEDecision standard eligibility screen or can override that
with their own customized version, by using empty subclasses,
which ensure that the original screen is still kept intact.

"This is a bet your company decision for us - if Forte fails,
we're in trouble," St. Clair concludes. He sees the relationship
as very much a two-way street, since MEDecision will be paying
Forte a small amount of future licenses of its new product. "It's
in their interests to support us; we're dependent on each other."
He reckons that so far the project has cost $1.5m, with
investment in Forte accounting for 10% of that figure, but puts
the total cost of the project at around $4m. A pretty substantial
investment for a company that expects to do $6m of business this
year and proof if any were needed that there are users out there
prepared to wager all on Forte.

Naturally, we have yet to see the fruits of these mission-
critical applications written in Forte. If they go well, this
together with the company's IPO later this year will undoubtedly
boost its name higher on users' most wanted tools lists. If
however some of these systems crash or do not appear on time,
Marty and the rest of the gang will have the kind of "can't
scale" cleaning up operation Sybase's Powersoft got hit by back
in 1994. And as we all know, Powersoft hasn't yet fully recovered
from that body blow.

                           CONCLUSION

For the time being, Forte is definitely making all the right
noises in widening its tool's appeal and exploring other related
application management and development areas. So, we'd have to
conclude that once the hoopla over application partitioning dies
down, Forte will still be a worthy tool for you to include on your
high-end development shopping list.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                   NEW WINE IN OLD BOTTLES:
                        CINCOM AND UNIFY

Gary Flood hears how two survivors of the software industry are
back in action once again

For both Cincom, perennially of Cincinnati, Ohio, and Unify, now
of San Jose, California, the management consulting wisdom of
Geoffrey Moore seems apt.

Moore's 1991 "must-read" for high-tech executives, Crossing The
Chasm, explains how the market for innovative and exciting new
technology must be cultivated properly. "The point of greatest
peril in the development of a high-tech market lies in making the
transition from an early market dominated by a few visionary
customers to a mainstream market dominated by a large block of
customers who are predominantly pragmatists in orientation. The
gap between these two markets, heretofore ignored, is in fact so
significant as to warrant [it] being called a chasm, and crossing
this chasm must be the primary focus of any long-term high-tech
marketing plan. A successful crossing is how high-tech fortunes
are made; failure in the attempt is how they are lost."

Sound advice, indeed. Both Cincom and Unify are even as we speak
placing their toes on the thin, quivering tightrope that
stretches over that very chasm. On the side they're now on lies
stagnation and tiny market share; beckoning far in the distance
is the shining Shangri La of cash-in heaven typified by another
old survivor's recent good fortune, Toy Story beneficiary Mr
Steven Jobs.

But even though Cincom actually contracted Moore to help its
recent re-engineering effort, and Unify has recruited a whole new
all-star management team from Informix and some of the other
database companies, both find themselves in the curious position
of being long in the tooth and yet firing up their engines on the
starting line like hot new prospects. It's as if it weren't 1996
at all, but their two respective annus mirabilii, 1968 and 1984
respectively. Truly, new wine in old bottles.

Let's see what each in turn is trying to use to excite those
famous visionary customers and what they later earnestly trust
will be the stuff that the much-desired pragmatist larger block
will vote for. What chance do these players have of dancing
nimbly across the software marketing chasm?

Cincom is a 28-year old privately held software operation that
has long specialized in database (relational and non-relational)
and application development (4GL and now object-oriented)
products. With its newly announced Total Framework (which in
itself gives a tip of the head to Tom Nies, founder and 99%
"stock" holder, and his penchant for products with "Total" in the
name) the company is focusing on that most talked about and
tantalizing of markets, the high-end complex client/server
development market (with a hint of workflow to flavor the mix).

Unify on the other hand is on at least its third iteration as a
company; it was born as a Unix database company in the early
1980s, had a second run as a 4GL (Accell) supplier in the late
1980s/early 1990s, and is now reborn a third time under its third
CEO at least as a Forte-Dynasty-Seer competitor. With its new
AppMan extension to its flagship Vision product it hopes to carve
out a new place in the sun as a "complete client/server product
for building managed applications." As we said when its new
marketing team came to visit us here in New York, "We thought
we'd killed you guys off years back." So blind to our insight is
its energizing new head Reza Mikailli that he's going ahead and
planning an IPO in July!

We'll look at chasm-crosser Cincom first. Its fortunes seem to
have peaked in 1992 at $157m, but that figure has been declining
ever since; it now quotes simply "over $150m" in its literature,
but it's quite open that 500 of its 1,500 staff have been cut in
a re-engineering program in train since November 1993. Over 60%
of that figure ($90m) in any case is based on maintenance revenue
from its existing Total, Supra, Mantis and AD/Advantage database
and 4GL offerings.

We last covered Cincom in any depth way, way back in September
1992 when we talked to Nies and others on his team about a great-
sounding distributed database product, the third version of its
Supra relational dbms... that Cincom in fact pulled back from
releasing at the last minute. For it was around that time that it
had tempted DEC Rdb Star luminary Marco Emrich back (he'd worked
there in the early 1980s) to become senior director of its
Advanced Technology Group.

                       SAME TERMS AS NEXT

In this new role Emrich has spent the last three years crafting a
new application development strategy based around objects and
object-relational databases, in a bid to establish Cincom as a
technology force to be reckoned with in the same terms as
Taligent or Next. With this in mind a new superglossy rdbms that
would have been trampled in the dust by Oracle 7 or even Sybase
System 10 would hardly have helped put the outfit back on track,
Nies had decided.

Hints of what Emrich and his elves have been cooking up have been
filtering out for a while (we alluded to it ourselves in our July
piece on object databases). At last month's DB/Expo in New York
he and marcomms manager Randy Saunders sat down with Software
Futures to tell us what this Total Framework thing really is.

In essence it's a suite of application development tools based
largely on products from third party software houses but
integrated by Cincom as a set of services, so that from a
customer's viewpoint they exist under a single point of support.

The system includes Assembly, Workflow and Persistence frameworks
backboned by a CORBA object request broker. It went to Austin,
Texas-based UniSQL Corp for its object-relational database
management technology, to Burlington, Massachusetts-based Easel
Corp, now part of VMark Software, for its ObjectStudio
development tools, and to Alameda, California based Action for
its workflow software. Thus Total Framework an object-relational
database including an object-relational model, large globs of
support for Microsoft OLE, multimedia data integration framework,
object-oriented SQL, call-level interface and graphical database
access and application development tools; and an object-oriented
application development technology that comes bundled with
Smalltalk class libraries and comprises a series of related
tools, both general and focused. It is targeted at application
developers, and Cincom says it has settled for Smalltalk because
it is available under Windows, OS/2 and Unix.

One problem that strikes one regarding Framework is trying to see
how it will be of interest to anyone other than existing Cincom
users unless it is directed at outside prospects with the right
tag-line.

This could be challenging. The company is hardly a name to
conjure with on Marketing 101 syllabuses. It was thus extremely
hard to determine what precisely the thing is in the sense of,
does it compete with products a, b, or c, or offerings, x, y. and
z?

For instance, Saunders chirruped that it had no competitors.
Yeah, yeah. Then Emrich chimed in that it was an application
assembly framework; on the slides it says it's best for "cross-
functional business process requirements." Then turn and turn
about, Saunders posited it would be best for workflow based
applications while Emrich sees it working in scenarios where the
customer had already looked at CommonPoint or NeXTStep.

This muddle may be perfectly legitimate multi-faceted stuff
caused by the richness and complexity of the Framework - or just
as likely it's due to the extremely tiny brain God blessed your
humble reporter with. We tried again. Who's it going to be sold
to, and then we'll see what it'll be used for? There are two
aspects to Cincom's answer. One is that there are three
industries being addressed - insurance, banking and financial
services. The second is that Cincom plans to bypass MIS and talk
directly to the VPs of customer services, sales and marketing. So
if you're in that kind of company, expect one of the 40
salespeople in Cincom (50% of the total) who have no existing
clients to look after to come a-knocking on your door.

When our sister paper Computer Business Review spoke to the
Cincomers back in September, there were nine trial customers by
mid-August for the Framework. Two are quoted in the backgrounder,
amid a host of enthusiastic statements from the right sorts of
analysts. The customers referenced are an Alaskan based log
distance telephone carrier called GCI, which is using the
software to develop an integrated billing system, and a Swedish
finance organization called Time-To-Market which is developing a
private-bond issuing application.

We spoke to two other Cincom customers - Toronto-based consulting
company Mark Winter & Associates and Dublin, Ohio-based CD-ROM
manufacturer Metatec. Both were enthusiastic endorsers of the
Framework, which is a good sign. But the fuzziness of the Total
Framework message was not radically cleared up by our
discussions.

For example, Mark Winter has been using some of the parts of
Framework for over five years but has only been in discussions
with Cincom for two. "It's very stable and very functional," he
told us, going on to detail applications built with Framework
components for an oil company, a savings and loan organization
and some retailers. But we were as hard-pressed with Winter as we
had been with Saunders to understand what niche the new Cincom
product might fit into other than it was a first-rate technology.

Again, maybe it's a case of us just not being able to see the
wood for the trees, but be it a better mousetrap than the rest,
it's focus that you need to stay above the rushing waters in that
chasm...

As for Metatec, an existing Supra customer, Alex Deak, its CIO,
said that his team was in "active evaluation" of Framework. A
pilot manufacturing process application is in progress, and the
developers at Metatec like the combination of the object-
relational database and the Smalltalk aspect, he adds. He
acknowledges that the 28 year old company has a great technology
pedigree but that he's never been overawed by some other aspects
of its attack. "We've been a Supra user for seven or eight years
and have known for a long time that Cincom is a strong technology
company but is light on the marketing end. This has had
implications for us when we periodically review our suppliers and
we have to say that Cincom is not high on the list of databases
supported by a lot of the third parties out there. This has been
an area of concern for us. Though I do believe that they will
succeed with Total Framework, I don't think it's going to be easy
for them."

How much does it matter in addition that a lot of the good stuff
in Total Framework is from third parties and is not "owned" by
Cincom? Emrich laughs, "It was a matter or build, buy or steal!"
He goes on to stress that many of the links between VMark and
UniSQL are based not on flimsy "joint marketing" but on "joint
R&D agreements." He also notes that Cincom has a substantial team
of engineers (he himself brought 12 over from DEC when he
defected) who are working on finessing the products behind the
scenes. Both Winter and Deak were emphatic in saying that they
think this "best-of-breed" approach is the best one for Cincom.

Home brewed excellence rather than elegant synthesis seems to be
the theme at Unify, which in a veritable Dracula re-run has once
again risen from its grave.

                    THE "SMART TOOLS" COMPANY

Unify now styles itself "The Smart Tools Company." And using
those self-same Smart Tools are a claimed 6,000 Vision licenses
sold and over 200 "paying entities" paying support, according to
its VP marketing (and yet another ex-Informixer!) Scott Canali.
That doesn't count the surprisingly high claim of 350,000 end
users using its Unify and Unify 2000 relational databases. All
told, this business has made the tightly held and sometimes
willfully obscure company into a $30m operation employing 180
people worldwide - comparable to rivals Forte. Note that a year
ago that was 300 - a side-effect of the appointment of Reza
Mikailli as CEO in November 1994, as we'll see.

Why hasn't Unify faded away years ago? Well, it kept releasing
software like Vision that was just great enough not for it to be
tossed into the midden. Tony Lacy-Thompson, who was involved with
the launch of another second-generation client/server development
tool, Informix's NewEra, typifies the sentiment as to why some
experienced software types have come over to the old-newcomer:
"Coming from the NewEra stable, there were a lot of things I knew
were required in a high end tool that I said would be in NewEra -
or I at least knew were coming soon. One of the things that
attracted me to Vision was all those things were there, such as
RAD, ease of use, real native database drivers, and such like."

In November it released version 2.1 of Vision, which is itself
interestingly enough a total C-based rewrite of the existing
Accell product using the Galaxy high-end toolset from Visix,
which we will be revisiting this quarter. The biggest single
change is enhanced software distribution features, primarily
through integration of Tivoli TME.

What is Vision? Unify claims Vision offers a "unique" Scalable
RADD (Rapid Application Development and Deployment) architecture
that provides developers with the ability to quickly and easily
produce complex, mission-critical business applications using
second generation, client/server technology. Development
scalability is delivered through elements including components,
built-in application and transaction models, an object-oriented
programming environment, and repository-based, team development
facilities

Now Unify has extended Vision through AppMan, a move into a new
area it's calling application (as opposed to systems or network
or server) management. It's a consequence, argues Unify, of the
new style distributed object applications, a new frontier that
has caused some interesting challenges for second generation
client/server developers and pioneers.

Applications developed using Unify's Vision 2.1 development
environment plus the new add-on layer called AppMan are claimed
to automatically generate and report statistics about themselves
in the areas of configuration, performance and thresholds. In its
first iteration AppMan addresses centralized event management,
performance monitoring, software distribution and configuration
management and administration. (Security and asset management and
licensing will follow in a subsequent release.)

AppMan's centralized event management can report some 400 built-
in events from Vision applications, and includes agents which
support BMC Software's Patrol, Tivoli Enterprise/Console and SNMP
management systems. On the performance management front it's
offering includes agents for HP MeasureWare and PerfView, BMC
Patrol and SNMP management tools. AppMan's software distribution
component supports Microsoft SMS and Tivoli Courier, and the
AppMan console can manage Vision application partitions and
servers. A further release will include a baseline set of event
management and performance management capabilities. AppMan 2.0,
due in the third quarter, will provide agent-based integration
with systems management products for security, controlled access
to application services, and asset management and licensing.

To hear Unify folk talk it's almost like AppMan signals a whole
new area of application development - perhaps its answer to
Forte's famed AP? "This is a new distributed applications
problem," says Lacy-Thompson.

"We had a recent example with a defense contractor consultant
customer of ours, who rolled out a mission-critical application
only to see it break. It spent six weeks trying to fix the
problem, spending all our taxpayer money, and in the end had to
go in from the top and get out the can opener. It turned out to
be an overloaded partition. That was something that none of the
existing tools had detected. It was pure and simple an
application problem. We're listening to hear these problems - but
the applications aren't talking."

Another aspect to AppMan, says Unify, is the whole integration of
products like Tivoli's software distribution product Courier.
Again, Lacy-Thompson has a startling anecdote - heard the one
about the company that actually hires a Lear Jet once a month to
distribute its 6,000 floppies to the field? Now that really is
SneakerNet - SneakerNet++, if you like.

But then again it's drawing back from claiming that this is the
start of a whole new sub-industry; AppMan is purely for Vision
users, and is essentially an added extra goodie. So how do the
Vision customers out there feel about it and the company?

We spoke to a customer who has been quoted a couple of times in
the press already about Vision - Greg Hindson of Tustin,
California financial apps provider Nortridge Software. He has
been using Vision (and before that Accell) since 1987, and told
Software Futures he was "very happy" with Vision's functionality
and performance, while noting of course that it'll never be quite
as fast as compiled C.

And AppMan - good, bad or ugly? "I think it's a fabulous idea,"
he says. "With this we're going to be able to cover a lot of
things that other products don't have. Just in software
distribution - I'm tickled to death Unify's going to look after
the licensing issue for me, a big issue in client/server."

Now this sounds familiar when we recall Cincom: as for Unify as a
company, he's happy with the new talent on board, but adds, "It's
always been weak in getting new sales and getting that message
out there. I've shown it to PowerBuilder developers who say it's
neat, but they've just never heard of it. And they have a
fabulous database with no market share."

Uh oh. Feel the winds from the chasm tugging at your
shirtsleeves?

Not so Reza Mikailli, the Unify CEO, who enthuses that his track
record alone as lead developer of the OnLine rdbms for Informix
and previous work at Ingres (where he claims he helped sell
Ingres to ASK - wouldn't brag too much about that one, Reza)
should restore some much needed street cred to his operation.

"At Ingres and Informix we all had a lot of respect, internally,
for Unify," he says. "But now I'm here I find that previous CEOs
have not concentrated on growing the business; they seemed more
interested in cutting down as much as possible in order to sell
the company."

While admitting that the first release of Vision was a kind of
"me-too" product, he says that the company is now doubling Vision
revenues every quarter and the firm is now firmly back in the
black. He has stripped out some "tired" executives and whipped up
enthusiasm among some Silicon Valley ex-colleagues over the
prospects for Vision in the telecommunications vertical in
particular. (By the way he's also hired people from Borland and
Oracle, so it's not all Informix II.) "We can easily grow to be a
$150m operation," he enthuses.

We asked Unify staffers on their New York press tour stop if they
had any sense of who was top dog in this whole Forte-Seer-Dynasty
dog and pony show. (Seer they see a lot, but Dynasty very little.
"In fact less and less people are seeing Dynasty," quips Lacy-
Thompson, the wag.) Internal figures that its UK marketing chief
Jeremy Jackson told us put it on a very respectable 17% of the
enterprise-level client/server market worldwide.

So two quite mature companies are standing at the edge of the
black and awesome market acceptance chasm. Cincom faces the
challenge of refining precisely what it is that it's trying to
bring to market - at the moment it still smacks a little of magic
beans. Plus it must ensure that it wins new beachheads outside
its successful but essentially static manufacturing home base.
For Unify, issues of differentiation and credibility are
paramount. Software Futures attended the 1989 launch of Unify
2000 - and that has hardly swept all pretenders before it in the
rdbms market.

                        THE WATER OF LIFE

As they stand on the brink both companies have the vital
ingredient of maturity on their side. Both have tempered
leadership who have seen more than one cycle in this industry and
could use that hard-won experience well. And remember that what
the Scots call the water of life - whisky - tastes that way
because it's matured in nice old aged sherry barrels. Will these
new vintages tempt your development tastebuds?




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                RATIONAL SOFTWARE: THE ADA KIDS
                       WIDEN THEIR APPEAL

If you were evaluating dynamic programming languages, the chances
are darling of the defense industry, Ada, wouldn't top your list.
Clare Haney asks whether Rational Software, previously one of
Ada's strongest adherents, can successfully move across into
selling more mainstream tools?

What do you think of when you hear the name Rational Software?
Well, if you've ever had any dealings with them, the word
immediately on the tip of your tongue would be "Ada." But no one,
not even the programming language's most fanatical adherents,
would claim that the market for Ada is exactly booming. As one
user pointed out to us, "Most people who want Ada are probably
already using it." Another corporate described Ada as "a bit of a
stigma" for any organization.

So, obviously a tools company like Rational can't continue to
thrive upon dwindling Ada revenues alone. The Santa Clara,
California-based vendor has indeed already begun to cast about
for other means to make its fortune, by broadening its tools to
support other languages, notably every object-oriented
programmer's favorite, C++. We look at its efforts so far, and
assess how successful they're likely to be in the future.

Something to bear in mind at this juncture is that the Rational
management have also had the smarts to try and put an end to the
object-oriented methodologies infighting that's been going on for
years. And they've gone about it in a rather interesting way. The
company already had OO guru Grady Booch, the man behind the Booch
methodology, as its chief scientist. He joined Rational in 1982.
Next, the tools vendor persuaded Jim Rumbaugh, of OMT (Object
Modeling Technique) fame, to leave General Electric in 1994, and
sign on as a Rational Fellow. Then late last year, Rational added
a third OO guru, bringing on board Ivar Jacobson, responsible for
Use-Case, as vice president, business engineering - by the simple
expediency of buying his company lock, stock and management!

Who's next on its object guru shopping list? Double act Stephen
Mellor and Sally Schlaer perhaps, or Ed Yourdon? Truth to tell,
Rational probably doesn't need anyone else. According to IDC, if
you lump Booch and Rumbaugh followers together, they account for
over 50% of the OO methodology marketplace.

Ever since Rumbaugh joined the company, Booch and he have been
hard at work on creating a joint methodology known as the Unified
Method, and have already released a draft version 0.8 of the
Unified Method Notation. Rational says it has received 250
requests per day via email for the draft. The putting aside of
old enmities was suggested in Rumbaugh's spoof on Joni Mitchell's
song Both Sides Now, which he released on an unsuspecting public
at OOPSLA '95 in Austin, Texas.

We quote: "But now our fans are acting strange/ Hey, Jim and
Grady, you've both changed/ Well, something's lost, but
something's gained/ In building unity.

We've seen OO from both sides now/ Both his and mine, and still
somehow/ It's OO strengths we'll still pursue/ We've tried to
bring the best to you." Hmm, well Shakespeare it ain't, but we're
sure you get the point!

Adding in some Jacobson use-case stuff doesn't seem like it
should present too much of a problem. Apparently, Use-Case is
already in the Unified Method notationally.

Gerard Rudisin, vice president, marketing at Rational US, told
us, "Both OMT-2 and Booch '93 embraced use-cases. Booch and
Rumbaugh say they're 85% to 95% there on their own already to
integrate Use-Case seamlessly." The dynamic OO guru duo is taking
public comment up until next month and then hopes to finalize
summer release of the Unified Method 1.0 which will then be in
the public domain.

"If we make it good enough, we want the Object Management Group
and users to embrace it as a standard," says Rudisin. "We want to
take the fight out of what OO methodology to choose and move it
onto which tools to use. I expect that the Unified Method will
make OO grow even faster and reduce confusion in the market," he
adds.

Certainly this is something users welcome, particularly
corporates beginning to investigate OO. As one Rational Ada
software user told us, "With the company acquiring the object
gurus, the method we'll adopt is likely to be the industry
standard." Surely, having the de facto OO methodology, if that's
the way it works out, is also going to help sell a bunch of
Rational tools. So let's investigate the range of the company's
product offerings (see diagram).

                      TAKING A ROUND-TRIP?

The most important Rational product right now and for the future
is its software engineering family of Rose tools, which allows
users to graphically develop, verify and document the analysis
and design model of their software. According to Rudisin,
comparing fiscal 1995 with fiscal 1994, Rose revenues increased
by 100%, a trend he expects will be repeated, if not bettered in
fiscal 1996. Like most software companies, Rational doesn't split
its revenues down into which products contributed how much, but
it does admit that while Rose storms ahead, revenues for its Ada
software are 'stable'. As Rudisin puts it, "The Ada market is
still larger than the Smalltalk market, but we have no
expectations that Ada will dominate in the mainstream market. Ada
is a slow growth market." Rational has grown its Ada business to
a 29% market share, largely through the gambit of acquiring other
smaller Ada players.

In fact, Rational is witnessing a something of a turnaround in
its traditional markets. Back in FY 1993, 88% of its revenues
came from those Ada hardcore advocates the aerospace and defense
industries. As of FY 1995 that business had shrunk to 65%, with
the commercial sector making up the remaining 35%. By the first
half of fiscal 1996, commercial business had grown to 42%.
Rudisin predicts, "In fiscal year 1997, we'll flip that
completely in favor of the commercial sector."

Returning to Rose - it derives 51% of its revenues from the
telecoms sector, and only 4% from the aerospace and defense
industries. It comes in a vanilla language-independent version,
as well as product variants which support Ada, C++ and Smalltalk.
Client/server application development, including code generation
and reverse engineering, is catered for by versions of Rose for
Sybase's PowerBuilder and Gupta's SQLWindows. Next up is Rose for
Visual Basic due in March of this year. In addition, Digital
funded Rose/IDL for its CORBA efforts. Rational has not yet
productized this, but did demonstrate the software at last year's
Object World (San Francisco). Japanese Rose user and Rational
partner Osaka Gas Information Systems Research Institute (OGIS-
RI) has already developed a Forte integration with Rose, which
Rational intends to offer as a product in the near future.

In connection with Rose, Rational rants a good deal about "round-
trip engineering" which it defines as follows: "A user can go
from graphical design to generation of source code, modify the
resulting source code, reverse engineer the new source code to
generate a graphical depiction of the system as it exists after
being modified, and merge any changes made in the source code
back into the model and vice versa."

We're talking "controlled iterative development" here - one of
Rational's three main buzzwords, the other two being OO
technology (naturellement!) and architecture-driven process. The
company claims Rose C++ is unique because it can support an
unlimited number of "round-trips" without losing any data on the
way. Rudisin sums up its appeal. "The old CASE tools largely
failed because if you changed the code and then tried to
regenerate it, the model fell apart. It didn't support iterative
development. That's what Booch along with Rational has been
preaching for years."

In terms of competition, stacked up against Rose are product
offerings from the likes of IDE, Select Software Tools and Cadre.
The latter seems to be specializing in hoovering up other CASE
vendors of late, notably Westmount and Bachman.

Speaking of acquisitions, Rational is very keen to scotch the
suggestion that it only acquired Objectory to bring OO
methodology guru Ivar Jacobson into the fold. "We wanted to add
to our expertise in business process re-engineering," says
Rudisin. "Users need the same integrated support for systems
requirements and systems engineering as they do for software
engineering. That's been a real chasm. People just throw the code
over the wall - we'll knit them together." Objectory also produce
a software process which assists organizations in achieving ISO
9000 certification. He revealed that Rational itself is hoping to
become ISO 9000 certified by the end of this year.

Rational's strategy is to extend its other tools for software
development, until now mostly Ada-based, across to other
programming languages, notably C++.

We wondered if the company planned to extend the same courtesy to
Smalltalk? Rudisin replies, "We've no plan to do the same for
Smalltalk yet. It could make sense. We've got to think, what's
the business opportunity? People are skeptical. They're worrying
about Smalltalk's scalability and that Smalltalk may become a
proprietary IBM language, since the ParcPlace/Digitalk merger
seems to have been complete a mess. There's real concern about
viability of Smalltalk going forward."

                         RATIONAL USERS

Turning to users of Rational Software, we chatted with Alan
Nugent, executive vice president, global strategy and advanced
technology, Global Process and Information Management (GPIM) at
Xerox, based in Rochester, New York. The self-styled "Document
Company" has made a significant commitment to Rational's Rose
tool and has been using it for the past two years. Nugent
explains why the organization opted for Rose, "The genesis of it
was really Xerox's decision to outsource its legacy systems and
to begin to focus its internal management community on developing
and delivering object-based client/server applications. I came on
board to develop the architecture, methods and tools."

Why choose Rose? "It was really the elegance, pureness and
simplicity of the methodology and the graphical notation that
drove us to Rational. We looked at Booch, Rumbaugh and a variety
of tools vendors. Grady Booch was the only one who was driving
for convergence. We kind of bought into the company, and into
Grady and his ideas and his passion for creating consolidation
within the industry. Rational getting Rumbaugh and Jacobson just
strengthens that resolve," he says.

Xerox uses a variety of different development environments for
its object-based applications, notably C++, PowerBuilder and
Forte. In fact, the company paid Rational to do a PowerBuilder
version of Rose. It was willing to do the same for Forte, but
Rational already had that covered with OGIS-RI. It's also
interested in the Visual Basic release for Rose since it has
about a dozen VB programmers.

The Rose tool is currently standard on Xerox engineers' desktops.
Its Information Management (IM) organization is rolling out
object-based applications for internal use to help run the
business, while other Xerox divisions are busy creating OO
applications which are either visible to its customers or
embedded in its products. Nugent reckons that at present the
company has between 400 and 500 Rose licenses, but estimates that
eventually close to 4,000 developers will use Rose. Xerox also
uses Rational to do all of its Rose training and is also hiring
people out of the company to fill consultative roles.

Although Xerox only uses Rose, it is well aware of Rational's
current product family and the vendor's future directions. Nugent
meets up with Rational's co-founder, chief technical officer and
chairman of the board, Mike Devlin, twice a year to discuss where
Xerox is heading and how Rational dovetails into that strategy.
Already, some of the company's division are are showing some
interest in Rational's SoDA, software which allows users to
generate documentation automatically from a variety of external
information sources

So what does Nugent reckon to Rational? "Bringing Jim Rumbaugh
and Ivar Jacobson and his entire company on board gives them a
lot of opportunity. Rational's doing a lot of the right things.
Given the size of the company they are, their lineage and
planning for the future and the fact that they're well managed
and led, they should have a very bright future."

                           CONCLUSION

Rational does seem to be playing a very smart game. Weaning
itself gradually away from its Ada heartland into the real OO
battleground of C++ and Smalltalk and supporting mainstream tools
such as Sybase's PowerBuilder and Microsoft's Visual Basic is
definitely the right thing to do. But there's a veritable forest
of ifs and buts for the company to safely navigate through before
this turnabout plan can be deemed successful. At least no one can
accuse it of not trying to made a real go of things. The Ada kids
have it all to play for!




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                 LET'S GET USER FRIENDLY: THE
                      DSDM APPROACH TO RAD

Organizations embarking on their first Rapid Application
Development project often feel baffled about how to manage the
process. Clare Haney visits the Dynamic Systems Development
Method consortium to discover how it can assist confused
corporates

Imagine the scene. An architect has drawn up the plans for
building a house. A bunch of builders are responsible for making
the blueprints a reality. Only some of them are none too happy
with some of the architect's suggestions. They're just not
practicable. In fact these bricklayer has some ideas of their own
on how the house should look. But what are they to do? They're
only the poor guys who've got to use the existing specifications
to make something workable. Right?

Sound familiar? Just mutate the architect into a systems
programmer and the hapless bricklayers into end users and you've
got a situation that still exists in many corporates today.
Systems developers and end users are still not communicating
adequately, and systems are still being built that are destined
for early obsolescence because no one bothered asking the people
who'll actually have to use the applications what they really
wanted and needed.

Enter the Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM) Consortium, a
non-profit making UK-based organization with the lofty aim of
creating a non-proprietary user-centered Rapid Application
Development (RAD) method which covers the whole of a project's
lifecycle. According to DSDM literature, the method "provides a
framework for building and maintaining systems which meet tight
time constraints through the use of incremental prototyping in a
controlled project environment."

We last visited with the consortium back in December 1994. At
that time it had been going for under a year and had only managed
to attract 50 members, 40% of which were end users. The prime
movers behind the consortium included corporate users such as
Abbey Life Assurance Co, Allied Domecq Retailing and British
Airways, as well as the UK operations of vendors like IBM, Logica
and Select Software Tools.

What a difference a year makes! The body now claims that DSDM has
become the UK's de facto standard for RAD development and boasts
more than 500 supporters, with end users accounting for more than
80% of the consortium's membership. Of this 500-plus figure, more
than 400 are Associate Subscribers which means for their #95
($152) annual membership fee they receive the DSDM documentation
and can go along to conferences, but are purely passive members
without voting rights. The rest, nearly 100-strong, are Full
Members, with end user organizations paying #980 ($1,568) a year
for the privilege which allows them access to the two monthly
User Forums and gives them voting rights at these gatherings.
Vendors pay #2,800 ($4,480) to be Full Members and can become
DSDM Accredited Training Organizations - there are currently 10
of these, with more than 1,000 users and project members having
successfully completed this consortium endorsed training. At last
month's European RAD Conference held in London, the organization
decided to introduce another membership category, that of a
Consultant at an annual fee of #400 ($640), which is an
individual active membership, allowing the person one vote at all
DSDM meetings.

Also in London last month, the organization unveiled version 2.0
of its methodology; version 1.0 appeared last February. DSDM 2.0
has been strongly influenced by the experiences of six so-called
Early Adopter projects, one of which we'll look at later, which
have been formally monitored to introduce feedback, new ideas and
metrics into the new release of the method. Particular new areas
of focus in 2.0 are maintenance and reuse of RAD applications.
The consortium intends to introduce more metrics into DSDM 3.0
and to spend 1996 catching up on what RAD projects its members
are undertaking.

So what constitutes the DSDM development lifecycle? Let's take a
look at the diagram on page 19. The dark arrows show the transfer
points from one phase of the lifecycle into the next, while the
light arrows show the points where development can easily return
to an earlier phase. Fundamental to the DSDM approach is that
"nothing is built perfectly first time, but that 80% of the
solution can be produced in 20% of the time it would take to
produce the total solution." In comparison to the traditional
waterfall approach to development which assumes that each stage
in development is completed before the next is embarked upon,
DSDM assumes that you can always revisit previous steps and
indeed suggests that "the current step need be completed only
enough to move to the next step." At this point we should stress
the importance of configuration management (CM). The DSDM 2.0
manual reminds us: "A DSDM development environment can represent
a very chaotic situation. Various areas of functionality may be
in the process of development at any point in time. Within each
area of development, different cycles of iteration are in
progress. Differing versions of the final system may be installed
at multiple sites, many being geographically widely located.
Configuration management is vitally important to ensure the
project does not degenerate into anarchy. Wherever possible,
configuration management should be automated."

Returning to the DSDM lifecycle. You begin with the Feasibility
Phase which considers both the feasibility of the project and the
suitability of DSDM and should take no more than a couple of
weeks. Next is the Business Study, probably of one to two weeks
duration, where you determine the business functions that will be
supported by your new system. The consortium stresses that the
lines aren't so clearcut in real life as the diagram suggests and
that there can be blurring between the different areas, ie, you
may choose to combine the Feasibility and Business Study phases.
The main part of the lifecycle comes in two iterative prototyping
cycles, the first concentrating on eliciting requirements and the
second ensuring the prototypes are sufficiently well engineered.
The implementation phase marks the handover of the system to
users, along with training them up and determining future
development requirements.

Why do we at Software Futures think that the activity of the DSDM
consortium is important? Well, RAD's been around since the mid-
1980s as one of those hot to trot technologies that users are
supposed to get really excited about. But when you get down to
basics, it's more often one of those "anything you want it to be"
acronyms... in other words, not very useful. The consortium
itself contends that vendors have offered users very little help
about how to manage RAD projects; instead, they've tended to
merely talk up the capabilities of their individual tools. This
has led to mucho confusion, with corporates often blaming a tool
for a poor system instead of the developers who never bothered to
canvass end user needs before building the wretched thing.

The DSDM 2.0 manual contains a couple of valuable caveats about
RAD tool usage. Namely, "The inexperienced tool purchaser should
be aware of imposters. Many toolset vendors are rebadging
existing toolsets as new RAD tools. In practice the functionality
provided is very limited. In most cases, the tools support only
rapid program development, which is only a small subset of RAD."
Obviously, it would be too politically sensitive for the
Consortium itself to actually name names, but it does produce a
list of 15 characteristics to which a RAD tool should conform.
UK-based research organization Bloor Research is planning a RAD
tools report based on these characteristics, to be published
later this year.

The consortium advises, "When selecting a DSDM support
environment, it is important first of all to decide on your
development process, then select the techniques which support
your process and then decide on the required level of tool
support. Many organizations fail to achieve the most from their
support tools by buying the tools first." It also suggests that
development teams should be skilled in using RAD tools well
before embarking on a critical project.

So let's hear from one of the early adopters of DSDM version 1.0,
The Boston Globe, the leading quality newspaper in the Boston,
Massachusetts region and most of the most respected US print
journalism titles, with a daily circulation of 500,000 copies.
This user is particularly interesting, given that DSDM is at
present largely a UK phenomenon. Ever ambitious, the consortium
wants to evangelize the message worldwide. "The UK has a
reasonable reputation in that we created methodologies in the
first place. But we're very concerned not to go and impose DSDM
on another country. We're seeking people to kick start operations
elsewhere." So says Nick Gill, manager, methods & tools,
applications and systems integration services at Olivetti UK
based in London and chairman of the DSDM's promotional workgroup.
There are already affiliate organizations in Australia, France,
Holland and Belgium and interest has been expressed in launching
DSDM in Scandinavia and the US. Gill expects DSDM to be
introduced in Russia next month.

Back to The Globe. It needed to be able the track the production
of the newspaper, to be able to know at which stage individual
pages were, ie, if they were ready for printing or still needed
headlines or captions to be added. Initially the paper's prepress
software supplier Atex together with an unnamed software vendor
tried over the course of 18 months to create such a tracker
system. "They built a Macintosh Quark extension. It was trying to
force us into a round hole. I was writing criticisms and
suggestions that were largely ignored. It was as though they were
trying to wait us out," Paul McGeary, systems editor at The
Boston Globe told us. The system, developed in isolation from the
editorial staff that would use it, was ultimately never
implemented. "It wasn't that the information on the pages wasn't
there. It was that it was inaccessible to the casual user," he
adds.

It was at this time that UK systems integrator and DSDM
consortium member Sysdeco came into the picture. Since it had
acquired Atex, it was a natural choice for The Globe to go with
the company for development of the Tracker system.

So what was it like working the DSDM way with Sysdeco? McGeary
enthuses, "They wanted to know about our processes. They had a
generic tool, Systemator, that was very customizable and were
using a standard database and interface tools. It's a fruitful
working relationship. Their people have an office in the
building, I meet them every day. They code all day and I test it
at night. They're very prompt in making changes. The give and
take attitude really moves things along," He describes how the
Sysdeco people came and sat at the newsdesk and observed how The
Globe's editorial staff worked from 3pm to midnight in order to
get a handle on how Tracker needed to work.

"We have a 120-page newspaper to get out," McGeary explains. "Our
first deadline is at 10.30pm and then we have repeat deadlines
until 3am. We need to monitor the pages as the night goes on and
give the person managing the flow, the night editor, a sense of
where the problems are. We need to know at 8pm if there's a
problem; between 8pm and 10pm we can solve it. We literally do
most of our work in the last hour. We're working in a very
compressed amount of time. It's really a matter of minutes and
seconds."

The Tracker system puts each page on a clock and after a certain
period of time, an alarm will go off, alerting the editor to the
fact that there's a problem. It could be that something's missing
from a page or simply that someone's forgotten about it and
neglected to push it on to the next stage. Sysdeco and The Globe
are currently working on developing an electronic thumbnail of
each page. "What's crucial to the speed of the project and
understanding and efficiency is the constant interchange of ideas
between us and Sysdeco," McGeary says.

The Tracker project took six months from The Globe's first
meeting with Sysdeco in late February 1995 until the paper had a
usable product in early September, with three months of actual
coding. Interestingly, it formed a neat comparison between
traditional waterfall methods and the DSDM RAD approach. Sysdeco
ran two development projects for Tracker. One was creating a
background database demon to update the database, and the other
was developing a user interface so that the night editor could
easily see the status of the pages. The database demon used the
waterfall technique, the user interface tried the DSDM approach.
Looking at metrics, the DSDM project produced double the number
of function points compared with the waterfall approach, and
performed in terms of function points per man month three times
better than the traditional project.

As we've seen the DSDM approach can significantly improve some
end user organizations' understanding of how to direct their RAD
development efforts, as well as putting in place good business
practice for future projects. What RAD technology has always
needed is some common sense rules and with DSDM, finally we have
it. Take this comment from a customer to their software house
quoted in the DSDM 2.0 manual as an able demonstration of this
fact: "About now, I would be worrying about what you (the
software house) were up to. With DSDM I know." What greater
recommendation do you need?




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                     MY OWN PRIVATE I-WAY

Gary Flood reviews Bill Gates' new book on the Information
Highway, "The Road Ahead"

Something's wrong with this list, and I wonder if you can point
out the mistake to a certain William Gates, III, an entrepreneur
currently building a house for himself and his new bride near
Seattle: Apple, Compaq, DEC, HP, IBM, and Intel.

Splendid companies all, as we know, and all important in their
respective ways to the start of the Personal Computer revolution
that made Mr Gates the richest man in the US. However, they have
not that much to do with the ostensible subject of the Microsoft
supremo's first book, The Road Ahead, the information highway,
yet their names come up time and time again.

For in all of this 286 page book we hear a lot about Bill's first
computer program (written when he was 13), his friendship with
Paul Allen, playing poker at Harvard, the extremely sanitized
view of how he played around with the grownups at IBM, PCs (why
they're cool and why everyone should have one), wallet PCs, PC
set-top boxes, PC software in general, and some stuff about what
the Highway might be like. But completely absent are the words
"Netscape," "Sun," and "Java." Silicon Graphics gets one name
check in the rather poor index while Oracle, the tribe following
Bill's rival software chieftain and I-Way contender Larry
Ellison, which is at least mentioned en passant, gets precisely
none.

Since 1995 has seen the supernova appearance of Netscape
Communications (not to omit Spyglass or Apache), the surge of
interest in Sun's Java and the endless debate about whether
Microsoft's Network (MSN) would destroy America On-Line and
Compuserve at a stroke - not to mention the forbidden merger
talks with Intuit (no, it's not mentioned either) - this is
somewhat of a partisan map of the Infobahn landscape. Come to
think of it, CNN gets talked about while NBC, in which Gates just
invested $220m, is blanked.

So don't pick up The Road Ahead expecting the full unbiased
vision thing (check out Daniel Burstein and David Kline's Road
Warriors instead). No, what we have here is more than a curious
experiment in vanity publishing. This is not John F Kennedy's
Pulitzer Prize-winning Profiles In Courage (which he didn't write
either), or not even a work as monumentally bad as Mussolini's
play about Napoleon, an item far from being a suggestive insight
into a great leader's secret soul like Winston Churchill's
paintings.

This is Bill at his most down-home, gosh-gee, American Everyman
(the prose is real written-by-committee stuff) telling the world
in the clearest words for those who read between the lines: I did
it once, you saps, and I'm gonna do it all over again. Outta my
I-Way!

"My focus is to keep Microsoft in the forefront through constant
renewal," writes Bill. "It's a little scary that as computer
technology has moved ahead there's never been a leader from one
era who was also a leader in the next. Microsoft has been a
leader in the PC era. So from a historical perspective, I guess
Microsoft is disqualified from leading in the highway era of the
Information Age. But I want to defy historical tradition.
Somewhere ahead is the threshold dividing the PC era from the
highway era. I want to be among the first to cross over when that
moment comes. I think the tendency for successful companies to
fail to innovate is just that: a tendency... I never anticipated
Microsoft's growing so large, and now... I unexpectedly find
myself a part of the establishment. My goal is to prove that a
successful corporation can renew itself and stay in the
forefront."

Hence Bill spends the first three chapters attempting to convince
the mass of Joe Q Public readers, who don't know (or care) where
the computer industry bodies are buried, that he and his buddy
Paul started the PC thing, which seems to have done rather well,
and that lightning will most emphatically strike twice. "If you
want to know how the race to build the information highway is
going, keep your eye on PCs connected to the Internet," he
solemnly advises. "At least that's what I'm going to do."

So the "information appliance" concept is simply written out of
Bill's future history; it's the PC that will bring the Highway to
us, not some pipsqueak 9,000 line program (as he dismissed
Netscape recently, according to US economist and technology
commentator George Gilder).

Gilder gives us the best summing up of Bill's book that I've
heard so far. Bill is seen on Annie Leibovitz's front cover snap
in a cuddly sweater standing on an empty road somewhere. "So
there's Bill standing in the middle of the road ahead trying to
persuade the world that he's not missed the bus. He's out there,
and he's going to catch it someday!"

This book is a good introduction for plain folks and works fine
that way. For other readers it will provoke a raised eyebrow or
two, but that's not the point. This is Bill's raspberry to the
punks who think he's falling behind, and deserves very careful
scrutiny in the offices of all I-Way companies.

"The Road Ahead," by Bill Gates, Nathan Myhrvold and Peter
Rinearson. Viking/Penguin, 1995, ISBN 0-670-77289-5, pp286 with
companion CD-ROM. $29.95 (US).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                         INPUT/OUTPUT

                DOES APPLE HAVE A CORE ANY MORE?

Like hyenas cackling around a fatally injured animal, the likes
of IBM and HP have been circling around the sick bed of Apple.
But what, on the software side, does the company really have to
offer a potential buyer?

Whatever Apple may say about Windows 95 being a pale imitation of
the Macintosh operating system, no one really cares any more.
Microsoft walked off with the desktop market in its pocket years
back and only Apple and IBM would argue any different. And, who's
the largest supplier of Mac applications? None other than the
lovable Redmond Rampager, which could (not so lovingly) dump the
product line any time it chooses.

Elsewhere, we've seen IBM, like a spurned suitor, giving Apple
back the fruits of their joint foray into multimedia, Kaleida;
while their object endeavor Taligent has wound up as an IBM
subsidiary. Both ventures were mega money pits and have still to
hit pay dirt, if indeed, they ever do. Other Apple work on
developing applications for its unsuccessful Newton PDA has also
yet to prove sellable.

The most likely bidder at the Apple auction is IBM - after all,
it still has several billion dollars left in its acquisitions war
chest. A few years back, when IBM first attempted to buy Apple,
the prognosis was not good. Wits came up with the joke, "What do
you get if you cross IBM with Apple?" The punchline, as newly Big
Blue-assimilated Lotus found out to its cost all too chillingly
recently is, "IBM."

Many top execs at Apple are reputedly in favor of selling the
company. In fact, that's the reason behind so many of them
quitting. But CEO Michael Spindler is holding firm and refusing
to jump the sinking ship. Maybe Apple should, as Oracle's Larry
Ellison suggested earlier this year, sell off its hardware
business, and concentrate on what it's good at, developing
software and hardware technology. He believes an Apple
unencumbered by the Mac would be perfect for designing his
"network computer." Can Apple save itself before it's swallowed
whole by one of those hyenas? Or is it doomed to become the
favored MBS term paper in ten years' time: How Apple Flubbed It -
Big Time?

Clare Haney




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                       NEWS AT A GLANCE

                            INDUSTRY

* Farmington Hills, Michigan-based Compuware Corp will upgrade
its Uniface application development environment in the first
quarter. Over a year on from acquiring the Dutch eponymous
software company, some might say this is overdue. Compuware says
version 6.2 will include new model entities, features and
extensions to accommodate additional forms, reports
andapplication objects. Upper CASE tools will also be able to
transfer design work into Uniface automatically, the company
claims.It adds that 6.2 incorporates the canonical four object
techniques (abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance and
polymorphism, class!). The company also plans to introduce
dynamic partitioning by the end of 1996, which will include its
EcoTools distributed management performance software.

* Umang Gupta has had to fall on his sword to save what's left of
his company. The start of the year found the ex-Oracle founder
announcing his departure from his once eponymous company (to be
renamed the anonymous Centura Software). New head Sam Inman (who
has been jointly running the company since April) took the
opportunity to push through a 17% headcount reduction (taking
staff numbers down to 330) and it will also have to take a
restructuring charge of $9m for the quarter. We at Software
Futures were surprised - mainly because we'd been so sure it
would fall to stakeholder Computer Associates instead.

* Howls of protest were heard throughout the Valley at President
Clinton's decision to veto a widely-supported bill to curb the
number of lawsuits hi-tech companies have to face from supposedly
irate shareholders each time they have a poor quarter. The
American Electronics Association notes in its angry statement
after the last minute blockage that this is a $2.4bn quasi-
industry, which benefits lawyers reaping a third of that figure.

* The Object Management Group took its recent emphasis on
vertical markets to retune itself along such lines: and as a
result its technology request process will be exanded to include
business applications as well as underlying infrastructure
software. The body now also claims an impressive 555 members - of
whom only 103 have full voting rights, however.

* Now how's about this for responsible behaviour? A Spanish
student called Alvaro Martinez spotted a weak point in the
Internet connection of his prime minister, Felipe Gonzalez. But
rather than egregiously misbehaving, the 23-year old called the
authorities to point out the danger, and then preceded to
volunteer to come and fix it. Glad to hear that not all hackers
are irresponsible clowns, we wish him Feliz Navidad!

                            BUSINESS

* Just exactly how many people are on the Internet - 25, 30, 40
million? According to what's claimed to be the first
statistically defensible study of Internet users, the whole of
the USA only contains 5.8 million real users. The study, put
together by Internet veterans O'Reilly and Associates and Trish
Information Services, polled 29,901 individuals, giving a
sampling error of less than 1% it's claimed. The previous dearth
of hard data is highlighted by the fact that the company got
funding from International Thompson Publishing, IBM/Lotus, Turner
Broadcast Systems/CNN, MCI/News Corp Online Ventures and a few
others who might reasonably want real data. The study defined
'Internet users' as people of 18 years of age or over who have
direct access to the Net and use email, as well as one or more
Internet-specific applications, such as FTP, gopher, telnet or a
Web browser. Thus people who connected via a commercial online
service aren't included in that six million. The company predicts
that the total online population will grow to 15.7 million; the
number of pure online-service users is reckoned to remain
constant at 3.9 million, with a further 6 million using both
online and Internet services and 5.8 million using nothing but
direct Internet feeds.

* Just prior to the holidays (could that timing be a
coincidence?) Taligent Inc's fate was sealed, with the ill-fated
joint venture rolling back into IBM and becoming a subsidiary
called the Taligent Object Technology Center. More than half of
its 400-odd staff will be laid off, with the rest continuing to
operate out of its premises in Cupertino, California. Its other
two investors, Apple and Hewlett-Packard, will continue to have
rights to the unit's CommonPoint technology, though only IBM has
displayed any real enthusiasm for the C++ system.To the amusement
of our sister paper Unigram.X, a HP spokesperson claimed the
company had met all reasearch goals expected from Taligent - but
was flummoxed because the piece of paper they were reading from
didn't list what those goals might have been...

* Hats off to Buzz! Pixar Animation Studios Inc has repaid
bigtime for Steve Jobs - its IPO made him a paper billionaire for
the first time, with his stake valued at $1.2bn on the first day
close - more than his Apple shares were ever worth while he was
there! And that for a firm bought for an estimated $10m, but in
which admittedly he went on to invest at least $50m. Pixar
created its own cluster of 117 Sun 20 workstations - 87 duals and
30 four-processor models, to handle the rendering of each of the
114,000 frames in the 77-minute Toy Story epic. Expect
parallelised versions of its software for Sparc and Solaris
architectures.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet
January 01, 1996

                          UK PRODUCTS

                       BROWSING ASYMETRIX

Bellevue, Washington-based Windows multimedia and client/server
tools vendor Asymetrix has announced a new database browser Info
Assistant. The company claims the software "replaces arcane
database terminology with plain language commands." Primarily
aimed at large corporates in multi-user environments, Info
Assistant is designed to help users of complex databases - Oracle
7, Sybase SQL Server 10, Microsoft SQL Server and Borland's
dBase, Paradox and InterBase - extract information in the form
they require. It uses the Borland Database Engine to obtain
direct access to the database systems. In addition, users can
import data from Excel, Lotus 1-2-3 and Quattro Pro spreadsheets,
or text files. The browser is a 32-bit Windows 95 application,
compatible with industry standards such as MAPI, OLE and ODBC. It
consists of four elements: Fact Browser, Query Generation,
Analysis and Presentation Views and Integration with popular
office suite software. Info Assistant is available from UK value
added distributor ICS Solutions initially at an introductory
price of #349 plus VAT for at least the first three months of
this year. Thereafter the price will be #545 plus VAT and you can
reach ICS on (01256) 469 460.

                     LBMS' SYSTEMS ENGINEER

Now fully settled in its new home of Houston, Texas, former UK
CASE company LBMS is shipping the latest version of its flagship
product Systems Engineer (SE) Version 6.1. This is a
client/server analysis and design tool for workgroup-based
application development. Optimised for Windows 95, the tool
contains design objects with what the company describes as a rich
set of properties beyond their standard name and textual
description for easy editing in a tabsheet approach. This means
users can now view and edit all properties of an object in one
window. The software incorporates OLE linkage through the
repository, enabling any SE object to be linked in any OLE-
capable application, including email, word processing and drawing
packages. Along with the Windows 95 enhancements, the CASE vendor
claims that the new features will simplify object creation and
editing, reduce the number of key strokes for users and improve
integration with other desktop tools. Speaking of third party
products, Systems Engineer Version 6.1 works with leading 4GL
tools including Microsoft's Visual Basic and Sybase's
PowerBuilder. Supported databases include DB/2, Oracle, Sybase
and Microsoft SQL Server. In terms of platform requirements, the
tool needs Windows 95, 3.1 or NT for the client workstation and
DOS, OS/2, NetWare 3.x and 4.x and Windows NT 3.5x for the
SE/Repository server. TCP/IP workstation connectivity is
supported for NT servers. Systems Engineer Version 6.1 costs
#3,000 per user. If you require further information, please feel
free to contact Pete Stone at LBMS on (0171) 878 8762.

                    SEEING IN FOUR DIMENSIONS

Just when you thought the Windows client/server database market
must be fully saturated with the likes of Access, Approach and
Paradox, along comes another would-be entrant. Already dominant
in the Macintosh rdbms arena (according to Newsweek, it has 75%
of the worldwide market), software vendor ACI wants a piece of
the Windows piece. To this end, it has launched 4D Server 1.5,
its client/server relational database which now supports both the
Windows and Mac environments. 4D Server is the multi-user version
of 4th Dimension, ACI's platform-independent relational database
solution. The company claims that 4D Server 1.5 manages team
development simply and logically by acting as an application
server as well as a data server and can automatically control
object locking and version control by check in/check out
capabilities. The database ships with 4D Backup which allows full
backup and restore, logfiles and logfile restoration and
mirroring to a range of media. Both 4D Server 1.5 for Macintosh
and Windows come with two clients at a cost of #995. Existing 4D
Server uses can upgrade to the new Mac version for #395 or to the
Windows release for #795. Additional user licences can be added
in units of 1, 5 or 10 by purchasing expansion disks. If you need
more data, please ring ACI UK on (01625) 536 178.

                    FIREWALLING THE INTERNET

European network connectivity specialist Integralis,
headquartered in Theale, near Reading, Berkshire, has released a
new version of one of its Internet security products. Checkpoint
Firewall-1 version 2.0 features multiple encryption schemes
including FWZ1, a proprietary algorithm which allows
organisations to encrypt all communications. The application's
address translation capabilities enable companies to leverage a
small number of registered IP addresses into multiple
connections. Organisations can use this for day-to-day Internet
correspondence which reduces reliance on public telecoms or
expensive leased lines. The software provides comprehensive
remote connectivity for all TCP, UDP and RPC applications,
supporting standard smart cards or soft key solutions, such as
Security Dynamics SecureID. Supported platforms include SunOS
4.1.3 and Solaris 2.4 for Sparc, Intel 80x86 and Pentium-based
systems, along with HP-9000 workstations and servers running HP-
UX. Firewall-1 version 2.0 is available from Integralis priced
from around #4,000. If you require further details, please
contact Paula Irvine at Integralis on (01734) 306 060.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>