
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B31-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B011-48</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec79.html 205.156.212.5 19970114214816 text/html 23127
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:46:06 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:07 GMT
Content-length: 22940
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec79.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COMPUTER WORKSTATIONS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES BROAD RANGE&nbsp;OF ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(580 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>HIGH-PERFORMANCE TECHNICAL COMPUTING MADE AFFORDABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(964 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>VIDEO CODEC CHIP BRINGS QUALITY VIDEO AUTHORING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(662 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>ROBERT IANNUCCI NAMED CAMBRIDGE RESEARCH LAB DIRECTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER WORKSTATIONS via NewsNet
January 1996

TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX

Texas Instruments (TI) Software will begin shipments of
Composer for Digital Equipment Corporation's Digital UNIX.
Texas Instruments Software's Composer is a market-leading
component-based development tool for client/server application
development.  Standards-compliant, high-performance Digital
UNIX is the industry's leading 64-bit UNIX operating system.

The combination of Composer and Digital UNIX provides the
maximum performance, modularity and scalability available in
the client/server application development market today. With
Composer, users can design, develop and deploy flexible
client/server applications that allow maximum use of computing
resources regardless of the client/server architecture. In
combination with Digital UNIX, Composer gives users the high
performance needed to run client/server applications in a UNIX
environment. Applications developed with Composer can be
deployed on the Digital's Alpha* workstation running Digital
UNIX or OpenVMS*.

"Digital UNIX offers Composer customers an industry standard
high-performance UNIX operating system that lets them move
today to the next generation of open computing," said Susan
Morgan, alliance manager for Texas Instruments Software. "This
TI and Digital solution enables customers to develop and
deploy client/server applications in a reliable, distributed
environment where top transaction processing performance is a
must and customers can be assured of scalability that meets
business growth needs," Morgan added.

"We're pleased that TI has decided to port its market-leading
application development tool to Digital UNIX," said Mark
Silverberg, UNIX product marketing manager at Digital
Equipment Corporation.

"The combination of Composer, Digital UNIX and 64-bit Alpha
platforms provides users with the ideal combination of
flexible tools and robust power to develop mission-critical
client/server applications."

The Implementation Toolset module of Composer will be
available for Digital UNIX. This module, which ensures the
automation of the compilation, linking and installation of
Composer-developed applications, allows migration of the
developed code to the target deployment system.

As part of its strategy to provide customers with many
development and implementation options for software
applications, Texas Instruments Software provides Composer for
a broad range of operating systems. In addition to Digital
UNIX, these operating systems include Digital OpenVMS, IBM
MVS, Tandem NonStop Kernel, Tandem NonStop-UX, Hewlett-Packard
HP-UX, IBM AIX, Sun Solaris, Sequent Dynix/ptx, Pyramid
DC/OSx, Siemens/Nixdorf SINIX, AT&T GIS SVR4, Microsoft
Windows 3.1 and NT, and OS/2.

For information on U.S. pricing and availability call (800)
838-1843.

About Texas Instruments Software

Texas Instruments Software is the market leader in software
application development and assembly tools and services for
department and organization-wide implementation of
client/server technology. Texas Instruments Software is a
division of Texas Instruments Incorporated (NYSE:TXN), a
high-technology company headquartered in Dallas, Texas, with
sales or manufacturing operations in more than 30 countries.

For more information on Texas Instruments Software and its
products, please visit the division's World Wide Web site at
http://www.ti.com/software/software.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER WORKSTATIONS via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES BROAD RANGE
OF ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS

Digital Equipment Corporation has demonstrated its complete
family of Alpha-and Intel-based systems, all delivering
exceptional performance, running the industry's leading
Mechanical Design Automation (MDA) software applications at
Autofact '95.

"AlphaStation workstations are the world's best in performance
and offer customers a choice of leading 2D and 3D graphics
options and three operating systems -- Digital UNIX, Windows
NT, and OpenVMS. The workstations allow for real productivity
breakthroughs in MDA. Digital's new line of personal
workstations, from Intel- based models through to Alpha-based
models, are economically priced NT-based solutions and offer
easy CISC-to-RISC migration," said Herb Shumway, vice
president of Digital's Software Partner Group. "Digital's
complete range of workstations and servers deliver customers
the best performance at every key price point, providing
design engineers with the power they need for complex models."

Running Circles Around the Competition

Competitive MDA application benchmark demos in Digital's booth
will show the outstanding performance of AlphaStation
workstations. EDS Unigraphics and Pro/ENGINEER applications
demonstrated in the booth will run almost three times faster
on an AlphaStation 600 5/300 workstation than on SGI Indigo 2
R4400/200 and Sun SPARC station 20/71 workstations, and almost
twice as fast as an HP 9000 J210 workstation.

In addition, the Bentley MicroStation CADbench benchmark
running on the AlphaStation 600 5/266 workstation, and on the
Alpha XL 266, Celebris XL 5133, and Celebris XL 6150 Personal
Workstations, will demonstrate the range of systems available
from Digital -- both Intel-based and Alpha-based -- that run
popular Windows NT applications.

Leading MDA Applications Perform Best on Alpha-based Systems

Leading MDA software vendors are demonstrating their products
running on Alpha systems in their own booths, including,
Autodesk, Bentley, Matra Datavision, and SolidWorks, among
others. The following Digital Business Partners will be
demonstrating their application software in Digital's booth:

o ANSYS, Inc. -- ANSYS 5.2 is a multi-purpose design analysis
software for engineers who want multi-purpose finite element
analysis with versatile design analysis and optimization
capabilities.

o Bentley Systems, Inc. -- MicroStation with Modeler
MicroStation Masterpiece is a feature-based parametric solids
modeler and high-end engineering visualization software that
includes ray tracing and animation.

o CIMLOGIC, Inc. -- Toolbox is a set of application tools that
enhances AutoCAD and Designer and performs a number of
functions including 2D and 3D design, detailing, and
dimensioning. The company develops and markets design
automation and drafting annotation applications for AutoCAD.

o Computervision -- Optegra, TDM-Lite for Microsoft Windows NT
is a cost-effective way to bring the benefits of data
management to PC users. It is a member of Computervision's
Optegra enterprise data management family.

o EDS Unigraphics -- Unigraphics is complete CAD/CAM/CAE
software solutions and services that enable optimal individual
productivity, comprehensive design through manufacturing, true
collaborative engineering, and advanced process automation.

o MacNeal-Schwendler Corporation -- MAC/PATRAN and MSC/NASTRAN
is leading analysis software.

o Parametric Technology -- Pro/ENGINEER is a parametric,
feature-based solid modeling system for the design-through-
documentation of mechanical parts and assemblies.

Pro/MECHANICA is design optimization software for easy
evaluation of design form, fit, and function.

o SolidWorks Corporation -- SolidWorks 95 is the first
production-level solid modeling system to be built
specifically for Windows NT.

Digital Equipment Corporation is the world's leader in open
client/server solutions from personal computing to integrated
worldwide information systems. Digital's scalable Alpha
platforms, storage, networking, software and services,
together with industry- focused solutions from business
partners, help organizations compete and win in today's global
marketplace. ####



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER WORKSTATIONS via NewsNet
January 1996

HIGH-PERFORMANCE TECHNICAL COMPUTING MADE AFFORDABLE

Digital Equipment Corporation has announced new technology --
PCI Memory Channel interconnect -- that enables its highly
scalable AlphaServer systems to deliver new levels of
affordability and price/performance for the technical
computing market. Digital has showcased these new capabilities
in an array of eight AlphaServer 8400 systems with a total of
96 Alpha 64-bit processors running 64-bit Digital UNIX.

Digital makes high performance affordable for compute-
intensive, technical applications such as computational fluid
dynamics, computational chemistry, weather modeling, and
molecular and genetics research. Digital delivers outstanding
price/ performance by taking advantage of standard,
high-volume, low-cost components including a high-speed
interconnect and optimized software. As each processor
delivers 600 MFLOPS, a 96 processor system delivers 57.6
GFLOPS of computing power -- for only $4.5 million.

This combination of affordable price and high performance
enables a wide variety of users to attain performance levels
previously available only with expensive, specialized
supercomputers. Users who would never have been able to afford
supercomputer-class power can now do so with Digital's
systems.

"Digital is making high-performance computing affordable for
more applications than ever before," said Dr. Michael Levine,
scientific director, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center. "We're
finding that Digital's approach to connecting AlphaServers is
elegantly simple, and both very powerful and very cost
effective. We can connect AlphaServers of different sizes,
which is important to us because it enables us to match our
systems and applications most efficiently. We're currently
using the system for molecular dynamics, visualization, finite
element and simulated annealing code, and think this
technology prepares us for the future of high-performance
computing."

"Digital's new scalable AlphaServer 8400 array offers a
preview of the next generation in enterprise supercomputing,"
said Gary Smaby, president, Smaby Group, Inc. "By linking
dozens of its blazingly fast Alpha microprocessors through a
robust memory interconnect architecture, Digital has
constructed a mainframe-class computing platform for high-end
technical users tackling applications that benefit from
parallel processing. The system leverages the cost benefits of
commodity componentry to deliver a compelling
price/performance alternative to traditional supercomputers
and MPPs."

Standards-based Commodity Components for Outstanding
Performance and Affordability

Digital delivers these new levels of price/performance by
leveraging commodity hardware and software components. A
standards- based PCI bus Memory Channel interconnect is used
to link multiple AlphaServer systems. This low-latency (less
than 5 microseconds), high-bandwidth (100 Mbytes/sec)
interconnect provides high-speed, memory-to-memory
communications among up to eight AlphaServer 8400 systems,
which allows the multiple systems to operate essentially as a
single system with 57.6 GFLOPS of power. The Memory Channel
interconnect can also link lower-cost AlphaServer 2000
systems for extremely cost-effective high-performance
solutions.

Digital also provides a suite of software tools that allows
technical users to optimize their applications for the new
technology. The software includes:

o Digital UNIX, the industry's only 64-bit UNIX operating
system, which provides greater standards-compliance and higher
performance than any other available UNIX operating system.

o High Performance Fortran (HPF), which allows the arrayed
systems to be programmed as easily as a single system. HPF
automatically optimizes communications among processors for
maximum performance and allows the system to be easily scaled
for a variable number of processors.

o Parallel Software Environment (PSE), which provides the
runtimes for HPF, and performance analysis and debugging tools
for developing parallel applications.

o Digital PVM (Parallel Virtual Machine), an enhanced version
of public domain PVM, which facilitates the creation of
parallel applications.

o MPI (Message Passing Interface), software developed with
Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre, which enables users to
create parallel applications for these systems using an
optimized version of the industry-standard software for
message passing.

Digital's use of these standards-based, off-the-shelf hardware
and software components allow it to deliver systems that are
lower cost, easier to expand and simpler to program than
competitive systems.

"Digital is the leading provider of high-performance UNIX
solutions, as demonstrated by the industry's first
implementation of 64-bit UNIX in 1993, our Very Large Memory
systems last spring, and now the new level of price and
performance of arrayed systems," said Pauline Nist, vice
president, AlphaServer Business Segment, Digital Equipment
Corp. "Through our Technical Solutions Initiative, we have the
high-level expertise to deliver solutions that meet the unique
needs of users in the technical segment. The technology in
these AlphaServer arrays leverages the fastest processors,
the best interconnect, proven, shipping, software and low-cost
commodity components to deliver the best available
high-performance solutions for technical computing."

Digital's Very Large Memory (VLM) technology dramatically
improves application performance by increasing the amount of
information that can be stored in memory. Digital is the only
company delivering high-performance 64-bit servers,
AlphaServer systems, and a 64-bit operating system, Digital
UNIX, which together make VLM64 possible. Whereas 32-bit
systems are limited to 2 Gbytes of memory, AlphaServer 8400
systems can store up to 14 Gbytes of data in memory, for fast
access to large amount of data.

Digital's Technical Solutions Initiative provides customers in
engineering and scientific environments with complete
application solutions.

Through the Technical Solutions Initiative, Digital provides
AlphaStation and AlphaServer customers in mechanical design
and analysis, electronic design and analysis, geographic
information systems, technical CASE and science and research
with industry- leading application performance and
price-performance advantages.

Pricing and Availability

The hardware and software components in the AlphaServer array
will be available in January, 1996. The AlphaServer 8400
array with 96 processors; 4 gigabytes of memory; 32 gigabytes
of disk space; PCI Memory Channel interconnect; Digital UNIX,
HPF, PSE and Digital PVM is priced at $4.5 million. Other
complete configurations begin at $70,000, such as a system
with an AlphaServer 2000 array with 2 processors; 256 Mbytes
of memory; 4 gigabytes of disk space; PCI Memory Channel
interconnect; Digital UNIX, HPF, PSE and Digital PVM.

More information is available at
http://www.digital.com/info/hpc/hpc.html.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER WORKSTATIONS via NewsNet
January 1996

VIDEO CODEC CHIP BRINGS QUALITY VIDEO AUTHORING

Digital Equipment Corporation has announced a powerful, new
video coder/decoder (codec) chip that delivers high-quality,
30-frames-per-second (fps) video compression and decompression
for desktop PCs. The PCI-based 21230 codec chip puts
affordable video authoring and video conferencing on a wide
range of platforms based on Pentium, Alpha, and PowerPC
microprocessors.

Ed Caldwell, vice president, Digital Semiconductor, a Digital
Equipment Corporation business, said, "With the 21230 video
chip, PC vendors can deliver affordable capability on the
desktop for creating and using video-enhanced presentations,
interactive training, video conferencing, on-line monitoring,
and other forms of multimedia communication."

Video Compression Essential

Susan Yost, Digital Semiconductor's multimedia marketing
manager, called image compression/decompression "essential" to
reduce the heavy data storage and bandwidth demands of video
applications.

"Video authoring and video conferencing need a video codec
that not only compresses data efficiently, but delivers
high-quality video that accurately represents the original
material. And they need it in real time," she said.

"The 21230 chip is the first video codec to meet this
challenge at an affordable price," Yost continued. "The 21230
video chip implements state-of-the-art compression and
filtering techniques that provide efficient data compression,
exceptional image quality, and realtime performance. In
addition, as a PCI-based, single-chip implementation, it is
designed and priced for the PC market."

According to Peter Hess, manager of OEM development for FAST
Electronic US, Inc., a manufacturer of multimedia products,
"The 21230 chip is capable of encoding video and audio data
from tapes and laser disks into MPEG-1 format in real time for
storage and playback on digital compact disks."

Video Chip, CPU Work Together

Designed as a coprocessor, the 21230 chip takes advantage of
host CPU computing resources while concentrating on codec core
processes to achieve maximal functionality in a cost-effective
package.

The superior image quality of the 21230 video chip reflects
the product's sophisticated filtering, motion estimation, and
scene characterization capabilities, which enable optimal
video compression and decompression for excellent image
sharpness.

The chip interfaces directly to the PCI local bus and features
glueless interfaces to industry-standard NTSC and PAL
decoders, audio digital signal processors (DSPs), optional
peripherals, and external memory, greatly simplifying system
and board design processes.

Supports Video, Audio Standards

For video authoring, the 21230 chip supports MPEG-1
IB(B)P-frame and I-frame standards from constrained bit rates
(1.15 Mb/s) to higher bit rates. For video conferencing
applications, it implements the H.261 video compression
standard for H.320 video conferencing. In addition, the 21230
codec chip is architecturally compatible with the H.263
standard for H.324 POTS video conferencing. The chip also
offers resolution and format flexibility to satisfy customers'
specific needs.

Mikhael Haidar, general manager, Software and Systems
Technology Division at Analog Devices, Inc., said, "We have
worked cooperatively with Digital Semiconductor to provide our
industry- leading family of audio DSPs and codecs to complete
the audio subsystem of the 21230 solution," Haidar said. "This
combination furnishes outstanding multimedia capabilities for
desktop PCs at the lowest cost."

Pricing and Availability

Digital Semiconductor's 21230 video codec coprocessor chip is
priced at $75 in quantities of 10,000. Volume shipment is
scheduled for spring 1996.

The 21230 chip will be packaged with software drivers,
libraries and utilities for Windows 95 and Window NT to
expedite development on standard consumer platforms. An
evaluation board, documentation and supporting software also
will be available from Digital early in 1996 to help board and
system suppliers to design the 21230 chip into their products
quickly.

Digital Semiconductor, a Digital Equipment Corporation
business headquartered in Hudson, Massachusetts, designs,
manufactures and markets industry-leading semiconductor
products including Alpha microprocessors and PCI chips for
networking, bridging, and graphics/multimedia, as well as
low-power StrongARM microprocessors under license from
Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. Digital Semiconductor operates
design centers in Hudson; Palo Alto, California; Austin,
Texas; and Jerusalem, Israel. A new, $450-million fabrication
facility in Hudson will begin revenue production in 1996.
Mitsubishi Electric Company is a second source for Alpha
microprocessors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COMPUTER WORKSTATIONS via NewsNet
January 1996

ROBERT IANNUCCI NAMED CAMBRIDGE RESEARCH LAB DIRECTOR

Digital Equipment Corporation has announced the appointment of
Robert Iannucci as Cambridge Research Lab Director. At this
facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Digital conducts
research on human-computer interaction technologies and
strategic technologies critical to the development of new
information systems. He reports to Dr. Samuel H. Fuller, Vice
President of Corporate Research.

Iannucci joined Digital from Exa Corporation, where he was a
founder and Vice President of Product Marketing. Prior to
that, Iannucci was at IBM for fourteen years, where he was a
Research Staff Member/Manager, in the T.J. Watson Research
Center, and led hardware development of the MIT Multiprocessor
Emulation Facility at the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science.

"Bob brings very valuable and extensive research experience,
especially recent experience in translating visionary ideas
into commercial products to Digital," said Fuller. "He will
play an integral role in our work to develop technologies
essential to helping customers build and use emerging
information appliances and services.

Iannucci received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science from MIT. He also holds a Masters of Science
Degree in Computer Engineering from Syracuse University, and
a B.E. in Electrical Engineering from Youngstown State
University.

Iannucci received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science from MIT. He also holds a Masters of Science
Degree in Computer Engineering from Syracuse University, and
a B.E. in Electrical Engineering from Youngstown State
University.

Digital's Corporate Research Group is part of the company's
Advanced Technology Group (ATG), which is focused on
developing and quickly delivering to market technology,
products and services that make it easier for people and
businesses worldwide to share information.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>