
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B036-376</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te29.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045751 text/html 37487
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:55:38 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:03 GMT
Content-length: 37300
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te29.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CABLEVISION SYSTEMS ANNOUNCES $300 MILLION FIBER BUILD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DSC-BELL ATLANTIC FIBER EQUIPMENT DEAL SEEN WORTH $150 MILLION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SPECTRAN CORP.</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>AMP'S GLENN MOORE NAMED SPECTRAN'S PRESIDENT, CEO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ANDREW CORP.</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ANDREW TO MARKET HYBRID FIBER/COAX CABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>1996 FORECAST</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>1996: MAJOR GROWTH SPURRED BY DEREGULATION, HYBRIDIZATION, THE INTERNET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3804 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FIBVER OPTICS DIGEST</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>FIBVER OPTICS DIGEST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(532 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>AT&T</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>AT&T SCORES $10 MILLION OPTICAL FIBER CONTRACT WITH DEUTSCHE TELECOM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ALCATEL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ALCATEL GETS APPROVAL FOR SONET MULTIPLEXER FROM AT&T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(164 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>UNISOURCE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ALCATEL SCORES SDH CONTRACT WITH UNISOURCE PARTNERS IN EUROPE </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CABLEVISION SYSTEMS ANNOUNCES $300 MILLION FIBER BUILD

     Cablevision Systems Corp. has announced it will invest $300
million in northeastern Ohio to build a fiber optic telecommunications
system.  The company already has begun constructing the 750 MHz
system, which Cablevision says will provide a platform for programming
choices and advanced two-way communications services.
     "The new telecommunications network will initially provide 77
analog channels with future digital capacity," says Lawrence Drake,
senior vice president and general manager for Cablevision's midwest
region.  
     "In the near future, those programming choices will be joined by
the exciting new capabilities that our fiber optic telecommunications
system allows, including video-on-demand, interactive services and
high-speed computer connections," Drake says.
     Cablevision anticipates the $300 million investment will create
an estimated 100 new jobs.  Cablevision of Ohio now employs 670.  
     The company recently applied with the Public Utilities Commission
of Ohio to provide telephone service there as part of its attempts to
broaden its market impact.  (James Evangelista, 216/696-0229.)   



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DSC-BELL ATLANTIC FIBER EQUIPMENT DEAL SEEN WORTH $150 MILLION

     DSC Communications Corp. has signed a two-year agreement with
Bell Atlantic Corp. to supply DSC's Next Generation Digital Loop
Carrier equipment. An industry source says the deal is worth
approximately $150 million during that period.  The deal primarily
involves DSC's Litespan-2000 product, this source told us.
     The agreement is part of an ongoing relationship that DSC has had
with the regional holding company, which continues to be a major
customer as it packs more fiber into its network. For example, Bell
Atlantic contracts with DSC accounted for 10 percent of DSC's annual
revenues in 1992 and 11 percent in 1993.
     Bell Atlantic actually has been deploying the Litespan product
since 1990, according to DSC.  DSC characterizes Litespan as the fiber
optics industry's first integrated, synchronous optical network-based,
optical loop carrier system.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AMP'S GLENN MOORE NAMED SPECTRAN'S PRESIDENT, CEO

     Recently reorganized SpecTran Corp. has named Glenn Moore to be its
president and CEO.  Raymond Jaeger remains chairman of the board of the
Sturbridge, Mass.-based company.
     Moore, 44, comes from outside the company.  He was general manager
of the Optical Connectors and Assemblies Division at Amp, where he spent
20 years.
     "The experience and success Glenn Moore achieved in developing
Amp's Optical Connector business will be a major asset in the execution
of SpecTran's aggressive growth plan," commented Jaeger.  "[The move]
will allow me to concentrate more on longer term corporate development
issues and pursue strategic alliance opportunities that will further
strengthen and diversify the company."
     Reporting to Moore will be the heads of SpecTran's three subsidiary
companies, which were created as part of the reorganization.  These
subsidiaries include SpecTran Communication Fiber Technologies Inc.;
SpecTran Specialty Optics Co.; and Applied Photonic Devices.
     Bruce Cannon, SpecTran's chief financial officer, also will report
to Moore.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ANDREW TO MARKET HYBRID FIBER/COAX CABLE

     As part of its positioning in both the cellular and fiber worlds,
Andrew Corp. is introducing premise composite fiber optic and copper
cable assemblies for use in cellular and emerging personal
communications systems.
     The assemblies connect RF antennas that provide coverage throughout
a building with cellular or PCS base stations via an RF analog fiber
optic link which includes the electrical conductors that power the
remotely located antennas.  These composite cables may also be
integrated with an uninterruptible power supply so that a building power
outage will not affect wireless services.
     The cable assembly is composed of two Andrew-manufactured
Microcables, including optical connectors and two standard insulated
copper wires.  Single-mode fiber--which can be dispersion-shifted--is
incorporated.  The company notes that such cables eliminate the need for
"bulky ductwork" because the company's optical fiber cables employ a
unique sheathing design that protects the cable.     The composite design
allows electrical power and fiber to run together, making expensive
conduit, outlets or transformers unnecessary, Andrew says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

1996: MAJOR GROWTH SPURRED BY DEREGULATION, HYBRIDIZATION, THE INTERNET

     The year 1996 will be a strong one for fiber optics both in the
United States and throughout the world, according to extensive
interviews we have conducted with fiber optics industry experts.
     Global telecom deregulation, and particularly the potential for
opening markets in the United States, will continue to accelerate the
growth of fiber optics.  Because of its amazing properties, fiber
continues to find its way into operating networks, whether it is pushing
closer to the home as the result of cable TV overbuilds in hybrid fiber
coax networks, via a new product that Andrew Corp. is announcing that
packs both fiber and copper into the same cable, or as part of the new
hybrid fiber wireless architecture.
     When we asked James Crowe, chairman and CEO of MFS Communications
Co. Inc., what general business trends in fiber he anticipates will
occur in the coming year, he responded, "The Internet, the Internet and
the Internet."  It is cheaper by over a factor of 100 to move
information over the Internet versus the circuit switched voice network,
said Crowe.  That kind of economic advantage is unstoppable over the
longer term.
     The paradigm shift in many companies to the Internet suggests an
opportunity to many of our interviewees for fiber.  Forget the video-on-
demand market dream that simply has not driven bandwidth to this level,
we were told; right under our noses people are demanding more bandwidth
on the Internet--and there is no doubt that fiber optics will deliver
it.

  ...All Agree: A Solid U.S. Market, Especially With Telecom Reform

     1996 very well may be the most explosive year that we have seen in
the industry, says Craig Young, president of Brooks Fiber.  "We will see
a lot of folks that are new players in new markets that will be building
infrastructure in new fiber markets," Young tells us.  "You are probably
going to see an explosion of fiber going into the ground."
     The only limitations to U.S. fiber growth are going to be the fiber
manufacturing capabilities of Corning and Alcatel, says Gary Glick,
business unit manager of fiber optic cable at  Andrew Corp..
     Crowe believes 1996 will be "an excellent year," noting that the
focus may shift a little from more traditional voice-oriented telco
services to methods of broadband interconnect with the Internet.  "If
the local loop was considered a bottleneck for voice-grade service, it
becomes a real restriction as people demand more broadband access to the
Internet," says Crowe.
     Brian McFadden, assistant vice president of high capacity
applications for the SONET networks group at Nortel, believes "the
demand for bandwidth across the network is increasing and therefore
fiber deployment should be strong in 1996."  McFadden believes it still
is "an elastic market for bandwidth" as prices come down and new
applications are invented. 
     "In the area of high-speed, trunked telecommunications, 1996 is
going to be the year that 10 Gbps OC-192 networks come into play and at
the same time the first [large commercial] deployments of
multiwavelength WDM times OC-48," says John Ryan, principal at the
California consulting firm of Ryan, Hankin and Kent. "The next step in
high capacity telecom gear is going to happen in 1996 and that will push
the state of development of both TDM and dense WDM."  With regard to
high speed TDM and WDM, "its very clear that at least for the first
several years, they have to co-exist," says Ryan. 
     Stephen Montgomery, vice president of Electronicast Corp., a
competitor to Ryan, Hankin also based in California, believes strong
markets will continue for premises data and broadband communications. 
"We see prices remaining very stable, although going up in [a few] fiber
optic cable components."
     The market for fiber to support cable TV also is expected to
continue strong in the coming year.  "We feel it will be a very good
year," says Ron Coppock, vice president of international sales and
marketing for Texscan. How good, Coppock adds, depends on whether
telecom reform legislation is passed into law.  Still, "in terms of HFC
architecture we build products for, we see an increased evolution toward
that type of architecture and the market is significant."  There are a
number of 350 MHz or 550 MHz architectures that need to be rebuilt and
Coppock does not see that happening without some fiber infrastructure
going in as part of it.
     Andy Meyer, Scientific-Atlanta Inc.'s director of marketing for
transmissions, believes there "will be a lot more activity on the MSO
side continuing in fiber for 1996."  Meyer believes a lot of that is
driven by the concept of narrowcasting, which he defines as the ability
of cable companies to segment their markets into smaller sections. 
"They have done infrastructure changes that allow them to go to smaller
pockets of nodes and they can target those nodes with a specific
advertising using data modems," continues Meyer.  "Fiber optics to allow
them to do that."
     Scientific-Atlanta also is pretty optimistic about the products it
makes for the telecom market, says Tim Wilk, director of strategic
planning. The regional holding companies (RHCs) have been trying
unsuccessfully to get into the video market for a number of years, he
observes.  "As we start 1996, there are a number of RHCs that are ready
to start rolling out HFC networks. With Pacific Bell and SNET we see the
integrated networks," he continues.  "We are really excited about some
of the telcos that are starting to build a video-only system."  It is a
trend that Wilk believes will "really kick into high gear" in 1996 as
the telcos see that fiber to the curb is not living up to its
capabilities and not hitting the target availability and cost targets.
     "Emerging technologies can only run on fiber," says one
interviewee, who works for an RHC and who asked not to be identified. 
"That is where the growth is going to come," this source adds.  "You are
going to see major market growth in the United States."
     Drew Zogby, director of strategic marketing for ADC
Telecommunications Broadband Connectivity Division, believes 1996 will
be a very strong year for U.S. fiber optics deployment. 
     Otto Szentisi, vice president and director of hardware and
equipment technology at Siecor Corp., says the company expects to see
continued growth, "very similar to 1995."
      Optelecom Chairman William Culver predicts "market revenues will
continue their inevitable growth in spite of decreasing prices."
     David Maack, vice president for research, development and
engineering at Porta Systems, believes telecom reform legislation will
be made law and "it is going to spur people to add plant equipment."
     Michael Mattei, vice president of technology for TII-Ditel, says
there is the potential for large increase in the number of fiber miles
installed in 1996, depending on whether telecom reform legislation is
approved.  If not, the industry will go through its normal increase, he
reasons. 
     Joe Chisholm, a manager of network infrastructure planning and
technology at BellSouth, says that all he has heard "internally and
externally leads me to believe that [the fiber optics market] should
continue to grow." BellSouth's Greg Mims, who has the same title,
believes there will be a continuing upward fiber optics trend across all
of the regions in the U.S.

  ...Diverging Views Mark Undersea Fiber Forecast

     There were widely divergent viewpoints among experts with regard to
undersea growth in fiber.
     "1996 is going to be the busiest year in the history of the world
with regard to the installation of undersea fiber optic cable," says
Clifton Lundberg, president and CEO of General Offshore Corp. (GOC),
which installs optical fiber cable up to depths of 50 meters throughout
the world.  The company recently has been deploying new tools, such as
the Gator, to help get the cable in the mud and out of the way of
anchors and trawling nets.
     GOC's Lundberg cites FLAG, as well as installations in such diverse
places as Ukraine and Thailand as helping to fuel an accelerating
market.  Based in Alexandria, Va., but with offices throughout the
world, GOC is 60 percent owned by Hannon, Armstrong and Co. and 40
percent owned by Cable & Wireless.
     While believing that the terrestrial market in the United States
will remain strong, Konnie Schaefer, president of K. Schaefer &
Associates, believes the market for undersea fiber optic systems "is
going to be slow." That is because, Schaefer reasons, a number of
systems are going to become operational and fulfill demand for 1996.
     "I think there is going to be a significant slowdown from the
standpoint of undersea fiber optic sales," Schaefer says.  One case in
point: Schaefer believes the sweeping SEA-WE-ME-3 network will not go
forward.  He attributes this to changes in the organizational structure
of France Telecom, the governing partner, which have led to questions
raised by the new management as to whether the resulting capacity will
be there to justify the very substantial capital investment.  Officials
from France Telecom would not comment when asked what the current status
of the project is.
     Ando Corp.'s Michael Griffin believes 1996 will be "a strong year"
for fiber optic test instrumentation equipment.

  ...Worldwide Growth Strong: But Know Thine Area

     The global fiber market is "going to be a very positive one in
1996," says Ryan.  "Many nations are building out fiber-rich
infrastructures for telephony and cable TV and in a lot of cases a
combination of the two," he observes. 
     "The southern edge of South America--including Argentina, Chile and
Peru--have become perhaps the most deregulated telecommunications
markets on earth with a resulting upsurge of infrastructure buildout,"
says Ryan.  "I would expect to see a lot more of that occurring in
various different regions."
     In order to take advantage of that, most of the major vendors have
"beefed up their ability" to provide for this market, says Ryan.  "There
are terrific global opportunities," he adds.
     "Most nations outside of a small club of advanced nations have
relatively little telecommunications infrastructure," says Ryan.  The
gap between developing nations and wealthier nations will increase
substantially if these poorer nations do not put in new infrastructure. 
And that translates into more fiber in the ground, Ryan believes.
     Texscan's Coppock sees continuing strong markets in Europe and
Latin America.  While the market for cable TV in the United Kingdom is
consolidating, Coppock sees "a continuing build there that's all
upside."  That's because, they have just turned on their 1 millionth
subscriber in a nation of 48 million people.  "Clearly, there is a lot
of cable passing to be done." 
     Italy is going to be a huge market for cable TV if the nation
approves Socrates, Telecom Italia's vast cable TV project, Coppock says. 
Spain and Portugal also represent opportunities for cable TV
infrastructure incorporating fiber.
     With regard to Latin America, Coppock notes that "there has been a
consolidation in Chile.  Last year there were maybe 10 players, next
year there will be two or three."  He identifies Argentina as a
continuing strong market. 
     Zogby believes that "international growth will continue to be
robust."  He identifies Germany, Chile and Australia as nations that
will continue to  aggressively install fiber.  China, India and other
Asian nations are accelerating fiber optic deployments.  Zogby
identifies Japan as a strong market and believes that Argentina and
Mexico also will grow substantially.  Middle East fiber optics activity
also is up.
     "We see much higher growth, particularly in Asia," says Montgomery. 
For some components, Electronicast predicts growth of 100 percent per
year or higher; in others, it predicts growth of 30 percent.
     International growth is being spurred to some extent by AT&T and
MCI hoping to assume a global presence, says Mattei.  One example is MCI
in Mexico. He believes the amount of fiber going in during 1996 will
represent a larger increase than it did in 1995. 
     "The country that is the most advanced in the use of fiber is
France," says the RHC source requesting anonymity.  "France has us
beaten hands down in the use of fiber.  They are the most advanced in
terms of nuclear power at around 85 percent; they are the most advanced
in terms of fiber at around 65 percent." The nation is very active in
using fiber to deploy smart cars and smart highways.
     Andrew Corp. is involved in joint ventures in Russia, says Glick. 
"We see opportunities in Russia," he notes, particularly as the
situation stabilizes there.  "There is also major activity in China and
India, particularly Shanghai and the coastal areas," Glick believes.
     "In Europe, things are happening a little more rapidly on the
regulatory front than perhaps people had thought," says Crowe of MFS
Communications.  There may be as many as five consortia in Germany who
could put fiber in the ground, he adds.  With regard to deregulation of
Europe's PTTs on Jan. 1, 1997, Crowe believes that "we may see something
similar to what we saw in the United States after equal access where we
saw an explosion of fiber capacity being put in," although he notes that
such developments are subject to regulatory developments that are
"perilous to try to forecast."

  ...1996 Drivers: Telecom Reform, Cable-Telco, Internet, Technology
Improvement 

     Interviewees identified a variety of factors that will propel
market growth in 1996, including telecom reform legislation, the
struggle between cable TV companies and telephone companies to gain
larger market share, increased capacity requirements resulting from
demands for Internet access and technology improvements that will drive
new installations.
     ADC's Zogby lists drivers for growth as including cable TV fiber-
to-the-feeder and two-way network upgrades; regional Bell operating
company cable TV overbuilds; second-tier competitive access provider
growth; overall fiber optics-based, high-capacity-service demands;
increased local competition and the advent of local exchange carriers in
the inter-exchange carrier market; and more aggressive fiber optics
deployment by utilities.
     BellSouth's Mims sees increasing levels of fiber going into the
telco regions as "a natural evolution."  As you deploy more of a
particular technology, such as fiber, the cost structures come down as
the costs to your vendors come down.  Chisholm notes that the increased
functionality that fiber can provide is a major plus as telcos study
their networks.
     "It is clear that the line between local and long distance is going
to disappear," says MFS' Crowe.  Indeed, it has been clear for some time
that customers don't buy local and long-distance services because they
want to.  When the interexchange carriers move into the local exchange
that is going to mean additional construction and a good portion of that
will be fiber. 
     AT&T Corp.'s plans to enter the local exchange represents wonderful
news for consumers and the economy, Crowe believes.  From the point of
view of AT&T and the Bell operating companies, he believes it was
inevitable.  "From MFS's perspective it is great, in the short-to-medium
term it is a customer for us," says Crowe.  "It will be quite a while
before AT&T is able to deploy enough switches to carry all of its own
traffic," he predicts.
     Rick Jones, executive vice president of Broadband Technologies
Inc., believes telecom reform in the United States will be a big driver
that will cause telephone companies to build facilities in a variety of
spots.  "There will be quite a bit of attention in the local exchange
but also elsewhere," adds Jones.  "While 1996 will not be the year for
huge shipments, it will be the year people sort out what is going on and
make large orders," Jones believes.
     The Internet is having an impact, says Nortel's McFadden.  "A lot
of companies are putting people on the Internet on a day-to-day basis as
part of doing their job and that certainly is a dramatic shift from
three years ago." McFadden believes that deregulation and privatizations
are going to drive the number of second, third and fourth operators in a
lot of countries and competitive access providers are going to get even
stronger. 
     "The boom of the Internet will drive fiber optic deployment,"
predicts Sunil Tewarson, manager of new business development for AT&T
Network Systems. Tewarson notes that the U.S. government is going to be
handing over the network to private companies, that the performance is
going down below acceptable levels.  "For it to perform at the level
people accept, it will require higher speeds and that will drive fiber
deployment," says Tewarson. 
     Technology improvements will also play a role in accelerating
fiber, says Tewarson.  "In Bell Labs, we have tested the same fiber up
to speeds of 80 Gbps, 2000 channels of broadcast TV," he notes.  "There
is definitely a big technology push."

  ...Wireless Seen As Representing An Opportunity 

     Like it or not, wireless communications is having a growing impact
throughout the world.  While that will detrimentally affect fiber's
growth in some instances, it also may be an opportunity.
     Electronicast's Montgomery notes that some Asian nations deploying
wireless or personal communications require wireless antennas every 300-
400 feet that will be linked to fiber. 
     "Copper-based systems can't provide the bandwidth required to
handle all the PCS volume," says Glick.  "You need fiber." 
     As the result, Andrew Corp. is developing products that include
both fiber and copper in the same cable to the antenna (see related
information, p. 2).
     "Instead of pulling two separate cables, you can install one cable
and solve the problem of powering the antenna from the local bay
station," says Pat Estenes, senior product manager at Andrew Corp.

  ...1996 Business: Partnering to Continue, Growth of CAPs, (Re)-
Empowering AT&T

     It was clear from the learned responses of our interviewees that
much thought has been given to what business moves will be undertaken in
the coming year.  Much of that depends on, as Ryan defines it, on "the
minutiae" contained in telecom reform legislation, if it does become
law.
     There seems to be no question that roles will be changing rapidly
as shown in this anecdote from Ando's Griffin about two companies doing
business in 1996: "Today, I am your competitor; tomorrow, I am your co-
marketing partner; the week after next, one of us will buy the other;
and we will divest next month."      
     The general consensus was that there will continue to be
partnerings, such as the Sprint-Deutsche Telekom-France Telecom
partnering and the rumored alliance between Nynex and Bell Atlantic.
     "Companies such as ourselves don't have all the resources to get to
every customer," says Nortel's McFadden.  "It is very hard for one
company to cover the whole waterfront on technology developments.  You
can't afford to be limited by your own internal technological
capabilities.  There are going to be a lot more partnerships and a lot
more strategic use of these partnerships."     
     Our anonymous RHC source predicts there eventually will be an
implosion where only a few carriers eventually will be left standing. 
That jibes with comments from BBT's Jones, who says "the shaking will
begin in 1996, but the shake out will come later."
     Jones analogizes the situation to airline deregulation, "where
there were a number of mergers and a few companies that went out of
business as the landscape changed."  One common partnership will
probably be interexchange carriers and cable TV operators.  He also
believes there will be more partnering among the RHCs.
     AT&T will be a formidable foe as it enters the local exchange was
another consensus view. "I don't know if it is scary or provides an
opportunity," says Scientific-Atlanta's Wilk.  "AT&T recognition is
tremendous. If they can partner with the right providers, they are in an
absolutely tremendous position to capture a significant share not only
of the interactive data market but also of local telephony.  I think
AT&T is really something to watch next year."
     Officials from the AT&T systems and technology company--which has
about $20 billion in annual revenues--generally refused to comment for
this report, claiming they are in a quiet period until after the company
become public, expected about March 15.  AT&T Services, with about $50
billion in annual revenues, will remain a public company.  The third
company, GIS, the so-called computer company, also will not have a
public offering.   
     The systems and technology company--which includes Network Systems,
Microelectronics, Global Systems, Bell labs and Consumer Products--has
decided to create Network Cable Systems, which will combine its optical
fiber, fiber cabling, copper cables and fiber optic apparatus products
into one unit.  Units will include Norcross, Ga.; AT&T of Shanghai Fiber
Optic Co. Ltd.; Litespec Inc.; LYCOM A/S; AT&T Finolex Fiber Optic
Cables Ltd.; AT&T of Beijing Fiber Optic Cable Co. Ltd.; AT&T Fitel Co.;
AT&T Yakazi Fiber Optic Cable Co. Ltd.; AT&T Network Systems Deutschland
GmbH; AT&T Network Technologies Co. Ltd. (Bangkok, Thailand); Access
Network Technologies (Fuquay-Varina, N.C., a joint venture with
Raychem); AT&T ELECON Telesistemas C.A. (copper facility located in
Venezuela); AT&T of Tianjin, China; AT&T Network Systems Australia; and
AT&T Network Cable Systems Ireland. 

  ...Strong CAPs Seen Consolidating By Acquisition

     The competitive access providers (CAPs) are expected to continue to
aggressively plow fiber into the ground--and to consolidate for further
strength.
     Brooks Fiber President Young said his company will announce an
acquisition in coming weeks.  "Even though 1996 will not be a gangbuster
year in revenues, it will be a gangbuster year in capital expenditures,
because all of us are going to be putting in switches to go after the
biggest piece of the local dialtone market," Young confides.  Brooks
Fiber will install 8 to 10 switches in 1996 because that is all the
states will allow them to install. The company has the capability to
install 20 switches next year. 
     As we went to press, Brooks announced that it intends to invest
more than $20 million in building and operating two new fiber optic
networks in Stockton, Calif., and Jackson, Miss.  The company now will
serve 20 cities.
     "MFS is eating up other little CAPs," says Electronicast's
Montgomery.  CAPs are going to be very aggressive to position themselves
against the cable TV companies.  "They are doing this with fiber optics
deployment such as OC-3 and OC-12 SONET equipment."
     1996 will be an important year for software, several sources
observed.  "You are going to see more integration of fiber optic
products into large scale network-management, software-driven systems,"
Coppock believes.  "Software is going to be a big component."
     In the undersea market, Schaefer predicts there may be further
consolidations, such as Alcatel's earlier purchase of STC's undersea
unit.  Siemens also is trying to break into the fiber optics undersea
business--with limited success to this point.  It is also questionable
what happens to AT&T's underwater unit, known as SSI, which Schaefer
says has been the subject of industry gossip that it may be sold.
     [This is part one of a two-part series on forecasts and trends
anticipated in the fiber optics industry in the coming year.  FIBER
OPTICS NEWS interviewed more than 20 industry leaders to compile
information for this report.  Part two will run in our next issue, dated
Jan. 8, 1996.]



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FIBVER OPTICS DIGEST

     Colombia's national telecommunications company has announced that
it has signed contracts with Mitsui & Co., Sirti SpA, Alcatel Cable SA
and Siemens AG as part of its fiber optics build.  The contracts are
worth a total of $112 million.

     Columbus, Ohio-based utility contractor Gudenkauf Corp. is
installing optical fiber cable together with the city.  The network will
offer high-bandwidth for power users and providers, supplying voice,
video and data.  The second phase of the network will entail
installation of 48-strand fiber cable traveling 6.62 miles and
connecting City Hall with Ohio State University and the Greater Columbus
Convention Center.  (Jeff Gudenkauf, 614/488-1776.)

     NTT has unveiled two fiber-related Track II procurements.  These
include "Optical Fiber Cables and Fiber Jointing for Aerial Access
Distribution Network" with filing deadline of Jan. 26, and "Optical
Fiber Cables and Fiber Jointing for User Distribution Network," with
filing deadline of Jan. 25.  (NTT America, Shingo Ieda, 212/808-2232.)

     Net sales of fiber optic products continue to increase for ADC
Telecommunications.  It announced that fiber sales represented 41.3
percent of total sales for the quarter ending Oct. 31, up from 35.6
percent for the year earlier period.  The company reported net income of
$18.7 million, compared to $12.8 million last year.  (Aimee Gallogly,
612/946-3338.)

     C-COR Electronics Chairman and CEO Richard Perry has announced that
the company's second quarter financial results will not meet expected
levels. It still does not have a corporate president, following the
departure of Daniel Finch. The company has received an order to supply
equipment to Titus Communications Corp. as part of a 1,050 mile hybrid-
fiber coax build in Japan.   
     Fiberguide Industries unveiled a new line of custom, single-fiber,
high-powered assemblies that are custom made.  The high-powered
assemblies are avail-able in a variety of sheathings and lengths. 
(Richard Landreth, 908/647-6601.)

     Hanh Lu has joined Lasertron as senior staff engineer for
distributed feedback lasers.  He formerly had worked at Bell Northern
Research Ltd.

     Stephanie Marshall has been named to the board of Tellabs Inc.  She
served as executive director of the Illinois Mathematics and Science
Academy.

     Brian McCann has joined the board of directors of Super Vision
International Inc..  He has spent more than eight years at 3M, where he
has been employed in the fiber optic division. 

     The New Orleans City Council has voted to let LeveeComm of
Louisiana build a perimeter fiber optics network for the city.  The
would-be carrier is still attempting to raise revenues for that purpose,
according to reports. 

     Galileo Electro-Optics Corp. gained a net profit for the first time
in the last five years, the company says in its 1995 annual report. It
had a profit of $1.1 million compared to a loss of similar value the
year before. Galileo also had the greatest commercial sales as opposed
to military sales for the period and the best productivity, as measured
by sales per employee.

     Luxtec Corp., a maker of fiber optic lighting and optical systems,
lost $6.1 million in the last quarter of fiscal 1995, compared to a net
income of $36,281 last year.  Primary reason for the loss was completion
of the CardioDyne acquisition, which involved a $5.1 million write-off.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AT&T SCORES $10 MILLION OPTICAL FIBER CONTRACT WITH DEUTSCHE TELECOM

     AT&T Corp. has received its largest contract involving optical
fiber yet from Deutsche Telekom, a $10 million deal in which the cable
will be used largely to upgrade east German infrastructure.  Roughly 90
percent of the cable will be installed in what was formerly East German,
according to AT&T.
     AT&T Network Systems fiber cable manufacturing facility in
Augsburg, Germany, will produce fiber optic cables to fill the order.
     Denmark-based LYCOM A/S, an AT&T subsidiary, will manufacture and
supply single-mode fiber to the Augsburg facility.  AT&T's Norcross,
Ga., facility also will supply single-mode fiber for the project.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALCATEL GETS APPROVAL FOR SONET MULTIPLEXER FROM AT&T

     AT&T has approved Alcatel's 1603/12 SM synchronous optical network
multiplexer with AT&T's ACCUNET T155 service.  The Alcatel multiplexer
is one of the first tested by AT&T operating at the OC-3 rate, according
to Alcatel.
     While it unclear how much business the approval will generate,
Alcatel spokesman Mike Newsom told us the approval "is a major deal. 
They can't deny us anymore," said Newsom.
     The multiplexer offers carriers the option of an OC-3 or OC-12
configuration in a single, compact shelf, says Joe Bass, Alcatel's vice
president and general manager of lightwave products.  "The 1603/12 SM
can even operate as an OC-3 and OC-12 system at the same time,
interfacing an OC-12 line rate through one high-speed direction and OC-3
through the other high-speed direction of the same shelf."
     Test results showed that the unit can operate as a terminal
multiplexer, an add/drop multiplexer in either a linear or ring
configuration, an optical hub and a repeater as defined by the Accunet
T155 service specifications.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALCATEL SCORES SDH CONTRACT WITH UNISOURCE PARTNERS IN EUROPE 

     Alcatel has signed a contract of unknown price to provide
synchronous digital hierarchy equipment to the Unisource partners.  They
represent telephone concerns in The Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland,
and Spain.
     Alcatel believes the deal represents an important step in the
construction of a major pan-European infrastructure.
     The contract covers supplies, engineering, installation and
commissioning, with deliveries to begin in 1996.
     The Unisource partners include Telia of Sweden, PTT Telecom of the
Netherlands, Swiss Telecom PTT and Telefonica of Spain.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>