
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B01-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA074-000493-B047-48</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013800 text/html 49027
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:36:04 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:51 GMT
Content-length: 48840
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/gt10.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* WASHINGTON FOCUS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>          One result of the recent intense focus on the budget</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Agency Can't Glomarize Where&nbsp;Disclosure May Be in Public Interest</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1008 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*VIEWS FROM THE STATES*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Arkansas</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2296 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* NEWS FROM CANADA *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>        Ontario Government Proposes Changes to FOI,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1128 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* IN BRIEF *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>          The D.C. Circuit has ruled that the Secret Service</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2741 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

          One result of the recent intense focus on the budget

          One result of the recent intense focus on the budget
battle has been that Congress has yet to pass some bills
not directly associated with the budget dispute.  The
telecommunications bill, which includes the Exon
amendment criminalizing the use of indecent language on
the Internet, probably will not be voted on for another
several weeks.  Public interest advocates are trying to
use that time to lobby against the Exon amendment.
Recent incidents such as the shutdown of access to Usenet
groups by Compuserve at the behest of German prosecutors
may play in favor of those critical of government
intervention.  As access advocate Jim Warren noted: "When
other nations' enforcers choose to inflict their
prejudices and dogmas on the global communications net,
perhaps American leaders may finally understand the
danger of what Congress is attempting with its `decency'
demands on all private and public speech and expression
if aided by any telecommunications device."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Agency Can't Glomarize Where
Disclosure May Be in Public Interest

          In a case that places some important restrictions on
an agency's ability to categorically deny the existence
of information pertaining to individuals, the D.C.
Circuit has ruled that the Customs Service acted
improperly when it told Max Holland of the Nation that it
would neither confirm or deny that it had records
concerning offers by H. Ross Perot to help the Service
with drug interdiction activities.  Circuit Court Judge
Pat Wald, writing for the court, observed that "although
Reporters Committee and the precedent of this circuit
make clear that FOIA extends only to those records which
reveal something about agency action, the mere fact that
records pertain to an individual's activities does not
necessarily qualify them for exemption.  Such records may
still be cloaked with the public interest if the
information would shed light on agency action."

          Wald pointed out that District Court Judge Charles
Richey had erred when he concluded that Holland's request
pertained only to the activities of a private citizen.
Wald noted that "as the language of the contested request
indicates, it would be disingenuous to suggest that
appellants are not interested in the actions of Perot.
Unlike the private activities in Reporters Committee and
the cases. . .from our own circuit, however, what makes
Perot's activities significant is their connection to
agency conduct.  Appellants want to find out whether
Perot offered to help a federal agency fulfill its
statutory duties to interdict drugs, and if so, how that
agency responded to his overtures.  Although Perot
himself may be a target of their investigative work,
appellants also expressed interest in the `privatization
of government functions,' particularly operations which
are covertly funded.  The district court acknowledged as
much, in stating that appellants sought to determine
whether `Customs planned to privatize certain components
of the nation's drug interdiction efforts.'  These
concerns are about `agency activity,' not just Perot's
private activities.  As such, their disclosure may serve
the public's interest in knowing `what their government
is up to.'"

          Because the Nation had identified a public interest
in the records, Wald found that Customs' use of a Glomar
response was inappropriate because it swept too broadly.
"Because the range of circumstances included in Customs'
categorical rule do not `characteristically support' an
inference that all material in law enforcement files
which names a particular individual is exempt from
disclosure to third parties, a more particularized
approach is required."  Wald noted that one alternative
was for Customs to adjust its categorical rule.  "Customs
is. . .free to articulate a revised categorical rule
regarding disclosure of law enforcement records if it can
identify more narrowly tailored circumstances under which
the balance of privacy and public interest
characteristically tips in the direction of exemption."

          The court clarified its earlier decision in Safecard
Services v. SEC, 926 F.2d 1197 (D.C. Cir. 1991), by
reining in its application.   In Safecard Services, the
court had established a categorical exemption for names
of third parties in law enforcement records unless the
information was needed to "confirm or refute compelling
evidence that the agency is engaged in illegal activity."
Wald wrote that "to the extent any information contained
in 7(C) investigatory files would reveal the identities
of individuals who are subjects, witnesses, or informants
in law enforcement investigations, those portions of
responsive records are categorically exempt from
disclosure under Safecard.  But we do not read Safecard
as permitting an agency to exempt from disclosure all of
the material in an investigatory record solely on the
grounds that the record includes some information which
identifies a private citizen or provides that person's
name and address.  Because such a blanket exemption would
reach far more broadly than is necessary to protect the
identities of individuals mentioned in law enforcement
files, it would be contrary to FOIA's overall purpose of
disclosure, and thus is not a permissible reading of
Exemption 7(C)."

          An individual's privacy expectation could also be
tempered by their voluntary disclosure of their role
documented in government files.  Wald noted that "Perot
himself has made several public statements indicating
that he has offered to aid the federal government in
hostage rescue and drug interdiction operations.
Redaction of Perot's name from any responsive documents
in the [Customs' investigatory] files that involve the
subject matter of those disclosures, if those records are
not otherwise exempt from disclosure under Exemption 7(C)
or other exemptions set forth in [Exemption 7], would not
serve any useful purpose in protecting his privacy.
Perot's decision to bring information connecting himself
with such efforts into the public domain differentiates
his privacy interest from the interest of unnamed
Safecard witnesses who did not voluntarily divulge their
identities; these public disclosures effectively waive
Perot's right to redaction of his name from documents on
events that he has publicly discussed."

          The court also found that Customs' search had been
inadequate.  Although Holland's request asked for records
indexed or cross-indexed under Perot's name, "it also
explicitly seeks information `pertaining to' Perot and
information regarding offers by Perot to assist Customs
in drug interdiction efforts. . . Accordingly,
appellants' request should be interpreted to include
subject matter files on topics of interest to appellants,
in addition to files indexed under Perot's name or
personal identifier."  Wald noted that "if we agreed with
the agency's position that appellants sought only those
records indexed under Perot's name, we might find this
search adequate.  But we have construed the scope of
appellants' request more broadly than did Customs, to
include `subject matter files.'  Customs did not describe
its recordkeeping system in sufficient detail to permit
us to identify what subject matter files, other than
those in the Privacy Act System of Records, might hold
responsive information regarding Perot's offers to help
Customs with its drug interdiction efforts.  In the
absence of this information, the agency's assertions are
too conclusory to allow de novo review of the adequacy of
its search."  (The Nation Magazine, Washington Bureau and
Max Holland v. United States Customs Service, No. 94-
5275, U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit, Dec. 8, 1995)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Arkansas

Arkansas

          The supreme court has ruled that the Arkansas
Department of Human Services did not violate the
Administrative Procedure Act or the FOIA when it awarded
a contract to provide obstetrical services under a
federal waiver program.  National Park Medical Center, an
unsuccessful bidder on the contract, claimed that staff
meetings held to develop the bid solicitation violated
the open meetings requirements of the FOIA.  The court
disagreed, noting that such meetings were not the type
covered by the statute.  The court also found that
National Park failed to bring the alleged violation to
the attention of the agency before filing its court
action.  (National Park Medical Center, Inc. v. Arkansas
Department of Human Services, No. 95-411, Supreme Court
of Arkansas, Dec. 4, 1995)

Illinois

          A court of appeals has ruled that a political body
has standing to bring a suit under the Open Meetings Act,
but that the mayor of the City of Northlake failed to
file his suit against the Board of Education of School
District No. 87 within the statutory time limits.  Based
on a series of critical letters between the school board
and the mayor, the school board met in closed session --
allegedly to discuss employment matters -- to draft a
letter to the mayor in response to his recent letters.
Several months later, the mayor sued the school board for
improperly conducting a closed meeting.  On the matter of
standing, the court observed that "we find no compelling
reasons to limit the word `person' [in the Open Meetings
Act] to an individual as opposed to a body politic.
Indeed, creating an impediment to the explicit command of
the statute that actions of public bodies be taken
openly, solely on the basis that a political body is not
an individual person, ill serves the intent of the
legislature and frustrates the principles underlying the
Act.  The deterrence of official misconduct is no less
important simply because it is the office of the mayor
which challenges the infraction rather than the mayor in
his or her individual capacity."  But the court agreed
that the mayor had missed the 45-day deadline for filing
the suit.  The mayor argued that his suit was covered by
a special provision allowing a suit to be filed 45 days
after the state's attorney discovered the violation
because he had informed the state's attorney prior to
filing the suit.  The court rejected that claim, noting
that "if, as contemplated by plaintiffs, any person could
file suit as late as 45 days after the State's Attorney's
discovery of a violation the Act, then the 45-day
limitation period from the date of the meeting is
rendered superfluous."  The court added that "to allow
that same person to file suit in his or her own name
solely upon notification to the State's Attorney would,
no doubt, condone dilatory practices.  In fact, it would
confer upon persons other than the State's Attorney the
opportunity to delay filing an action ad infinitum by
simply not notifying the State's Attorney of the alleged
violation until some future date."  (Reid M. Paxson,
Mayor of the City of Northlake, v. Board of Education of
School District No. 87, Cook County, Illinois, No. 1-94-
4294, Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fifth
Division, Dec. 8, 1995)

Indiana

          A court of appeals has ruled that research
applications for projects involving the use of animals
are protected under an exception to the Public Records
Act pertaining to research.  The court noted that "the
application seeks information about the researcher, the
nature of the proposed or ongoing research project, and
procedures to be employed throughout the project.  The
sole subject matter of the application is a research
project and related personnel and procedures.  Even in
the narrowest sense, the information sought by the
application concerns research.  As such, it was not
subject to disclosure under the Public Records Act."
(Scott Robinson, M.D. v. Indiana University, etal., No.
49A02-9306-CV-253, Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second
District, Dec. 11, 1995)

New York

          The Court of Appeals has ruled that a list of
textbooks for courses at the State University of New York
at Farmingdale are agency records even though they are
created and maintained by a contractor.  The case
involved requests from Encore College Bookstores, a
competitor to the university-subsidized bookstore which
was run under contract by Barnes & Noble.  Encore had
initially gotten a copy of the textbook list from the
University, but after Barnes & Noble said its business
had dropped as a result, the University stopped keeping
a copy of the list.  The list was compiled by Barnes &
Noble, which gathered the information through inquiries
to professors each semester.  Both the trial court and an
appellate court had ruled that the lists were not subject
to disclosure because they were not agency records, but
the Court of Appeals disagreed.  It pointed out that the
function of the Auxiliary Service Corporation, which
operated the bookstore, was "to supply these essential
services -- including the campus bookstore -- for SUNY.
ASC's acts in discharging this delegated duty, then, are
performed on SUNY's behalf."  Applying this to the
circumstances, the court noted that "because ASC receives
a copy of the booklist compiled by its subcontractor,
Barnes & Noble, to ensure that the campus bookstore is
adequately maintained, it does so for the benefit of
SUNY, a government agency.  In other words, the booklist
information is `kept' or `held' by ASC `for an agency'.
Thus, the information falls within the unambiguous
definition of the term `records' under the [Freedom of
Information Law]."  The University urged the court to
apply the more restrictive federal standard, which, as
interpreted, requires custody and control of records.
But in rejecting that definition, the Court pointed out
that "to do so would undermine the legislative objective
to provide maximum disclosure by enabling a government
agency to insulate its records from public access by
delegating responsibility for creating or maintaining
particular information to a non-governmental entity."
However, the court went on to find that the list was
protected as commercial business information.  It noted
that "the booklist has obvious commercial value to Encore
since it would enable Encore to offer the precise
inventory that its target clientele -- SUNY-Farmingdale
students -- is required to purchase and that is currently
offered by  Barnes & Noble. . .The likelihood of harm to
Barnes & Noble is enhanced by the economic windfall
conferred upon Encore were it to receive the booklist at
the mere cost of FOIL fees.  The information in the
booklist, accumulated by virtue of the effort and expense
of Barnes & Noble, is also directly available to Encore.
Disclosure through FOIL, however, would enable Encore to
obtain the requisite information without expending its
resources, thereby reducing its cost of business and
placing Barnes & Noble at a competitive disadvantage."
(In the Matter of Encore College Bookstores, Inc. v.
Auxiliary Service Corporation of the State University of
New York at Farmingdale, No. 304, Court of Appeals of New
York, Dec. 27, 1995)

          The Court of Appeals has ruled that litigants who
prevail in exposing egregious violations of the Open
Meetings Law should be awarded attorney's fees as a
matter of course.  Ruling in a case in which the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Monticello decided at a closed
meeting to play "musical chairs" with their jobs --
rotating various village positions among themselves --
and then affirmed their prearranged plan at a subsequent
open meeting, the Court of Appeals explained that "on
this record, denial of a request for attorneys' fees
would constitute an abuse of discretion. . ."  The court
rejected the concept that attorney's fees were
appropriate only for repeated violations of the statute,
noting that "it is inconceivable that the Legislature had
only such recidivist offenders in mind when it vested
trial judges with the authority to award costs and fees
in the first place.  In fact, it is very often the
possibility of recovering costs and attorneys' fees that
gives private citizens like plaintiffs the impetus they
need to bring meritorious lawsuits to enforce the Open
Meetings Law thus advancing the statutory policy of
keeping New Yorkers better apprised of the actions of
their elected officials."  (In the Matter of Victor W.
Gordon v. Village of Monticello, Inc., No. 276, Court of
Appeals of New York, Dec. 7, 1995)

          An appellate court has ruled that the Department of
Transportation improperly withheld contract proposals
even after the contract had been awarded.  The court
noted that the winning proposal "did not include any
intra-agency confidential information which would assist
in DOT's negotiations."  It added that "once the contract
was awarded, the terms of [the winning bidder's] RFP
response could no longer be competitively sensitive.  DOT
implicitly recognized the validity of petitioner's
modified request by releasing a redacted version of [the
winning] RFP response."  The court pointed out that the
department raised the trade secrets exemption for the
first time at the appellate level, claiming that it had
no time to do so at the trial court level.  But the court
noted that "respondents, however, offer no explanation
for why DOT did not raise this exemption when it gave the
redacted version to the petitioner.  In our view, DOT
should, at that point, have given an explanation for
providing a limited version. . .Simply, this record does
not provide any basis to support respondents' position
that there was no opportunity for them to set forth the
argument that there was a trade secret exemption."  (In
the Matter of Cross-Sound Ferry Services, Inc. v.
Department of Transportation, No. 73187, Supreme Court of
New York, Appellate Division, Third Department, Dec. 7,
1995)

          An appellate court has ruled that the Saratoga
Economic Development Corporation is not a public agency
subject to the FOIL.  Although the town provided 50
percent of the Corporation's revenues, the court found
that the Corporation was not similar to the Buffalo
Enterprise Development Corporation which the Court of
Appeals had earlier ruled was a public agency.  The
appellate court noted that the Saratoga Corporation was
"an independent entity formed by private businessmen to
further their own interests. . .It has never been
furnished offices at County expense; no County employee
has ever served on its board; it receives some of its
funding from private individuals and corporations; and it
is not subject to most of the financial controls exerted
over the [Buffalo Corporation].  Significantly, while the
Court of Appeals found that the BEDC described itself as
an `agent' of the City, and that a substantial portion of
its activities consisted of the administration of loan
programs and, concomitantly, the disbursement of funds on
behalf of the City, respondent does none of these things;
rather it has simply contracted with the County on a fee-
for-service basis, much as any other independent business
entity might."  (In the Matter of Farms First v. Saratoga
Economic Development Corporation, No. 73053, Supreme
Court of New York, Appellate Division, Third Department,
Dec. 14, 1995)

Ohio

          A court of appeals has ruled that drafts of proposed
changes to the collective bargaining sections of the Ohio
Code which were prepared by or received by the Office of
Collective Bargaining must be disclosed.  The court noted
that there was no exemption for the draft records and
rejected the agency's suggestion that it adopt a
deliberative process privilege.  The court pointed out
that "even if respondents' public policy arguments may
have some merit, the legislature expresses Ohio public
records law and that statute permits no exemption for a
pre-decisional or deliberative privilege.  The General
Assembly has done all of the balancing needed in public
records law; public policy arguments should not sway our
interpretation."  (State of Ohio ex rel. District 1199,
The Health Care and Social Service Union, SEIU, AFL-CIO
v. Stephen Gulyassy, Deputy Director, No. 95APD01-26,
Court of Appeals of Ohio, Tenth Appellate District,
Franklin County, Dec. 12, 1995)

Wyoming

          After federal courts have largely shut down union
access to payrolls of federal projects to be used for
monitoring compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act, the
Wyoming Supreme Court has made clear that such records
are subject to disclosure under state law.  The
Department of Transportation argued there was no public
interest in disclosure, but the court disagreed, noting
that "the [plaintiffs] demonstrate the information can be
used to audit WTD's, the [Federal Highway
Administration's], and contractors' efforts to comply
both with federal requirements for a prevailing wage
rate, as well as with Wyoming's parallel statutory
requirements.  For that reason alone, any countervailing
interest of the workers in their privacy is outweighed by
a public interest."  The court rejected the claim that
disclosure was an invasion of privacy.  It explained that
"the argument relies almost entirely on construction of
a federal exemption which is not found in Wyoming's
public records act.  However, we are persuaded the record
makes no suggestion that affected employees have
complained about the potential of such a release, nor
would it be likely such complaints, if made, could
overcome the mandate of the public records act to release
information.  This is especially so because the workers
have already released their names and addresses to the
contractor, who has in turn released them to the State of
Wyoming, who has in turn released that information to the
federal government.  There is no indication in the record
that if the [plaintiffs] did contact the workers at their
homes that such would be significantly disruptive of
their privacy.  The record simply does not provide any
basis for denying release of the contested information."
(Wyoming Department of Transportation v. International
Union of Operating Engineers Local Union 800, No. 95-47
and No. 95-48, Supreme Court of Wyoming, Dec. 22, 1995)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

        Ontario Government Proposes Changes to FOI,

        Ontario Government Proposes Changes to FOI,
                  Privacy Statutes

          Ontario entered the world of access and privacy in
the latter 1980s with a carefully constructed statute
that combined access and privacy.  The statute created
the Office of Information and Privacy Commissioner and
was generally seen as one of the most progressive
statutes of its kind.  While Ontario has had its share of
knotty problems under the statute, the law has generally
stood the test of time and the Office of the Information
and Privacy Commissioner has emerged as a leader in its
thoughtful and capable implementation and analysis of the
statute.  But Ontario recently underwent a sweeping
change in political direction and now it seems almost
certain that the Freedom of Information and Protection of
Privacy Act and the Municipal Freedom of Information and
Protection of Privacy Act will be subjected to major
structural changes in the name of more efficient
government.

          An omnibus bill, the centerpiece of the province's
new "Common Sense Revolution," was introduced in the
legislature in late November and was slated for approval
by mid-December, all with very little legislative or
public debate.  However, after a sit-in by opposition
members, public hearings were scheduled.  The legislative
committee considering the omnibus bill was divided in
half, with one half dealing solely with healthcare
amendments and the other half dealing with everything
else.

          The amendments to the freedom of information and
protection of privacy statutes introduce the concept of
an application fee for the first time.  While the federal
Access to Information Act has always included a $5
application fee, the provincial acts have largely treated
such fees as barriers to access and have never provided
for them.  However the new fees, which will be set by
regulation, will apply not only to general information,
but to personal information as well, blurring the
distinction that is made in the federal acts where
personal information requests are not subject to an
application fee.  In another break with tradition, the
amendments will also require an application fee for
appealing an agency's determination to the Office of the
Information and Privacy Commissioner.  The amendments
will also increase fees for search time, costs of
preparing a record for disclosure, and computer and other
costs associated with locating, retrieving, processing,
and copying a record; the amendments also provide for
shipping costs and any other costs incurred in responding
to a request.

          The final significant change will allow agencies to
refuse requests that are considered frivolous or
vexatious.  While multiple or large-scale requests have
sometimes been seen by agencies as frivolous and
vexatious, Information and Privacy Commissioner Tom
Wright ruled this past summer directly on the issue as a
way of setting some guidelines for making such
determinations.  While Wright had decided that the issue
needed addressing on its own merits, part of the
rationale for dealing with the issue was to provide
guidance which would result in consistent treatment of
such requests.  While Wright realized that one agency's
idea of what constituted a frivolous request could well
be another requester's idea of a perfectly legitimate
inquiry, he carefully restrained his decision to deal
with those instances where the request was a clear abuse
of process.  Part of the fear that such determinations
can be made on an agency-by-agency basis is the potential
that such determinations might be abused for no more
legitimate a reason than that the agency did not want to
incur the time or cost involved in responding to a
request.  The new amendment allows a requester whose
request has been rejected as being frivolous or vexatious
to appeal to the Commissioner; ironically, such appeals
will be free.

          While many governments, including the U.S.
government and many state governments, are in the throes
of budget-cutting battles, Ontario is the first
jurisdiction where freedom of information and privacy
protections have been singled out for reductions early in
the game.   On the federal level in the U.S.,
implementation of such statutes has often been given low
priority and agencies struggle with inadequate budgets
and staff, but Congress has not moved to trim them as
statutory rights.  If the current Ontario government
actually views these potential changes as a way to
increase revenues, experience shows clearly that such a
goal is very unlikely.  The nearly certain result of the
proposed changes will be to lower the number of requests,
which, in turn, may save institutions money if their
workloads become small enough that staff can be let go or
moved to another office.  The addition of an application
fee for personal information is likely to impact the
privacy rights of individuals to an even greater extent
than will application fees for information requested by
subject matter.  Not only will individuals pay a fee to
access their personal information, other related rights,
particularly the right of correction or amendment, will
be affected as well.  Since most individuals will not
know if their files are incorrect until they have
actually seen them, corrections will occur only after
access is made pursuant to the new fee regulations.
Since this aspect of fair information practices is based
on the assumption that individuals are in a position to
be most knowledgeable about the accuracy of their
personal information and most concerned about ensuring
accuracy, the entire system is premised on the ability of
individuals to access their files.  Roadblocks
represented by fees may undermine that premise.

          While access advocates are fond of making the
connection between principles of participatory democracy,
freedom of speech and press, and the need for citizen
access to government information, no court has ever quite
made that leap of faith.  But that doesn't mean the
connection doesn't exist.  When governments take measures
that denigrate the ability of citizens to inquire about
their government for no other reason than to save money
or make government more "efficient," that government has
put a pricetag on that aspect of democracy.  Such actions
are likely to have two results.  The first is that fewer
people will participate in the scheme of access and
debate on a societal level will be incrementally more
uninformed.  The other result of fees in such statutes is
to further exacerbate the chasm between economic haves
and economic have-nots.  Those entities, primarily
business, which can easily absorb the fees and realize
that government information is still a bargain in the
commercial market will continue to access government
information and reap the potential benefits.  Those who
are driven by grassroots activism or mere personal
curiosity will begin to drop out of the race or at least
think twice before plunging ahead with a request.  If
information is truly power, the fostering of divisions
along economic, class or political lines ultimately has
consequences that resonate throughout a democratic
society.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

          The D.C. Circuit has ruled that the Secret Service

          The D.C. Circuit has ruled that the Secret Service
properly withheld records concerning the breakup of a
meeting of computer hackers at the Pentagon City Mall by
mall security under Exemption 7(C) (invasion of privacy
concerning law enforcement records) and Exemption 7(D)
(confidential sources). However, it told the Secret
Service to show that the sources had been promised
confidentiality.  Although the agency said it routinely
treated source information as confidential, the court
pointed out that "the manner in which an agency
`routinely' handles information is not sufficient to
establish an implied assurance of confidentiality as to
any particular source."  It then noted that "the Service
offered no evidence that a fear of retaliation by hackers
is sufficiently widespread to justify an inference that
sources of information relating to computer crimes expect
their identities and the information they provide to be
kept confidential."  The agency was able to establish
that at least one source had explicitly requested
confidentiality.  Ironically, it wasn't until the D.C.
Circuit issued its opinion that the plaintiffs --
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility -- even
knew there was more than one source.   As to 7(C), the
court took a hardline position that virtually any mention
of an individual in law enforcement records gave rise to
a privacy expectation.  CPSR pointed out that "the
records also contain information relating to individuals
who attended the meeting of the 2600 Club" and argued
that "the exemption does not authorize the Service to
withhold this information because, it its view, no stigma
could attach to persons who `were engaged in wholly
lawful activity and were peaceably assembled in a public
place.'"  But the court disagreed, noting that "even if
we were to assume that the Service's records contain such
information and even if those individuals were not
suspects, their public identification with a meeting that
reportedly attracted the attention of law enforcement
officials would subject them to a degree of interest that
would impinge upon their privacy.  We conclude, then,
that Exemption 7(C) permits the Service to withhold the
names and identifying information of persons appearing in
its records so long as their privacy interest in not
being connected in any way with a criminal investigation
outweighs the public interest in disclosure."  (Computer
Professionals for Social Responsibility v. United States
Secret Service, No. 94-5247, U.S. Court of Appeals for
the District of Columbia Circuit, Jan. 2)


          A federal judge in Maine has rejected the rationale
of Dismukes v. Dept. of the Interior and has ruled that
digitized data maintained by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration for use in electronic charting
systems was an agency record subject to disclosure.  NOAA
had argued that it was not obligated to provide the
digitized data because its paper-format charts were
already available and contained the same information.
But Judge D. Brock Hornby, wondered why "if the materials
are subject to disclosure in some format (here, the paper
charts), then why not in any other format in which they
also exist?"  He provided the agency's answer: "Expense
and inconvenience to the agency are the obvious answers,"
but noted that "Congress seems to have addressed these
concerns by providing specific measures for cost
recovery."  Noting that the Supreme Court in Dept. of
Justice v. Tax Analysts had held that agency records may
be withheld only if they are subject to an exemption,
Hornby added that "the paper charts -- information the
human eye can decode -- and the binary number strings --
instructions a computer can decode to generate an image
of a chart on a monitor -- are both agency records.  They
also each add information to the underlying raw data
about depths, shoals, buoy locations, etc., in order to
make the data more easily usable -- by eye, the mind, or
the computer.  Nothing in the FOIA excuses an agency from
disclosing a particular record because it has disclosed
the content elsewhere in a different format."  (Delorme
Publishing Company v. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration of the United States, Department of
Commerce, Civil Action No. 95-94-P-H, U.S. District Court
for the District of Maine, Dec. 11, 1995)


          The Eighth Circuit has ruled that a district court
judge improperly dismissed Jack Urban's FOIA suit for a
copy of a polygraph test he took administered by the
Kansas Bureau of Investigation and provided to the U.S.
Attorney for Kansas.  The lower court dismissed the case
based on the government's claim that it could not find
the record.  The court of appeals noted that "when a
government agency claims that it does not possess or
control a requested document, the agency must show it
fully discharged its statutory obligations by `conducting
a search reasonably calculated to uncover all relevant
documents.'  Thus, when the question is whether a
requested document exists, or is outside the government's
possession or control, an FOIA action is not moot, and
dismissal prior to service will almost never be
appropriate."  The court said that the response of the
Assistant U.S Attorney for Kansas that he could not
locate the records in the files of the U.S. Attorney's
office was not adequate.  The court noted that "Urban has
now spent nearly eighteen months seeking a copy of
seemingly innocuous test results.  His early requests got
no response or a cryptic brush off.  He has never been
told why he is not entitled to the documents.  And his
attempt to invoke, FOIA, a statute intended to foster
greater access to government records, has instead
fostered more paper shuffling and lame excuses."
Remanding the case to district court, the court of
appeals noted that "there may be a legitimate reason why
Urban is not entitled to the materials he requests, but
none appears in this record."  (Jack Urban v. United
States of America; Kansas Bureau of Investigation, No.
95-2386, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit,
Dec. 27, 1995)


          A federal judge in New York has given the FBI a year
to respond to Wayne Pray's request.  Noting that the FBI
had a backlog of 14,055 cases as of May, 1995, Judge
Sidney Stein also indicated that there were at least
1,616 requests ahead of Pray's and that the agency was
processing requests at the rate of 19 per month.  Noting
that this would mean Pray's request would be completed in
seven years, Stein observed that "it seems inconceivable
that defendants would be requesting this Court to stay
Pray's request for seven years.  Therefore this Court is
prepared to assume that defendants' declaration contains
a typographical error, that the average of 19 cases per
month is actually 190 cases per month and that defendants
should therefore be able to comply with Pray's request in
approximately 9 months.  Because of the difficulty in
estimating time, this Court will grant defendants' motion
for a stay until December 31, 1996 or until Pray's
request is responded to, whichever is sooner."  (Wayne
Pray v. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Civil Action No.
95-0380 (SHS), U.S District Court for the Southern
District of New York, Dec. 27, 1995)


          A federal court in New York has accepted a
magistrate's recommendation and found that the FBI
properly withheld records concerning the murder of Pedro
Bueno and the whereabouts of the plaintiff's wife and two
daughters.  The only record disclosed to Devernon Le
Grand was a letter from the Director of the FBI to the
National Center for Analysis of Violent Crime field
office in New York informing it that a Violent Crime
Apprehension Program (VICAP) report had been submitted
for Bueno.  In withholding the report under Exemption
7(C) (invasion of privacy concerning law enforcement
records) and Exemption 7(D) (confidential sources), the
magistrate noted that there was no public interest in the
VICAP report, but that "the administration of VICAP,
which seeks to assist state and local law enforcement
agencies in their investigations of unsolved violent
homicides, clearly involves concerns of potential
harassment of personnel and interference with law
enforcement efforts."  As to 7(D), the magistrate
observed that "the VICAP Report for Pedro Bueno was
submitted by the New York State Police to the FBI under
circumstances which support an inference of
confidentiality.  It consists of information concerning
the investigation by the New York State Police of the
Pedro Bueno homicide.  It is reasonable to infer that a
state law enforcement agency would not turn over to the
FBI all of its investigative information on an unsolved
homicide if the information were not to be treated as
confidential by the FBI."  (Devernon Le Grand v. Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Civil Action No. 94-0300, U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of New York,
Nov. 29, 1995)


          Judge Louis Oberdorfer has ruled that the FBI
properly invoked a series of exemptions and conducted
adequate searches in most instances in responding to a
request from Jeffrey Steinberg.  However, Oberdorfer
found that some searches were inadequate, noting that the
Charlotte and New York offices had not justified their
search for a Terrorist Photograph Album.  He pointed out
that the agency failed to address Steinberg's contention
that the album should be searched.  He noted that
"plaintiff has identified a particular document, the TPA,
that is likely to contain any responsive information that
exists . . .In this case, defendant has failed to meet
its burden of showing that its search was reasonable."
As for the search of the Richmond office for records
concerning the Dan Bar Farm, Oberdorfer noted that the
agency had alluded to a resident agent in Radford, VA,
who had information about the farm; however, the agency
told the court there was no Radford agent.  But Steinberg
produced a document from an Alexandria agent stating that
an agent under Richmond's supervision had information
about the farm.  Steinberg suggested the agency contact
the Alexandria agent and find out who the "missing" agent
was.  Although the agency claimed to do so would be
tantamount to conducting research, Oberdorfer noted that
"it is not unreasonable to require defendant to obtain a
single redacted name and make a single phone call to
clarify defendant's mistake and discover where responsive
records, if any, are located."  (Jeffrey Steinberg v.
U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Action No. 93-2409-LFO,
U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, Oct.
31, 1995)


          Judge Louis Oberdorfer has ruled that the Customs
Service search for records responsive to a request from
Jeffrey Steinberg was inadequate.  Oberdorfer noted that
"although defendant has stated in conclusory terms that
[the Treasury Enforcement Communications System] is used
to locate investigative files and is, to its mind,
comprehensive, defendant has failed to explain or even to
state, `that no other record system was likely to produce
responsive documents.'"  He pointed out that Steinberg
had produced a list of 18 possible systems of records
that might have responsive records.  He noted that
"plaintiff has shown that it is reasonable to conclude
that additional systems exist and that TECS does not
include these systems.  Plaintiff has shown that it would
not be `unduly burdensome' to search these systems, given
that they are organized alphabetically."  To further
clarify the search issue, Oberdorfer ordered the agency
to respond to Steinberg's interrogatories.  (Jeffrey
Steinberg v. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Civil
Action No. 93-2348-LFO, U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia, Sept. 13, 1995)


          A federal court in Chicago has ruled that an FOIA
suit against the Veterans Administration is not moot.
After William Johnson filed suit against the VA, the
agency disclosed records responsive to his request.
However, Johnson continued to contend that it had not
provided all the requested information.  Refusing to
dismiss the case, Judge Suzanne Conlon noted that "while
the medical center denies the existence of the
information in issue, Johnson asserts that his
conversations with the medical center's pharmacy indicate
otherwise.  The Seventh Circuit views conflicting claims
as to the existence of documents or information as a form
of improper withholding.  Accordingly, the case is not
moot."  (William J. Johnson, Sr. v. Veterans
Administration, Civil Action No. 95 C 4909, U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern
Division, Dec. 6, 1995)

          A federal judge in Michigan has ruled that the IRS
properly refused to honor a subpoena requiring testimony
of a special agent and production of documents pertinent
to an ongoing law enforcement investigation.
Acknowledging that he was not dealing with an FOIA
request, Judge Gerald Rosen nevertheless found that FOIA
case law was instructive in reaching a conclusion.
Relying on the Sixth Circuit's decision in Dickerson v.
Dept. of Justice, 992 F.2d 1426 (6th Cir. 1993), which
upheld the Justice Department's decision to withhold all
its files on the Jimmy Hoffa investigation, Rosen noted
that "the level of justification demanded from an agency
when it refuses to disclose information surely must
depend on the nature of the materials sought and their
relation to any ongoing criminal investigations.  The
materials sought by Plaintiffs go to the very heart of
the ongoing criminal investigation of the Plaintiffs."
He concluded that "the subpoena issued in connection with
Plaintiffs' state court action seeks testimony and
materials that are central to an ongoing IRS criminal
investigation.  The District Director reasonably
determined that compliance with this subpoena would
seriously impair federal tax administration."  (Branch
International Services, Inc., etal. v. United States of
America and Internal Revenue Service, Civil Action No.
94-CV-75003-DT, U.S. District Court for the Eastern
District of Michigan, Southern Division, Nov. 29, 1995)


          A federal court in Minnesota has ruled that Steve
Netzman cannot have access to IRS information concerning
charges or penalties filed against Philip French.  The
court found that the records were "tax information"
covered by Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code.
The judge noted that the Haskell Amendment -- which
"precludes from exemption data in a form which cannot be
associated with, or otherwise identify, directly or
indirectly, a particular taxpayer -- was the only
exception to non-disclosure under 6103.  He pointed out
that the records Netzman was requesting consisted of
"information which relates directly to a particular
individual and, therefore, is not subject to the Haskell
Amendment."  (Steve Netzman v. Internal Revenue Service,
Civil Action No. 3-95-248, U.S. District Court for the
District of Minnesota, Third Division, Nov. 21, 1995)


          A federal judge in New Hampshire has ruled that the
IRS properly withheld records from Terrence Bennett.
Judge Paul Barbadoro pointed out that "the documents
refer to information exchanged pursuant to a tax treaty.
The Service reasonably concluded that the disclosure of
such documents would chill future cooperation with
foreign government treaty partners.  Therefore, it is
entitled to withhold the documents on the ground that
their disclosure would seriously impair federal tax
administration."  (Terrence M. Bennett v. Internal
Revenue Service, Civil Action No. 95-73-B, U.S. District
Court for the District of New Hampshire, Nov. 8, 1995)


          A federal court in California has ruled that data on
which the Department of Health and Human Services relied
to show that the Loma Linda Community Hospital had over-
represented the number of Medicare patients it served
should not have been withheld based on the Privacy Act.
The Department claimed that only 14.77 percent of Loma
Linda's Medicare patients qualified as low-income.  To
defend itself against the charges, Loma Linda requested
access to the underlying data, claiming that its
disclosure would be a routine use under the Privacy Act.
The court found that Loma Linda was entitled to see the
data because it had already had access to the
confidential information contained in it in order to make
its own calculations under the state Medi-Cal program.
The court noted that "the policy underlying the Privacy
Act of protecting confidential information from
disclosure is not implicated in this particular factual
situation.  Even if release of the data relied upon by
the [Health Care Financing Administration] in making its
calculation had unexpectedly included information not
already known to Loma Linda, a confidentiality order
could have been imposed to protect the privacy interests
in issue."  (Loma Linda Community Hospital v. Donna
Shalala, Civil Action No. ED-CV-940055-RT and ED-CV-
940068-RT, U.S. District Court for the Central District
of California, Dec. 15, 1995)


          The report on the state of access to public records
prepared by former House Government Information
Subcommittee counsel Bob Gellman has been published in
Government Information Quarterly.  The paper, entitled
"Public Records -- Access, Privacy and Public Policy: A
Discussion Paper," is reprinted at 12 Government
Information Quarterly, p. 391-426.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>