
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B05-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B039-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025541 text/html 62357
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:38 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:16 GMT
Content-length: 62170
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it62.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 08, 1993<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* A REPORT *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>AN INTERVIEW WITH JAPANESE AMBASSADOR TAKAKAZU KURIYAMA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2259 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>FY 1993 BUDGET REVEALS FISCAL STRAINS by Jon Choy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2024 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INCREASE IN FY 1993 DEFENSE BUDGET SMALLEST IN 33 YEARS by Barbara Wanner</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1339 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* NOTES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>JAPANESE AID TO SOMALIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(274 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NTT PROCUREMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(384 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* A REPORT *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>GOVERNMENT ANTICIPATES SLOWER GROWTH IN FY 1993 by Douglas Ostrom</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(895 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>GROWING GLOBAL ROLE IN JAPAN'S FY 1993 FOREIGN AID BUDGET by Margo Grimm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(787 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

AN INTERVIEW WITH JAPANESE AMBASSADOR TAKAKAZU KURIYAMA

SUMMARY
       Any change of administration in Washington puts Japanese government
leaders and business executives on the alert.  A Democrat in the White House
after 12 years of Republican rule transforms caution into wariness.  As Japan's
ambassador to the United States, Takakazu Kuriyama is uniquely positioned to
assess the impact on bilateral relations of the transition from George Bush to
Bill Clinton.  In a recent discussion with JEI Senior Political Analyst Barbara
Wanner the ambassador offered some observations certain to calm the jitters in
Tokyo.


Q.     What will Bill Clinton's election to president mean for U.S.-Japan
relations?  Do you anticipate any changes?

A.     No, I do not anticipate any basic change in our bilateral relations.
Prior to the election, however, some Japanese commentators expressed their
unease with Mr.  Clinton because he is not well known in Japan, even though he
visited a few times as governor of Arkansas.  Whenever there is a new president
there will be an understandable feeling of uneasiness among some Japanese,
which can be attributed to a fear of the unknown.  There also was apprehension
about Mr. Clinton because of the Japanese tendency to identify the Democratic
Party with more protectionist elements in the United States.  All in all,
however, it is my impression that the president-elect has a broad and balanced
international outlook, so we can expect basically a continuation of the
economic, trade and political-security policies pursued by the Bush
administration.  Too, there is a solid recognition on the part of responsible
American political leaders that the U.S.-Japan relationship is critical for
both countries as well as the world.  That is why I believe we will see policy
continuity.

Q.     What trade issues do you think the Bush administration and the Japanese
government successfully have tackled during the past four years and what issues
await the Clinton economic team?

 A.     In the latter part of the 1980s the Japanese government and the Bush
administration made substantial progress on the trade front until the recession
hit the Japanese economy.  If you examine the trade statistics you will see a
remarkable increase in Japan-bound U.S. exports as well as an increase in
Japanese direct investment in the United States [see Appendix].   This was a
sound start in building a more balanced and beneficial relationship between the
two countries.  Work still needs to be done in several areas, however, if this
economic realignment is to continue.

       One of the most important factors contributing to the favorable
developments in the second half of the 1980s was the exchange rate
realignment.  The increase in U.S. exports, of course, was prompted by the
appreciation of the yen, which made U.S. products more competitive in the
Japanese market.  As the yen strengthened, the Japanese government also made a
conscious effort to try to shift the economy's gears to take advantage of
developments in the currency markets by implementing a number of measures to
stimulate domestic demand; these had the effect of substantially increasing
imports.  In addition, Tokyo pursued a number of initiatives designed to
improve foreign access to the Japanese market.  These factors have led to a
substantial reduction in the trade imbalance.  With this solid foundation I
think the bilateral trade picture will continue to improve once the Japanese
economy picks up again.

Q.     Do you foresee any specific sectoral issues that may challenge the
Clinton administration in its first year?

A.     Automobiles, automotive parts and semiconductors, of course, still will
be on the trade agenda.  But these industries have engaged in collaborative
activities, and the Japanese government has sought to promote the purchase of
U.S.-made automobiles, automotive parts and semiconductors, which over time
should yield tangible results.  While I cannot forecast specific results for
the coming year I do hope that these issues no longer will create as much
friction in bilateral relations.  It is very important that Tokyo resolve these
sectoral disputes as soon as possible so that imports can increase and Japan's
current account surplus, which now is rising, can be contained.

Q.     Turning to the political-security side of U.S.-Japan relations, I
understand there is growing support in the Japanese government for the
formation of a new Asian Pacific security forum that would involve the key
players in this region.  How would that arrangement complement or possibly even
change the U.S.-Japan security relationship?

A.     We must recognize the change that now is taking place in the Asian
Pacific political-security structure with the end of the Cold War and the
collapse of the so-called bipolar power configuration.  But a great deal of
uncertainty still exists because of the economic and political problems in the
republics comprising the former Soviet Union, tensions on the Korean peninsula
and developments in China.  Tokyo continues to believe -- and I imagine the new
administration also will recognize -- that the U.S.-Japan security relationship
is essential to ensuring regional stability.  For this reason I do not see any
need for or any possibility of changing our bilateral security ties in the
foreseeable future.

       On the other hand, we have reached a stage where we need a multilateral
forum to enable Asian Pacific countries, including, of course, the United
States, the countries of ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations],
Australia, New Zealand and South Korea, to exchange views on a regional
security situation in which all of these countries have an interest.
Admittedly, their perceptions of what constitute security threats may not be
quite the same.  Still, these countries have a common interest in maintaining
political stability and peace in this part of the world.

       The Japanese government feels that it would be useful to have a
dialogue among these countries so that we can develop a common understanding
of the security situation in the Asian Pacific and have a better appreciation
for our respective policies.  Last year Tokyo proposed this kind of
multilateral dialogue using the forum of the so-called post-ministerial
conference of ASEAN [an annual meeting with ASEAN's foreign ministers and
their dialogue partners, which include the United States and Japan].  The
reaction of the ASEAN countries at that time was somewhat cautious.
Evidently, they did not understand what we were trying to do.  This year,
however, the ASEAN countries appeared more agreeable to this approach. We
think it would be in Japan's interest as well as the interests of the region
as a whole if we pursued this two-track approach of maintaining Japan-U.S.
security ties and promoting regional dialogue to ensure stability in the
Asian Pacific.

Q.     In some of the articles that you have written on challenges facing
U.S.-Japan relations you discuss the difference between burdensharing and
responsibility sharing.  Please elaborate on why this is important in the
post-Cold War era.

A.     The notion of burdensharing, rightly or wrongly, often is perceived by
many in Japan as meaning that the United States first establishes its policy
and then expects its friends to foot the bill.  We do not think that is the
right way to manage the bilateral relationship.  If Japan is to become an equal
partner, then we should share with the United States the responsibilities for
political peace and economic growth.  If Tokyo were to participate in the
policymaking process, it would be all the more natural for us to share the
costs accordingly.  We have been telling our American friends that on major
political and economic issues we should maintain very close consultations so we
can coordinate our policies.  If that is done, it would be legitimate for the
United States to ask Japan and other allies to share more of the burden.

       Tokyo's request to participate in the CSCE [Council for Security
Cooperation in Europe] process also reflects the Japanese government's desire
to share more responsibility for ensuring world peace, as does our push for a
permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.  We think that in due
course we will be awarded an appropriate place on the Security Council since we
are expected to play a more active role in the United Nations.

Q.     Speaking of responsiblity sharing and Japan's participation in the
United Nations, not long ago the Japanese government for the first time since
World War II dispatched members of the Self-Defense Forces to support the
U.N.-sponsored peacekeeping mission in Cambodia.  If there was another Persian
Gulf-type crisis, do you think Tokyo could respond more quickly in terms of
sending nonmilitary assistance now that this law is on the books?

A.     The new law authorizes Japanese participation in peacekeeping operations
under the aegis of the U.N.  In the case of the Persian Gulf war, of course,
there was a Security Council resolution condemning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
Strictly speaking, however, Operations Desert Shield/Desert Storm were not U.N.
operations; they involved coalition forces led by the United States.  Legally
the cases of Cambodia and the Persian Gulf are different.   But insofar as
U.N.-sponsored peacekeeping initiatives are concerned, the Japanese government
does not intend to limit our participation to Cambodia.  We are quite willing
to participate in similar operations outside of Asia.

Q.     In light of the conclusion of the North American Free Trade Agreement as
well as developments in the European Community, is the Japanese government
worried that the global trading system may break down into trading blocs that
would shut out Japanese goods -- particularly if the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade talks remains deadlocked?

A.     The Japanese government certainly is concerned about that possibility.
Obviously, we do not want to see the world breaking up into three or even more
trading blocs.  Japan has a huge stake in maintaining and strengthening an open
global trading system.  And with the world becoming increasingly interdependent
there is a much greater need for a common set of rules governing trade.  The
prospect of escalating frictions and bilateral and multilateral disagreements
in the absence of these rules, in fact, creates a strong incentive for bringing
the Uruguay Round to a successful conclusion.  On that point Japan, the United
States and the European Community all agree.

                                  * * * * * *



                          U.S. Trade, 1980 and 1985-92
           (in millions of dollars; exports f.a.s., imports Customs)

                                    Percent                 Percent     Trade
                       Exports      Change      Imports     Change      Balance

                                   Total Trade

1980                   $225,722       21.0%    $245,262       16.6%    $-19,540
1985                    218,828       -2.3      345,276        6.0     -126,448
1986                    227,159        3.8      369,961        7.1     -142,803
1987                    254,122       11.9      406,241        9.8     -152,119
1988                    322,426       26.9      440,952        8.5     -118,526
1989                    363,812       12.8      473,211        7.3     -109,399
1990                    393,592        8.2      495,311        4.7     -101,718
1991                    421,730        7.1      487,129       -1.7      -65,399
1992 (Ten Months)       371,994        6.4      439,606        8.7      -67,612

                                Trade with Japan

1980                     20,790       18.3       30,867       17.6      -10,077
1985                     22,631       -4.0       68,783       20.4      -46,152
1986                     26,882       18.8       81,911       19.1      -55,030
1987                     28,249        5.1       84,575        3.3      -56,326
1988                     37,725       33.5       89,519        5.8      -51,794
1989                     44,494       17.9       93,553        4.5      -49,059
1990                     48,580        9.2       89,684       -4.1      -41,105
1991                     48,125       -0.9       91,511        2.0      -43,385
1992 (Ten Months)        39,986       -0.7       78,905        4.2      -38,918

                          Trade with European Community

1980                     58,855        n.a.      38,211        n.a.      20,644
1985                     48,994       -3.0       67,822       12.6      -18,828
1986                     53,154        8.5       75,736       11.7      -22,582
1987                     60,575       14.0       81,188        7.2      -20,613
1988                     75,755       25.1       84,939        4.6       -9,183
1989                     86,331       14.0       85,153        0.3        1,178
1990                     98,129       13.7       91,877        7.9        6,252
1991                    103,122        5.1       86,157       -6.2       16,965
1992 (Ten Months)        86,432        0.8       77,152        7.7        9,280

                                Trade with Canada

1980                     40,331        n.a.      41,025        8.2         -694
1985                     53,287        2.9       69,006        3.8      -15,719
1986                     55,512        4.2       68,253       -1.1      -12,741
1987                     59,814        7.7       71,085        4.1      -11,271
1988                     71,622       19.7       81,398       14.5       -9,776
1989                     78,809       10.0       87,953        8.1       -9,144
1990                     83,674        6.2       91,380        3.9       -7,707
1991                     85,150        1.8       91,064       -0.3       -5,914
1992 (Ten Months)        75,779        5.7       81,897        7.7       -6,118

              Trade with Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan

1980                     14,741       24.1       17,779       11.5       -3,038
1985                     16,918       -4.5       39,066        7.4      -22,148
1986                     18,290        8.1       46,136       18.1      -27,846
1987                     23,547       28.7       57,664       25.0      -34,117
1988                     34,816       47.9       63,030        9.3      -28,214
1989                     38,429       10.4       62,774       -0.5      -24,345
1990                     40,734        6.0       60,573       -3.5      -19,839
1991                     45,628       12.0       59,277       -2.1      -13,648
1992 (Ten Months)        39,709        5.3       51,892        6.0      -12,183

                      Trade with People's Republic of China

1980                      3,755      117.8        1,062       79.0        2,693
1985                      3,856       28.3        3,862       26.0           -6
1986                      3,106      -19.4        4,771       23.5       -1,665
1987                      3,497       12.6        6,293       31.9       -2,796
1988                      5,021       43.6        8,511       35.3       -3,490
1989                      5,755       14.6       11,990       40.9       -6,235
1990                      4,806      -16.5       15,237       27.1      -10,431
1991                      6,278       30.6       18,969       24.5      -12,691
1992 (Ten Months)         5,896       15.5       21,375       38.6      -15,479

Source:  Department of Commerce


 Japan's Foreign Direct Investment Position in the United States, Yearend
1985-91

                (in millions of dollars, historical cost basis)

                           1985    1986    1987    1988    1989    1990    1991

Total                   $19,313 $26,824 $34,421 $51,126 $67,268 $81,775 $86,658

Petroleum                    31      34     -56     -64    -122      11     113
Manufacturing             2,738   3,578   4,970  11,065  15,601  17,153  18,657
  Food Products             159     158     281     393     678     793     769
  Chemicals                 268     279     932   1,677   2,350   3,101   3,446
  Metals                    562     471     602   1,293   2,527   2,326   2,504
  Machinery                 715   1,052   1,686   2,930   3,943   5,203   5,396
  Other                   1,033   1,618   1,469   4,772   6,101   5,730   6,542
Wholesale Trade          11,796  13,687  15,927  18,462  21,111  25,750  26,935
Retail Trade                251     290     373     411     571     639   1,102
Banking                   2,160   2,704   3,655   4,367   4,963   5,931   6,797
Finance                      51   2,087   2,994   5,666   9,291   8,605   9,120
Insurance                   119     *       188     266     368     388     572
Real Estate               1,536   2,941   4,386   8,190  10,665  15,084  14,948
Services                                  1,603   2,314   4,043   7,393   7,574
Other                       629   1,306     381     449     779     820     839

*Suppressed to avoid disclosure of data on individual companies.

Source:  Department of Commerce


                                  * * * * * *
 .DEPARTMENT
************
* B REPORT *
************



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

FY 1993 BUDGET REVEALS FISCAL STRAINS by Jon Choy

       Moving quickly to counter Japan's sluggish economic conditions, the new
cabinet of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa signed off on a spending plan for FY
1993 that diverts greater resources to public works and other stimulative
categories at the expense of other spending options.  The public had mixed
reactions to this reallocation.  Some observers said that the plan, which won
cabinet approval December 26, represented the most the government could do
given the tight revenue picture, while others criticized it as having little
real effect on the economy.

       The government was able to hold to its pledge not to issue new bonds to
fund general operations in fiscal 1993 only by deferring some payments and
transferring some new borrowing to local governments.  This sleight of hand
underscores the need for major tax reform, according to Japanese analysts.
Given the current turbulent domestic political situation, however, prospects
for smooth passage of the spending package and action on more weighty tax
reforms in the upcoming Diet session, set to open January 22, are uncertain.

       The overall 0.2 percent increase to Y72.4 trillion ($57.8 billion) in
the initial general account budget for the 12 months beginning April 1 points
to the preoccupation that the Ministry of Finance has with holding the line on
spending.  The bare rise in outlays is the smallest since FY 1987's zero growth
but masks a solid 3.2 percent increase in discretionary spending (see Table 1),
although that is the smallest gain for the discretionary side of the budget
since FY 1990.  The growth was made possible, in part, by a 1 percent cut in
transfers to local governments and a stunning 6.1 percent drop in the cost of
servicing the national debt.  Nevertheless, MOF estimates that the total amount
of outstanding national debt will reach Y176 trillion ($1.4 trillion) by the
end of the current fiscal year and then climb another Y6 trillion ($48 billion)
over the next 12 months.

       From a more disaggregated standpoint the cabinet's spending plan for the
year beginning April 1 reflects steadily growing demands on Japan from the
international community as well as new imperatives to boost the sagging
domestic economy.  The difference between the Ministry of Finance's draft
budget and the budget approved by the cabinet is stark and surprising in some
cases (see Table 2).  While MOF granted some leeway to defense spending and the
foreign aid program, budget planners had the greatest change of heart for
education and science as well as social security funding.



         Table 1:  Summary of General Account Outlays, FY 1992-FY 1993

                              (in billions of yen)

                                                  Initial     Initial
                                                  FY 1992     FY 1993    Change

Discretionary Items
Social Security                                 Y12,737.4   Y13,145.7      3.2%
Education and Science                             5,683.4     5,820.5      2.4
Pensions                                          1,783.9     1,776.6     -0.4
Defense                                           4,551.8     4,640.6      2.0
Economic Cooperation                                905.1       957.1      5.7
Public Works                                      7,956.1     8,458.9      6.3
Disaster Reconstruction                              68.2        68.2      0.0
Small Business Measures                             195.6       195.1     -0.2
Food Control Programs                               342.1       311.3     -9.0
Energy Measures                                     631.3       655.1      3.8
Administration and Operations                     4,577.3     4,729.4      3.3
Transfer of NTT Proceeds to Public Works            216.6       186.6    -13.9
Infrastructure Investment                             0.0         0.0      0.0
Reserves                                            350.0       350.0      0.0
  Subtotal                                       39,998.8    41,295.1      3.2

Nondiscretionary Items
Transfers to Local Governments                   15,771.9    15,617.4     -1.0
Debt Service                                     16,447.3    15,442.3     -6.1
  Subtotal                                       32,219.2    31,059.7     -3.6

Total                                            72,218.0    72,354.8      0.2



       These latter categories each showed respectable increases compared with
the current fiscal year's initial budget, but their gains in the general
account budget placed well behind the 6.3 percent increase for public works and
the 5.7 percent rise for economic cooperation.  When all government spending is
considered, public works outlays will be 4.8 percent higher in FY 1993 than
what was planned initially for the current fiscal year (see Table 3).  General
account outlays for official development assistance will top Y1 trillion ($8
billion) for the first time.  Although defense spending will go up just under 2
percent -- far below the Japan Defense Agency's 3.6 percent target, that gain
is better than the 1.7 percent figure penciled into MOF's draft budget.

       Food control programs suffered the biggest percentage cut among
programs, leaving this line item at less than one-third its FY 1991 level.
(The extraordinary category referring to proceeds from the sale of Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Corp. stock is not a program category.)

       As for individual programs, MOF listed the following highlights:

       --  About 7.1 percent more money will be spent in FY 1993 on social
infrastructure, bringing the total to over Y2.5 trillion ($20 billion).
       --  A five-year road improvement program will be launched in FY 1993,
with a total spending target of Y76 trillion ($608 billion).
        --  Government aid to retrain employees or to pay temporarily laid-off
workers will skyrocket to Y50.9 billion ($407.2 million) from Y0.9 billion
($7.2 million).
       --  The Global Environmental Fund will be initiated with Y1.5 billion
($12 million) in funding.
       --  The Japan Patent Office budget will be increased by 4.7 percent to
speed processing of applications, a commitment made to the United States in the
Structural Impediments Initiative talks.
       --  The immigration staff at the Ministry of Justice will be expanded by
84 percent or 168 employees to assist with the influx of foreign visitors and
undocumented workers.  Another Y1.1 billion ($8.8 million) is penciled in to
bolster efforts to control and manage the problem of illegal workers.
       --  Funding for AIDS education and care programs has received new
impetus and will total Y10.1 billion ($80.8 million) in the upcoming fiscal
year.
       --  Income support for rice farmers will be slashed by 25 percent to
Y101.3 billion ($810.4 million).
       --  A program to encourage small businesses to reduce employees' total
annual working hours will operate under funding earmarked at Y7.8 billion
($62.4 million).


     Table 2:  Proposed and Approved Initial FY 1993 Discretionary Outlays

                              (in billions of yen)

                                                  Proposed   Approved    Change

Social Security                                  Y13,111.4  Y13,145.7     Y34.3
Education and Science                              5,715.1    5,820.5     105.4
Pensions                                           1,739.3    1,776.6      37.3
Defense                                            4,630.8    4,640.6       9.8
Economic Cooperation                                 939.7      957.1      17.4
Public Works                                       8,458.9    8,458.9       0.0
Disaster Reconstruction                               68.2       68.2       0.0
Small Business Measures                              190.2      195.1       4.9
Food Control Programs                                301.3      311.3      10.0
Energy Measures                                      641.0      655.1      14.1
Other                                              4,831.6    4,729.4    -102.2
Infrastructure Investment                            186.6      186.6       0.0
Reserves                                             350.0      350.0       0.0
Unallocated Expenses                                 100.0       --          --


                 Table 3:  FY 1993 Public Works Spending Plan*

                              (in billions of yen)

                                                  Initial     Initial
                                                  FY 1992     FY 1993    Change


Flood Control                                    Y1,428.2    Y1,478.7      3.5%
Roads                                             2,300.0     2,410.1      4.8
Harbors and Airports                                650.6       681.5      4.7
Housing                                             931.1       988.0      6.1
Water Supply and Sewers                           1,340.9     1,435.1      7.0
Agricultural Projects                             1,109.4     1,154.3      4.0
Other                                                12.9        13.6      5.4
Forestry Projects                                   219.0       230.1      5.1
Repayment of Interest-Free Loans                    110.7       105.9     -4.3
  Subtotal                                        8,102.7     8,497.3      4.9
Disaster Relief                                      68.2        68.2      0.0

Total                                             8,170.9     8,565.4      4.8

*Includes transfer of proceeds from the sale of government-owned shares of
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp. to the special account for public works.



       The revenue side of the FY 1993 general account budget reveals the
impact of sluggish Japanese economic activity and MOF's commitment to fiscal
austerity (see Table 4).  Tax and stamp receipts are projected to decline for
the first time in a decade, mainly due to a plunge in corporate profits and
much lower growth in personal incomes.  This is quite a reversal from the boom
years of the late 1980s when tax receipt estimates regularly were exceeded.
The amount of money transferred to public works projects funded by the sale of
government-held shares of NTT also will continue to dwindle; the government has
not replenished these funds since the last auction of NTT shares was held in
October 1988.  Given that the current price of NTT shares is only about
one-fourth its historic high, further sales have been put on hold.  Despite a
projected 23.4 percent rise in nontax revenues (mainly expected to come from
Bank of Japan foreign exchange operations), MOF will be forced to raise issues
of construction bonds by 11.7 percent.  This will push reliance on debt to 11.2
percent in FY 1993, up from the 10.1 percent level estimated for the current
fiscal year.


    Table 4:  Summary of General Account Revenue Estimates, FY 1992-FY 1993

                              (in billions of yen)

                                                  Initial     Initial
                                                  FY 1992     FY 1993    Change

Tax and Stamp Receipts                          Y62,504.0   Y61,303.0     -1.9%
Nontax Receipts                                   2,217.4     2,735.2     23.4
Proceeds from Sale of NTT Shares                    216.6       186.6    -13.9
Bonds                                             7,280.0     8,130.0     11.7
  Construction                                    7,280.0     8,130.0     11.7
  Deficit-Financing                                   0.0         0.0      0.0

Total                                            72,218.0    72,354.8      0.2


Source:  Ministry of Finance



       The Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, a separately funded budget
directed mainly at capital spending, again will play an important role in the
government's effort to boost the economy (see Table 5).  FILP spending will
rise 12.2 percent to a record Y45.8 trillion ($366.4 billion) on the strength
of double-digit increases in nine of 13 categories.  While nearly all public
works-related categories will post solid gains, trade promotion and economic
cooperation (which funds the Japan Development Bank and the Overseas Economic
Cooperation Fund) will get a minuscule increase of just Y500 million ($4
million).  As for FILP funding (Table 6), the role of government trust funds
and life insurance monies deposited in the government-run postal bank system
will continue to grow.  FILP's reliance on debt financing, which is expected to
post a large jump after several years of cuts, further shows MOF's constraints
under the economic downturn.


     Table 5:  Fiscal Investment and Loan Program Outlays, FY 1992-FY 1993

                              (in billions of yen)

                                             Initial FY 1992    Initial FY 1993
                                             Amount   Change    Amount   Change

Housing                                     Y9,799.3    3.4%  Y10,798.9   10.2%
Other Social Infrastructure                  5,157.9   20.1     6,069.6   17.7
Welfare                                      1,109.7    8.1     1,397.1   25.9
Education                                      582.9    0.1       649.9   11.5
Small Business                               4,830.1    7.5     5,341.6   10.6
Agriculture                                    907.9   -0.0       914.5    0.7
Land Conservation and Disaster Relief          374.0   13.1       531.8   42.2
Roads                                        3,375.3   13.1     3,626.9    7.5
Transportation and Communications            2,230.4   51.9     2,889.8   29.6
Regional Development                           824.6   16.3       981.5   19.0
Industry and Technology                        965.6    3.0     1,289.0   33.5
Trade Promotion and Economic Cooperation     2,104.5   10.9     2,105.0    0.0
Capital Utilization                          8,540.0   10.9     9,175.0    7.4

Total                                       40,802.2   10.9    45,770.6   12.2


     Table 6:  Fiscal Investment and Loan Program Revenues, FY 1992-FY 1993

                              (in billions of yen)

                                             Initial FY 1992    Initial FY 1993
                                             Amount   Change    Amount   Change

Industrial Investment Special Account          Y58.1  -11.6%      Y57.7   -0.7%
Trust Fund Bureau Fund                      33,489.1   14.9    37,659.5   12.5
  Postal Savings                             9,900.0   12.5    10,400.0    5.1
  Pension Contributions                      7,230.0   12.4     7,190.0   -0.6
  Other Revenues                            16,359.1   17.6    20,069.5   22.7
Postal Life Insurance Fund                   6,055.0   -4.0     7,053.4   16.5
Government-Guaranteed Bonds and Borrowings   1,800.0   -5.3     2,000.0   11.1

Total                                       41,402.2   10.7    46,770.6   13.0



       While government officials and ruling Liberal Democratic Party leaders
have stressed that the FY 1993 spending plan is the maximum that can be done at
this time, critics have focused on several points of the budget.  The sharp
drop in the cost of servicing the national debt, some argue, merely disguises
the deferral until next year of between Y700 billion and Y1.5 trillion ($5.6
billion to $12 billion) worth of payments.  Moreover, even though issues of
construction bonds are expected to be increased to the current legal limit, the
public sector's reliance on borrowing is understated because the central
government will cut tax revenue transfers to local governments while
simultaneously instructing them to boost their borrowings by 18 percent to a
projected record Y10.3 trillion ($82.4 billion).  The expected fall in income
tax receipts also highlights Tokyo's excessive dependence on direct taxes.
Some critics of the government plan are calling for both a boost in the 3
percent consumption tax and a cut in income taxes.  While the LDP and the
government have been discussing these moves, there is no sign that any official
proposals will be made on these issues.


       Some business leaders welcomed next year's budget, but others criticized
the proposed outlays as being too little, too late to revive the economy
quickly.  This unhappiness already has spurred Prime Minister Miyazawa to
suggest that a supplementary budget will be considered for the first half of FY
1993.  The scandal-plagued LDP, however, may encounter the same difficulties in
pushing the FY 1993 spending package through the Diet as it ran into when it
sought to win Diet approval of a large supplemental spending bill for the
current fiscal year (see JEI Report No. 43B, November 13, 1992).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

INCREASE IN FY 1993 DEFENSE BUDGET SMALLEST IN 33 YEARS by Barbara Wanner

       Against a backdrop of reduced East-West tensions and recession-related
fiscal constraints the Japan Defense Agency's spending plans for FY 1993 and
beyond were hit hard by Ministry of Finance budget crunchers.  The cabinet
approved a plan December 18 that calls on JDA to slice some Y580 billion ($4.6
billion at Y125=$1.00) from the FY 1991-FY 1995 defense buildup program, which
was budgeted initially at Y22.8 trillion ($182 billion).  The five-year
program, which was based on annual spending increases of roughly 3 percent,
will take its first hit in the upcoming fiscal year.  At Y4.6 trillion-plus
($37.1 billion) in FY 1993, defense spending will be not quite 2 percent higher
than in the current fiscal year.  That increase is the smallest in 33 years.

       JDA was not unprepared for MOF-imposed belt-tightening.  Finance
Ministry officials had indicated in no uncertain terms during November that the
days were long gone of defense spending increases in the 5 to 6 percent range
(see JEI Report No. 44B, November 20, 1992).  In light of the apparent
diminution of the threat from the republics of the former Soviet Union as well
as an anticipated drop in tax revenues in the coming fiscal year even the 3.6
percent spending increase that JDA had proposed for FY 1993 could not be
justified, MOF maintained.  Finance officials initially wanted to slash up to
Y1 trillion ($8 billion) from the five-year defense program and hold FY 1993
spending to a mere 1.7 percent increase.

       Defense planners countered that cuts this substantial risked
jeopardizing attainment of the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan and, in turn, undermining
JDA's efforts to comply with the equipment and the manpower goals contained in
the National Defense Program Outline, the overarching blueprint for Japan's
self-defense strategy.  After two rounds of National Security Council meetings
and numerous cabinet-level discussions in December MOF evidently decided to
compromise on the cut in the five-year plan.  During subsequent budget talks
between defense planners and finance officials MOF also softened slightly on
FY 1993 defense spending.

       JDA officials evidently viewed those outcomes as the best they could
hope for, given domestic and international developments.  Defense planners
suspected when the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan was approved in December 1990 that
inclusion of a special provision requiring a review in FY 1993 could result in
leaner times at JDA if developments continued in line with what appeared to be
relaxed East-West tensions.  At the time JDA budget analysts estimated the
agency would be pressured to scale back spending in the last two years of the
five-year program.  Given the subsequent dissolution of the former Soviet Union
as well as the pinch on government revenues, Prime Minister Kiichi
Miyazawa -- no doubt urged on by MOF -- decided to push up the timetable by one
year.

       Speaking to reporters following his Christmas Day discussions with
Finance Minister Yoshiro Hayashi, JDA director general Toshio Nakayama sought
to assure the Japanese defense community as well as Japan's allies that the
country's defense effort would not be compromised unduly by the tightening lid
on defense spending.  "Despite a very difficult fiscal situation and a downward
revision in the five-year program, we were given a sufficient budget in both
frontline military spending and for improving living facilities," Mr. Nakayama
reportedly said.  The defense chief added that the revision of the current
five-year plan is a "starting line" for a review of the National Defense
Program Outline.  Numerous commentators and politicians have been pressing for
a reevaluation of the 1976 blueprint on the grounds that its Cold War-based
strategy no longer is relevant to the current international environment.

       The defense chief's positive remarks belie the impact of the revised
FY 1991-FY 1995 plan on procurement of frontline military equipment, which will
bear the brunt of the revised spending plan.  Of the Y580 billion ($4.6
billion) carved from the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan, Y440 billion ($3.5 billion) had
been earmarked for frontline equipment purchases.  As a result, the Ground
Self-Defense Force will have funds for 108 new tanks rather than the 132 it had
planned to purchase; the Maritime Self-Defense Force will be able to procure
only 37 combat aircraft instead of 45; and the Air Self- Defense Force will get
funding for 29 F-15s, rather than 42.  The Table shows other, similarly severe
equipment cuts.  Training and rear support will receive Y60 billion ($185
million) less in funding than originally outlined by the five-year plan, while
projected personnel costs will be trimmed by Y80 billion ($205 million).


              Revision of FY 1991-FY 1995 Defense Buildup Program

              Equipment                           Revised Quantities

                           Ground Self-Defense Force

              Tanks                                 108 (132)
              Artillery                             536 (716)
              Multiple Launch Rocket Systems               36
              Armored Vehicles                      193 (218)
              Surface-to-Ship Missile Launchers            40
              Antitank Helicopters (AH-1S)            18 (20)
              Transport Helicopters (CH-47J)          12 (14)

                          Maritime Self-Defense Force

              Escort Ships                             8 (10)
              Other Vessels                           15 (20)
              Total Tonnage of MSDF Ships
               to be Constructed              87,000 (96,000)
              Antisubmarine Patrol Planes (P3-C)        5 (8)
              Antisubmarine Helicopters (SH-60J)      31 (36)
              Minesweeping Helicopter (MH-53E)              1

                            Air Self-Defense Force

              Fighter Intercepters (F-15)             29 (42)
              Transport Aircraft (C-130H)               1 (3)
              Transport Helicopters (CH-47J)                2
              AWACS                                         4
              Jet Trainers (T-4)                      68 (90)
              Surface-to-Air Missile (Patriot)      1 (group)

              Note:  Original number of units in parentheses.

              Source:  Japan Defense Agency, December 1992.



       Despite the tightening purse strings, Tokyo has decided to proceed with
the planned procurement of several big-ticket U.S.-made weapons systems.  Kept
in the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan are four AWACS (airborne warning and control
systems), 36 multiple launch rocket systems and two Aegis destroyers.  Two of
the AWACS will be purchased during FY 1993.  Although Japanese defense
officials maintain that these systems are needed to address certain weaknesses
in Japan's self-defense capabilities, some commentators contend that Tokyo felt
pressured by Washington to go through with these purchases for both strategic
and political reasons.  At Y57 billion ($456 million) apiece, the AWACS
procurement, for example, would put a dent in the U.S. trade deficit with
Japan, these analysts have remarked.  Mr. Miyazawa also had a personal
political incentive, according to some observers; he did not want to renege on
a commitment to outgoing President Bush that Japan would purchase the
sophisticated Boeing Co.-built radar aircraft.

       In any event, the government's decision to sacrifice the procurement of
other frontline equipment to finance expensive, U.S.-made systems has raised
more than a few eyebrows in Tokyo.  Some Japanese defense officials reportedly
are concerned that the AWACS purchases could force additional cuts in Air
Self-Defense programs as well as those of the other services.  "The huge
expense for the AWACS might destabilize the equipment balance among the three
services," according to a JDA official who did not want to be identifed.  Some
defense commentators question whether the AWACS, Aegis and MLRS really are
needed since the threat of the Soviet monolith no longer exists.

       Japan's defense industry, already feeling the sting of FY 1992
procurement slowdowns, has made its objections known regarding Tokyo's
reordered spending priorities.  Japan's six major aerospace
manufacturers -- Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd., Kawasaki Heavy Industries,
Ltd., Fuji Heavy Industries, Ltd., Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, Co.,
Ltd., ShinMaywa Industries Ltd., and Japan Aircraft Manufacturing Co.,
Ltd. -- estimate that their total defense sales will decrease by 35 percent
from 1991 to 1998, forcing the transfer to other divisions or subsidiaries of
some 900 engineers and 1,400 plant workers currently working in their defense
aerospace divisions.

       As Japanese defense planners begin to reassess how the country's
security needs have changed since 1976, their analysis no doubt will be
complicated by the uncertain transition to a new world order, the global
economic slump and Japan's sluggish economy, a shrinking international defense
market and Tokyo's long-standing policy banning the export of weapons systems.
Those anticipating a timely evaluation of Japan's overall self-defense policy
and weapons development programs should not hold their breath.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

JAPANESE AID TO SOMALIA

       Aid to Somalia - The Japanese government announced plans December 18 to
provide $100 million to the United Nations-sanctioned multinational forces
guarding distribution in Somalia of famine supplies for the 2 million people
thought to be at risk of starvation there.  Tokyo set no restrictions on how
the contribution to the Trust Fund for the Somalia-Unified Command can be
spent, government officials said.  The contribution will be disbursed from the
reserve fund of the FY 1992 general account budget.

       Representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicated that the
$100 million figure was determined based on the ministry's assessment of the
likely length of the multinational operation.  The funds augment the $27
million-plus Japan provided earlier in 1992 for humanitarian aid in Somalia and
for Somali refugees in the region (see JEI Report No. 45B, December 4, 1992,
and No. 46B, December 11, 1992).  Both Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and the
Foreign Ministry in late December urged other nations to support U.N. efforts
to raise $400 million for the costs of Somali operations.

       Tokyo also is considering sending personnel to Somalia and neighboring
countries to provide medical and other humanitarian assistance.  In
mid-December Yoshiji Nogami, deputy director general of the Foreign Ministry's
Middle Eastern and African Affairs Bureau, headed a mission to Somalia,
Ethiopia and Kenya to study the feasibility of such assistance.  Foreign
Minister Michio Watanabe has indicated that after reviewing the mission's
reports Tokyo will consider ways to channel direct help for refugee and medical
needs in Somalia and the region.  Japanese participation in U.N.-led
peacekeeping activities in Somalia also will be studied, Mr. Watanabe said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

NTT PROCUREMENT

       NTT Procurement - Washington and Tokyo quietly agreed December 22 to
renew for another three years a 1980 bilateral arrangement governing Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Corp. procurement.  Although both sides had identified
some areas for change in the opening round of extension talks in mid-November,
the 1993-95 pact is a carbon copy of the one in effect from 1990 through last
year.  That leaves unresolved the question of whether NTT procurement will be
brought under the disciplines of the international government procurement code
if that code is renegotiated as part of a successful Uruguay Round.  The
Japanese government still hopes to make this switch, which encountered stiff
opposition from the Bush administration (see JEI Report No. 16B, April 24,
1992).  But, like the 1990-92 pact, the new arrangement merely provides for a
review of the bilateral accord should the long-running multilateral trade
negotiations be concluded.

       The American negotiating team proposed the straight extension of the
existing NTT procurement agreement in the third and final round of
discussions.  In the initial talks U.S. trade officials had indicated places
where the pact could be strengthened based on an eight-point list drafted by
the American Electronics Association.  Although Japanese negotiators said these
changes were unnecessary, they were willing to incorporate some of them in the
new arrangement.  In exchange, however, Tokyo wanted to exempt from certain
pact provisions products that NTT buys but later resells or leases.  This
exclusion, which was part of a tentative agreement reached in early December,
proved unacceptable to U.S. equipment suppliers.  They worried that it could
lock American companies out of important market segments, including, possibly,
equipment bought by the communications giant for resale or lease to its NTT
Mobile Communications Network Inc. and NTT Data Communications Systems Corp.
subsidiaries.

       Both companies previously had promised to adhere to the terms of the
bilateral procurement pact (see JEI Report No. 29B, July 31, 1992).  Officials
of NTT Power and Building Facilities Inc., which was spun off as wholly owned
subsidiary December 1, 1992, also have indicated that the firm will not
discriminate against foreign suppliers in its purchases.  With domestic
industry unwilling to rely solely on these assurances, U.S. trade negotiators
apparently concluded that a straight extension was the only way to resolve the
linkage problem.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

GOVERNMENT ANTICIPATES SLOWER GROWTH IN FY 1993 by Douglas Ostrom

       Just on appearances, Tokyo could be forgiven for believing that its
official economic outlook for the fiscal year beginning April 1 is, if
anything, too pessimistic.  The 3.3 percent projected rise in
inflation-adjusted gross national product (see Table) is the lowest growth
estimate adopted by a cabinet since the dark days of December 1973 when, in the
midst of the first oil crisis, Tokyo put the economy's expected growth at 2.5
percent.  The FY 1993 figure, if achieved, would represent one of the lowest
rates of expansion over 12 months in postwar Japanese history.

       Some analysts -- apparently including some in government -- believe,
however, that Tokyo was insufficiently gloomy in its December 20 announcement.
In a twist on the usual bureaucratic wrangling that pits the conservative
Ministry of Finance against the fiscally aggressive Ministry of International
Trade and Industry, MOF and MITI reportedly ganged up on the Economic Planning
Agency in insisting that a figure of approximately 3.5 percent be used.  EPA
argued for a number around 3 percent on the grounds that the government's
economic outlook should be realistic.  A compromise developed at 3.3 percent.

       EPA has both history and private-sector experts on its side.  The
government's outlook consistently has failed to anticipate fully either severe
downturns in the economy or sharp upturns.  For example, the economy actually
contracted 0.2 percent in FY 1974, implying that even the gloomiest outlook of
the past two decades was too optimistic.  Similarly, in revising its FY 1992
real growth estimate to 1.6 percent slightly more than three months before the
fiscal year ends, Tokyo now admits that its initial outlook of 3.5 percent
growth was too rosy.  If the revised figure is approximately correct, the
increase in GNP during the current fiscal year will be the smallest since FY
1974.



                     Government's FY 1993 Economic Outlook

                                         Original        Revised        Initial
                                         FY 1992         FY 1992        FY 1993
                                         Outlook         Outlook        Outlook

                              (percentage change)

Real Gross National Product                3.5%            1.6%           3.3%
  Consumer Spending                        3.7             1.5            2.8
  Housing                                  2.8             2.5            7.1
  Plant and Equipment Spending             4.5            -3.8            2.4

  Contribution of Domestic Demand          3.6             0.7            3.4
  Contribution of External Demand         -0.1             0.8           -0.1

Nominal Gross National Product             5.0             3.0            4.9

Wholesale Prices                          -0.2            -1.3            0.3
Retail Prices                              2.3             1.8            2.1

                             (billions of dollars)

Current Account Surplus                  $71.0          $116.5         $115.5
Trade Surplus                             96.5           136.0          135.0

Source:  Economic Planning Agency




       Twenty-one well-known private economic forecasters also made predictions
during December.  Their average estimate of real economic growth in FY 1993
came to 2.7 percent, with the range between 1.7 percent (Japan Research
Institute) and 4 percent (Daiwa Institute of Research).  This same group was
less optimistic a year ago about the prospects for FY 1992 than the government
but, on the assumption that the government's revised estimate for the year
through March 1993 is approximately correct, even these private-sector
forecasters were too optimistic at this time last year concerning FY 1992
growth.

       The disagreements among economists inside and outside government
concerning the likely direction of the Japanese economy are reflected in
differences over two key variables:  private plant and equipment spending plus
the current account surplus.  For example, the pessimistic Japan Research
Institute envisages a 3.4 percent drop next year in business investment.  By
contrast, the government expects a 2.4 percent rise.  Given the large weight of
private capital spending in the Japanese economy, this single category explains
most of the discrepancy between the least and the most optimistic forecasts.
In light of the fact that plant and equipment spending remained at historically
high levels in 1992 despite the rapid deceleration of overall growth, a further
correction may be in store, implying a substantial drop in FY 1993.  As a
result, even the most pessimistic of the private research organizations may
have too rosy a view of this key component of the economy.


       Those making higher forecasts of overall growth tend to expect smaller
external imbalances because imports are assumed to grow in sync with the
economy.  For example, the Japan Center for Economic Research, which expects 3
percent GNP growth, projects a current account surplus of $143.1 billion for FY
1993, far above the government's figure of $115.5 billion.  By contrast, EPA
officials now estimate that the current account surplus will reach $116.5
billion in the year through March 1993.

       Even the government's relatively upbeat numbers are not likely to please
the incoming Clinton administration despite the suggestion reported in the
press that the president-elect was very much on the minds of MOF and MITI
officials pushing for a higher projected GNP growth figure.  Slow growth in
Japan, coupled with the expected sluggishness of European economies, could put
a crimp in U.S. exports, one of the few bright spots during America's recent
recession.

       The government's FY 1993 economic outlook, unlike the projections
developed by private forecasters, did not assume any major policy changes.
JCER analysts, for example, built into their estimate the prediction that the
discount rate would be lowered an additional half point sometime in FY 1993 and
that the government would adopt a modest fiscal stimulus package in the coming
fiscal year.  In addition, an increasing number of business leaders are calling
for a substantial income tax cut.  Against this backdrop, the government's
optimistic economic outlook for FY 1993 marks a continuation, rather than the
end, of the prolonged debate concerning appropriate countercyclical economic
policy in Japan.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet
January 08, 1993

GROWING GLOBAL ROLE IN JAPAN'S FY 1993 FOREIGN AID BUDGET by Margo Grimm

       While the FY 1993 foreign aid budget did not emerge unscathed from the
budget deliberations of the past few months, spending for official development
assistance will show less of the strain imposed by Japan's current fiscal
difficulties than most areas of the general account budget (see preceding
articles).  Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials said that Prime Minister
Kiichi Miyazawa firmly supported a plan to increase the general account portion
of Japan's foreign aid budget beyond Y1 trillion ($8 billion at Y125=$1.00) for
the first time.  As approved by the cabinet December 26, the ODA outlays funded
through the general account will total Y1,014.4 billion ($8.1 billion) in the
year starting April 1.  A Ministry of Finance budget examiner responsible for
foreign aid asserted in a news conference prior to cabinet consideration of the
budget: "With these aid figures, Japan made the maximum fiscal effort to live
up to its obligation to help developing nations despite its severe fiscal
situation."

       The FY 1993 foreign aid budget's 6.5 percent increase over the
comparable FY 1992 figure is more than double the expansion in total
discretionary spending.  Even so, that growth rate is the lowest for foreign
aid spending since the 6.5 percent rise posted in FY 1988.  Next year's 6.5
percent figure represented a compromise between the 9.7 percent increase
requested by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Finance Ministry's efforts
to restrict the growth of spending.  The draft budget issued by the Finance
Ministry held the increase in ODA expenditures to 4.7 percent, but in a
December 25 meeting Finance Minister Yoshiro Hayashi agreed to Foreign Minister
Michio Watanabe's request to restore certain foreign aid funds cut during the
compilation of the budget.  Mr. Watanabe said that, among other things, the two
ministries negotiated an increase in the funds budgeted for bilateral grants to
Y243.1 billion ($1.9 billion), 6.7 percent more than allocated for the current
fiscal year.

       The Y1 trillion-plus ($8.1 billion) authorized for foreign aid in the
general account budget will be supplemented by Y675 billion ($5.4 billion) from
the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, which mainly funds capital projects.
The Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, which oversees the concessionary loan
portion of Japan's economic assistance, will disburse this money as part of its
Y930 billion ($7.4 billion) lending program for the next fiscal year.

       The expansion of Japan's foreign aid budget for FY 1993 allows for
increased outlays in several categories, although some areas have been
trimmed.  Technical assistance, for example, is slated to grow 7.6 percent to
Y210.2 billion ($1.7 billion).  The Y147.7 billion ($1.2 billion) budgeted for
the United Nations and other international humanitarian organizations
represents a 0.2 percent drop, however, from the current fiscal year's level.
Among specific U.N. agencies to benefit from increased funding in FY 1993 will
be the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, which is targeted to get Y10.1
billion ($80.8 million), a boost of 4.7 percent, and the U.N. Children's Fund,
which is to receive Y3.3 billion ($26.4 million), a 0.2 percent increase in
dollar terms.

       According to Japanese news reports, the Finance Ministry's foreign aid
budget examiner noted that Tokyo will disburse in addition to official
development assistance $5.3 million-plus to support U.N. peacekeeping
activities in FY 1993, more than double the amount appropriated for the current
fiscal year.  These funds will come from the Foreign Ministry portion of the
budget and will be separate from anticipated Japan Defense Agency expenditures
for the support of U.N. peacekeeping operations.

       Observers note that the Japanese government's plans to increase official
development assistance outlays in the next fiscal year reflect a recognition
that its contributions to the international community should match its economic
standing.  Alluding to the diverse objectives that factored into the drafting
of the FY 1993 spending plan, one Foreign Ministry official commented, "Japan
can impress the world of the seriousness of its international contributions
only by increasing the ODA budget."  Japan's commitment to meeting growing
global needs is expected to be spotlighted when the seven major industrial
democracies meet in Tokyo in July.

       International expectations for Japan's aid program have grown in tandem
with its expansion.  Tokyo's current foreign aid projections for the 1993-97
period are for outlays of $75 billion.  The Japanese government also is working
to address questions about the quality of its economic assistance (see JEI
Report No. 46A, December 11, 1992).  At the same time the growing demand for
resources worldwide coincides with domestic economic problems; that raises
issues of balance regarding domestic concerns and escalating foreign aid
expenditures.  As Japanese decisionmakers take these matters under
consideration, the focus of attention will point to how broadly Japan is
mapping out plans for greater international cooperation.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>