
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B33-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B026-221</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec50.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223747 text/html 27736
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:36:00 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:55 GMT
Content-length: 27549
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec50.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 2, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>ANALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>IOMEGA'S ZIP IS OMN'S PRODUCT OF THE YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(896 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PD</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>PD COULD BE WINNER AT THE `RIGHT' PRICE POINT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(788 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MO</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>APEX AIMS HIGH, WHILE MAJOR COMPETITORS STICK TOGETHER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(994 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPONENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NEW CHIP SET OFFERED FOR ERASABLE CD-R/E</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(353 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STRATEGIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>LOW-PRICE UPGRADE WINDOW STILL IS OPEN FOR MO AND PD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(573 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BACKWARD COMPATIBLE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HONORABLE MENTIONS FOR OMN PRODUCT OF THE YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(434 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

IOMEGA'S ZIP IS OMN'S PRODUCT OF THE YEAR

      Forget the maxim: "If you build it they will come."  What
apparently works to sell removable storage devices nowadays is low
pricing and narrowly targeted marketing.  In 1995, this was proven
dramatically by OMN's Product of the Year: the Zip drive, made by
Iomega Corp., of Roy, Utah.
      Two other storage devices that debuted last year deserve to be
runners-up: phase change dual, or PD and Apex.   Both of them
represent new directions and opportunities for the optical storage
industry.

A Sexy Package for Younger Users

      The hottest ticket of 1995 was a sales receipt for Zip: the
$199, 100-MB 3.5-in. removable magnetic disk cartridge system that
went on sale at the beginning of the year (OMN, Jan. 17).
      Stan Corker, director of removable storage research for
International Data Corp., told OMN that he expects Iomega to have
shipped "just under a million" Zip units in 1995, and forecasts it to
ship "three-to-four million" units in 1996.
      An Iomega spokesman declined to cite end-of-year sales figures. 
He told OMN simply: "By November, we'd shipped our one-millionth
personal storage solution, but that includes not only Zip but Ditto
[quarter-in. tape drives], as well."
      Whatever the actual numbers, it's safe to say that Iomega sold
hundreds of thousands of Zips last year--a figure that is an order of
magnitude higher than that of any competing removable disk product,
especially optical.
      There's no arguing with success, and there's no secret to how
they did it.  Iomega wrapped the drive in a standout purple box; gave
it a slangy, sexy name; and backed everything up with magazine ads
aimed directly at the hottest demographic bulge: the 18-to-35-year-
olds whom TV networks also covet.  Computer users in that age bracket
don't have much experience with removable storage beyond floppies,
except maybe quarter-in. cartridge (QIC) tape.  And, of course, Iomega
positioned Ditto to reach them too.  These younger users also aren't
loyal to 3.5-in. MO or to SyQuest Technologies' established lines of
magnetic disk cartridge drives.
      Iomega made one mistake: it didn't realize how big the demand
would be.  The external Zips are still selling at full list price, and
there are backlogs in most channels.  
      Iomega had to sign up Seiko Epson as a second-source (OMN, Dec.
5,; July 18,).  This year, assuming that production rises as expected,
Fuji Photo Film USA and Maxell Corp. of America will brand and sell
Zip drives in the United States.  It's as if Zip opened a new product
category: bigger than a floppy, but not too big and not too expensive. 
"No one else recognized the importance of a sub-$200 price point,"
said Corker.
      Since August, Iomega has been offering an internal SCSI version
of Zip to OEMs; and it showed an internal IDE version at Comdex. 
Both, according to the Iomega spokesman, "could be retailed at some
future date."  OMN has learned that Iomega also is working on a
thinner internal version, to be sold on an OEM basis to portable- and
laptop computer makers.  Even at a premium price, such a subsystem
would find a ready market.
      Around mid-year, SyQuest dashed in with a competing product:
EZ135, which costs about the same ($239, external version), yet holds
more data and transfers it faster.  The usenets (user-group bulletin
boards) that OMN reads are full of happy testimonials for EZ135,
although some users who have tried both report that Zip is easier to
install.

The Might-Have-Beens

      But competitive performance alone isn't the name of the game any
more.  Zip is what retail customers are asking for by name, and a
stroll through the aisles of retail computer stores during the holiday
shopping season showed that Zip was more prominently displayed.
      This "new" category that Zip seems to have generated could have
come to life years ago, with the arrival of Floptical or of 3.5-in.
MO.  But both those products fell short of defining the niche and
attracting users.
      Floptical blended optical and magnetic technologies: a 21-MB,
3.5-in. magnetic disk with a laser-guided head.  21 MB seemed like a
lot five years ago.  If it had been less expensive it might have
generated a big installed base.  But it also was inadequately
promoted, and was soon overshadowed by SyQuest's aggressively marketed
(and ultimately very successful) 44-MB and 88-MB, 5.25-in. product
line.
      A consortium of Matsushita-Kotobuki Electronics Industries Ltd.,
Compaq Computer Corp. and 3M Co. is trying to revive the Floptical--in
principle--with a 120 MB drive that also will read 1.44 MB floppies
(OMN, Aug. 1,).  But users today pay practically nothing for their
floppy drives.  With Zip and EZ135 already on the shelves, it's likely
that this revival will close out of town.
      3.5-in. MO drives also could have been the gotta-have-it storage
gadgets if they would have been launched at a far lower price ($2,000
in 1991), or had dropped below $1,000 quickly.  
      Instead, 128 MB drives were sold mainly into a captive personal
computer market in Japan, and never aggressively marketed in the
United States.  With no significant installed base here, manufacturers
were slow to innovate: they took more than three years to not-even
double its capacity to 230 MB, and those drives have only now broken
through the $500 floor.
      The Zip experience also proves that either of these devices
might have done (at least a little) better if they'd been promoted
with some pizzazz.  (Iomega Corp., 801/778-1000.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

PD COULD BE WINNER AT THE `RIGHT' PRICE POINT

      Phase change dual (PD) systems, which debuted in 1995, also
could define a new product category; but PD has a narrower window of
opportunity than Zip, and faces a potentially more powerful competitor
in CD-R.  PD's recent retail price drop below $500, however, should
give it a boost in 1996.
      PD is made by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., of Osaka,
Japan, and is distributed in the United States under four brand names:
NEC, by NEC Technologies, of Boxborough, Mass.; Panasonic, by
Panasonic Communications & Systems Co., of Secaucus, N.J. (a
subsidiary of Matsushita); Plasmon, by Plasmon Data Systems, of
Milpitas, Calif.; and Toray, by Toray Marketing & Sales America, of
San Mateo, Calif.
      With a single tray-load mechanism and a multipurpose head
configuration, PD offers the equivalent of two valuable drives in a
single enclosure: a 650 MB rewritable optical disk subsystem and a 4X
speed CD-ROM reader.  It can read CD-ROMs (and recorded CD-R media)
because phase change technology exploits domain reflectivity in a way
that is similar to that of CDs.
      PD was announced more than a year ago (OMN, Sept. 27, 1994,),
but production was stalled while Matsushita finalized specifications
of its disk format (OMN, April 24,).  This delayed the launch until
mid-year (OMN, Aug. 29,).  List prices, which began just under $1,000,
were reduced in November to about half that much (OMN, Nov. 7,).
      Steven Yuhas, president of Panasonic Communications & Systems,
told OMN in December that "we think we've reached the right price
point now.  The user gets a 650 MB optical disk system for only about
$300" (that is: for the difference between the PD's price and that of
a 4X CD-ROM reader, which also fell in 1995 to about $200 today).
      The internal version of PD conserves expansion slots--also a
benefit, but mainly for OEMs.  Compaq Computer Corp., of Houston,
Texas, has entered into an OEM agreement with Matsushita/Panasonic to
sell PD drives in its computers.  Panasonic and the others are
advertising PD, but additional computer makers will have to cut OEM
deals to actually put PD in front of more people.  Most users still
don't know about storage options anyway, beyond tape backup, and they
face too many choices when they do go looking for storage devices.
      The end-user market is extremely price-sensitive.  As CD-ROM
reader prices continue to fall (6X readers now retail for less than
$350), the pressure on PD's price structure will not abate.  It is
almost impossible to purchase a personal computer (PC) today without a
CD-ROM reader; and systems costing more than $1,500 typically come
with a 4X reader.  The extra cost of PD pushes PD-equipped systems
higher, but they're still within most business users' budgets.
      Price aside, what the PD vendors need to stress is value.  PD is
arguably the least expensive way to store 650 MB on a removable disk. 
A 5.25-in., 1.3 GB MO drive will continue to cost more than twice as
much, notwithstanding the closeout price of discontinued IBMdrives:
under $750, while supplies last (OMN, Aug. 15,).

PD as CD-ROM's Disc Image?

g disk-based competitors, the chief rival to PD is CD-R.  While CD-R
has been used primarily as a database publishing medium, and has more
recently been able to serve (via software) as a data backup device,
CD-R disks are not bootable, nor (being write-once) do they behave
like floppy or optical disks.  PD, by contrast, offers floppy-like
user familiarity, generates bootable disks, and uses rewritable media.
      With bundled software, some CD-R drives now cost less than
$1,000 (OMN, Nov. 21,; Oct. 10,).  These are relatively slow drives,
and the accompanying programs are not the ultra-sophisticated
authoring or mastering tools.  Nonetheless, a $1,000 CD-R drive, with
its sub-$10 media, undeniably is a bargain, since its disks can be
read by practically every CD-ROM reader or CD-Audio player ever made.
      A PD drive can read CD-ROMs and CD-R discs, but CD-ROM and CD-R
drives can not read PD media.  PD users will be able to share media
only with other PD users, while CD-R users gain leverage from being
able to reach literally millions of Compact Disc users.
      But synergy is possible.  PD can be used in the content
development/software authoring stages of making CD-ROMs.  The disks'
storage capacities are roughly equivalent, and the making of CD-ROMs
almost always requires dedicating a hard disk drive (HDD) to the "disc
image" under development.
      PD is nearly an order of magnitude faster than tape, and almost
as fast as an HDD (since phase change is a direct-overwrite
technology).  Being removable, PD media offers an added advantage over
HDD by enabling several versions of a project to coexist
simultaneously while they're being tested and compared.  (Matsushita
Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. +81/3-3578-1237.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

APEX AIMS HIGH, WHILE MAJOR COMPETITORS STICK TOGETHER

      The biggest storage news story of 1995 was the appearance of
Apex, a 4.6 GB 5.25-in. MO subsystem from Pinnacle Micro Inc., of
Irvine, Calif. (OMN, Aug. 1,).  It's a stunning technical achievement;
had the drives been shipping in quantity by now, Apex would have been
OMN's Product of the Year.
      The rest of the MO manufacturers last year coalesced around a
2.6 GB upgrade from 1.3 GB, and resolved to follow a migration path
that could bring backward-compatible 5.2 GB drives to market in 1997
(OMN, Oct. 24,).  By sticking together with "standard" products,
however, these manufacturers run the risk of being stuck with them if
Apex takes off.
      Apex offers more than just higher storage capacity.  It's
specified to have a direct-overwrite capability for extra recording
speed and to list for only $1,700: two-thirds of the announced debut
prices for 2.6 GB drives.
      Pinnacle's strategy for marketing Apex is twofold: to build
awareness of what a 4.6 GB removable storage device can do, by
advertising it in end-user and industry publications; and to
concentrate on making OEM sales to computer makers (the announced OEM
price is $800).
      In November, Pinnacle signed its first OEM deal, with Intergraph
Corp., of Huntsville, Ala., (OMN, Nov. 7,).  OEM sales represent a new
direction for Pinnacle, which has long offered standard products
(albeit in innovative packages), and has therefore depended almost
exclusively on retail and integrator channels.     

Some Glitches

      Pinnacle plowed nearly all of its last-year's profits into
developing Apex, setting up a manufacturing plant for it in Colorado
Springs, Colo.  Some component glitches--which are inevitable with any
new venture--have delayed Apex's full production until the first
quarter of 1996.  Sample units shipped before year's end do not
perform certain functions exactly as originally specified (OMN, Nov.
21,).  But vice president Scott Blum assured OMN in December that
production units would meet all performance specs.
      Blum's enthusiasm for Apex is palpable: he is the driving force
behind Apex's development; his company, though publicly traded since
mid-1993, is still largely controlled by his family; and his father,
Bill Blum, is president.        Pinnacle's stock currently is trading
close to its high for the year; and last month the company declared a
50 percent stock dividend, giving shareholders one extra share for
every two that they held as of Dec. 1.

What about Direct-Overwrite?

      Contrary to OMN's report of Nov. 21 (OMN, Nov. 21), which was
based on information provided by Scott Blum, Pinnacle does not license
its direct-overwrite technology from Nikon Corp. of Japan.
      In a manual that Pinnacle distributed to prospective OEMs,
Pinnacle stated: "Apex will also be one of the first ... optical disk
drives to support Direct Overwrite (DOW).  Media has been developed
that allows single-pass writes instead of the two-pass write media
used in existing drives.  The technology uses Light Intensity
Modulation Method (LIMM)."
      This method, abbreviated "LIMM-DOW" (alternatively, "LIM-DOW"),
was developed by Nikon.
      As OMN reported, Pinnacle's media supplier is Tokyo-based
Mitsubishi Chemical Corp. (MCC).  Blum told OMN, "I believe MCC has a
license that allows them to make the LIM-DOW media.  MCC does the
initial stage; Nikon puts on their layers; then the media returns to
MCC for the final stages.  There is involvement from Nikon to some
extent--that's what MCC told me."
      According to Shinya Sasayama, general manager of Nikon's Optical
Storage Division, in Tokyo, the only outside LIM-DOW project with
which Nikon is currently involved is a joint endeavor with Hitachi
Maxell Corp. to develop 2.6 GB media.
      Asked to clarify this inconsistency, MCC director Yoshimitsu
Kobayashi told OMN:  "Unfortunately, I can not comment on anything
about [4.6 GB] media and LIM-DOW media just now."

Standards vs. Progress

      The first 2.6 GB drives were shipped by Most Inc.  The next
company to roll out the drives will probably be Maxoptix Corp., which
will likely be followed by Hitachi America and Sony Electronics Inc.
(OMN, Nov. 7,).  Nearly every other MO manufacturer is expected to
offer a 2.6 GB drive in 1996 (see related story, p. 7).
      Technical standards for the 2.6 GB capacity point, to which
these manufacturers prefer to adhere, were developed within the X3.B11
committee of the International Standards Organization (ISO).  Pinnacle
is an ISO and X3.B11 member, and has proposed that its Apex
specifications be accepted as a new 4.6 GB standard.
      But the decision to migrate methodically, doubling capacity
every two years, was made in meetings of the Optical Storage
Technology Association (OSTA), to which nearly all of the other
manufacturers--except Pinnacle--belong.  They are positioning their
2.6 GB drives against Apex by emphasizing backward-compatibility:
being able to read existing 650 MB media and to read and write 1.3 GB
media.
      Users who are ready to move up, therefore, must weigh the OSTA-
compliant alternative: simply swap out an old drive for a new 2.6 GB
drive, with very little downtime or reconfiguration necessary. 
Switching to Apex probably means running dual systems until all
important data has been ported over to the more capacious media.  On
the other hand, Apex poses no such dilemma for new users.
     Standards, even de facto standards, are a mixed blessing: they
encourage conformance but inhibit innovation.  It's hard to make a
"standard" product sexy.  Yet to succeed, the OSTA-compliant drive
makers must market more aggressively than ever before, especially to
new users.  Even without Apex, there are ongoing challenges that they
ignore at their peril.  Magnetic tape will not go away.  In the
removable optical disk market, CD-R is nibbling at the low end, while
12-in. is beckoning at the high end.  And high-capacity hard disk
drives are getting cheaper all the time.
     Pinnacle, at least, recognized this and is doing something about
it.  The OSTA members may squirm to acknowledge the fact, but Apex
represents genuine progress.  Its aggressive price/performance point
could give the whole industry a long-needed shove in the right
direction: straight into the minds of new users.  (Pinnacle Micro
Inc., 714/789-3000.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

NEW CHIP SET OFFERED FOR ERASABLE CD-R/E

     To build an erasable version of the recordable Compact Disc (CD-
R), prospective drive makers will need to incorporate a new integrated
circuit (IC).  It's model SAA7390, manufactured by Philips
Semiconductors, a Sunnyvale, Calif., subsidiary of Philips Electronics
NV, of Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
     This IC is specified to support 6X reading and 4X writing, with a
maximum burst data transfer rate (into the external interface IC) of
16.9 MB/sec.  "Third level error encoding and decoding in hardware is
included [as is] an easy-to-use memory management system with ten
layers of arbitration," according to marketing manager Sunil
Nethisinghe.
     Philips, he said, also will offer prospective CD-R/E drive makers
"total systems packages [that] are expected to reduce the drive
development time by about eight months."
     The SAA7390 is priced at $25 in 10,000-unit orders, and is
scheduled for release in January.

Can CD-R/E Compete?

     The erasable system, which is expected to debut this year, was
called
CD-E, but has recently been designated CD-R/E by its developer,
Philips Electronics NV.  Besides CD-R, its chief competitor will
probably be phase change dual (PD; see related story, p. 3).  But for
two reasons, the contest may not turn out to be close.
     Like PD, CD-R/E employs phase-change technology (OMN, July 18, p.
6.  But CD-R/E drives and media will be more expensive than PD or CD-
R: at launch, perhaps at least $2,000 for the drives, with $25 media.
     More problematic for CD-R/E, however, is the fact that the
media's recording layer has a lower reflectivity than that of CD-R or
that of the data layer in a CD-ROM.  Thus, the present installed base
of readers and recorders can not read CD-R/E discs (OMN, Aug. 15, p.
7).  Only CD-ROM and CD-R drives manufactured after 1995 will have the
newer circuitry that makes them sensitive enough to read CD-R/E media.
     Of course, no one knows how quickly (or how many) CD-R
manufacturers will make the switch, nor how soon the unsold
inventories of older CD-ROM readers will be depleted, allowing the
channels to make room for the new ones.  (Philips Electronics NV,
+31/40-73-48-66; Philips Semiconductors, 408/991-4540.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

LOW-PRICE UPGRADE WINDOW STILL IS OPEN FOR MO AND PD

     There still is a chance for 3.5-in. MO and phase change dual (PD)
systems to seize market share along the storage upgrade path.  Very
soon, Zip users will find they need more than 100 MB, and that
magnetic disk cartridges can't meet every need.  But they won't want
to spend more than $500 on a solution.
     The only near-term upgrade on Iomega's horizon is an order of
magnitude bigger--the 1 GB Jaz--which has not yet shipped, and is also
incompatible.  SyQuest already is overextended with too many
incompatible product lines and doesn't have an EZ135 upgrade ready to
roll out either.  Nomai, which makes SyQuest-compatible products (OMN,
Aug. 29,), doesn't have the advertising budget to compete with Iomega
or SyQuest.
     Since users will have to buy something incompatible with Zip,
there's a window of opportunity in 1996 for optical disk vendors to
meet the move-up needs.  The end-user prices for 1.3 GB MO drives
probably will fall below $1,000, as vendors clear their shelves to
make room for new 2.6 GB drives and/or Pinnacle's Apex.  But that's
still a lot of money for the "average" user; and 5.25-in. media still
will cost about $80.

PD is the Better Deal

     Today's 230 MB 3.5-in. drives will have to come down under $300
very soon or they'll be squeezed out once again: by Zip below and by
their own 640 MB and 650 MB cousins above.  Those higher-capacity
drives, however, were announced long ago (OMN, Nov. 22, 1994,) and
have yet to appear on the market.  When they do, they'll probably list
for about $1,000.  At half the price, PD is a better deal.
     There's money to be made in 3.5-in. MO, but only Olympus and
Fujitsu seem to have coherent strategies for staying in that business
(OMN, Aug. 15,).  Olympus is going for high performance (2.61 MB/sec
specified maximum data transfer rate), while Fujitsu is making a fast
but modest-priced model for the desktop and a slower, but very thin
model for OEM-ing to notebook computer makers.  (Apple [AAPL] is
Fujitsu's first OEM customer.)
     Within the PD community, a viable strategy would be to encourage
content providers actively to "master" their CD-ROMs on PD, and--at
the same time--to persuade replicators to accept PD disks (along with
tape and CD-R media) as mastering media sources.  PD might then become
a respectable niche product in a niche market.  CD-R (if not CD-R/E)
still will be gaining.
     All the optical disk system manufacturers, ISVs, systems
developers and retailers this year would be well-advised to market the
concept of removable storage aggressively; to target the most likely
new users and advertise to them heavily; and to push prices down to
build an installed base. 

**********************************************************************

                   OLYMPUS UNVEILS `SUPER-FAST' MO DRIVE

     Olympus Image Systems Inc., of Melville, N.Y., has a 2.6 GB 5.25-
in. magneto-optic (MO) drive that it claims will be "the fastest ISO-
compliant MO drive in the marketplace."  Sample units reportedly were
shipped in December, with production quantities set to ship in "the
first quarter of 1996."  Pricing is not set yet.  The drive, model
MOS540E, has 4 MB of on-board memory and is specified to have a disk
rotation speed of 3,600 rpm, producing a specified data transfer rate
of up to 4 MB/sec and a seek time of 26 msec.  Olympus Image Systems
is a division of Olympus Optical Co., of Tokyo.  (Olympus Image
Systems Inc., 800/347-4027.) 

**********************************************************************



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

HONORABLE MENTIONS FOR OMN PRODUCT OF THE YEAR

     Many products were newsworthy in 1995, and are therefore worth
calling attention to once more.  Besides the significant achievements,
there also were a few products of more transitory--if not dubious--
value.
     * 12-in. Systems Get Bigger.  ATG Cygnet, Nikon Corp., Philips
LMS and Sony Corp. all announced higher capacity 12-in. optical disks. 
Nikon launched its 8 GB rewritable MO drive in the United States,
though it has been available for years in Japan.  Philips began
shipping a substantial upgrade from its original RapidChanger.  Sony
announced a 15 GB drive--though it has yet to explain how that drive
will read Sony's older disks.  ATG Cygnet topped the capacity charts,
promising a 16 GB system in 1996 (OMN, Oct. 10,; April 24,; April 10,;
March 27,).
     * Real Progress in Jukeboxes.  ATG Cygnet's 12-in. jukeboxes
already support other manufacturers' drives--not only ATG's.  So it's
logical that the Cygnature jukebox series should be able to support
not only optical disks but CDs and magnetic tape (OMN, April 10,). 
Gateway commissioned Sanyo to build a three-disc CD jukebox (OMN, May
23,).  Several vendors began selling Nakamichi's seven-disc CD jukebox
(Jan. 3, p. 6), and NEC released its four-disc half-height CD changer
(OMN, Nov. 21,).  Hewlett-Packard gave its SureStor jukeboxes a two-
disk transport mechanism (OMN, Feb. 14,).  And Smart Storage
discovered how to get a CD jukebox to read and write simultaneously
(OMN, Nov. 7,).
     * SD is Finalized.  The next generation of CDs will be pretty
much what Toshiba Corp. and its allies wanted, with one technical
concession to the competing Sony/Philips group.  Yet ironically, in
December, the participants announced that the new multigigabyte media
will be known as "DVD"--just what Sony and Philips proposed.  "DVD"
doesn't stand for anything (one vendor suggested "digital versatile
disk"), but the products will be distinguished by extensions, e.g.
DVD-Audio; DVD-Video; DVD-ROM, etc. (OMN, Sept. 26,).
     * `Intelligent Media' Appears.  Software Architects released
software that lets PCs read Macintosh disks.  This was one of those
"if they can land a man on the moon, why can't they ...?" conundrums
that the computer industry failed to answer for ten years.  Hats off
to the product, Here & Now (OMN, July 4,).
     * Where Are They Now?   OMN also was able to offer one fleeting
glance at a handful of products that subsequently vanished from the
radar screen: Toray's 1.3 GB 3.5-in. drive (OMN, March 14); Fujitsu's
3.5-in "Dyna-Mite" MO jukebox (April 24 p. 6); Exabyte's 20 GB Mammoth
8 mm tape drive; Pioneer's 2.2 GB 5.25-in. MO drive (OMN, April 10,;
and every MO drive that IBM ever made (OMN, Aug. 15,). 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>