
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-254</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt15.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033620 text/html 34241
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 34054
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt15.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet <BR>
May 1, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>LABS AND TESTING: MANDATED EMPLOYERS HAVE&nbsp;RULES, NON-MANDATED EMPLOYERS DON'T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1199 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>DRUG TESTING OF NON-SAFETY-&nbsp;SENSITIVE WORKERS UPHELD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(416 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>SURVEY: OVER ONE THIRD OF&nbsp;EMPLOYERS FIRE AT FIRST POSITIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(337 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EAPS NEED TQM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(803 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>COMING UP--</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>HOW TESTING CAN REDUCE WORKERS' COMPENSATION&nbsp;COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(738 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION OFFERS&nbsp;MODEL DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE LAWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>BORG-WARNER GUARDS TESTED AS APPLICANTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>LAB CERTIFICATION: HEADED FOR FDA?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>CHANGES IN SAMHSA LAB LIST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>CAN A WORKER BE FIRED FOR A SECOND POSITIVE&nbsp;TEST&nbsp;IF HE ISN'T FIRED FOR THE FIRST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(480 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

LABS AND TESTING: MANDATED EMPLOYERS HAVE
RULES, NON-MANDATED EMPLOYERS DON'T

Even if you have absolutely nothing to do with
transportation, weapons, or any other
safety-sensitive business, chances are you have
heard that if you do drug testing, you should
use a lab certified by the federal Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration.

Actually, it's even more likely you are still
hearing about "NIDA labs," since the agency
which formally ran the National Laboratory
Certification Program has stuck to the labs.
You are probably also told to use Medical
Review Officers (doctors who interpret test
results), gas chromatography coupled with mass
spectrometry (a confirmation test), and
possibly even told to limit the drugs you are
testing for to the "NIDA five" (amphetamines,
cocaine, marijuana, opiates, and
phencyclidine). You may even be told expressly
not to fire someone who tests positive, but to
send him to treatment or an EAP first.

But unless you are mandated by the government
to conduct testing this way, you don't have to
do any of these things. So, why do lawyers,
consultants, and other purveyors of advice to
employers insist on using the guidelines that
are mandatory mainly for federal employees and
safety-sensitive employees in DOT-licensed
companies?

'NOT A LEGAL REQUIREMENT'

"The HHS guidelines are not a legal
requirement," explains David Evans, a lawyer in
Lawrenceville, New Jersey who is an expert on
drug testing. "But the reason lawyers like to
use them is because they're written down."
Lawyers, says Evans, "love it when somebody
gives them some complex regulation and they can
hit somebody over the head with it." Evans says
employers who follow HHS/SAMHSA/DOT protocols
unnecessarily are "putting on too much gold
plate."

Not everyone agrees. "It's worth going through
what compliance programs go through," says Mac
Allen, executive director of the Substance
Abuse Program Administrators Association
(SAPAA), a Nashville-based group of corporate
and third-party drug-testing programs. "I don't
think the lab is the key as much as the MRO is
the key," says Allen. "If an employee tests
positive for opiates, for example, and he's
using a bona-fide prescription drug, he would
be protected."

But most SAPAA members are DOT-mandated
employers, or third-party administrators who
want work from DOT-mandated employers. For a
small business, on-site hand-held tests might
be the way to go.

"Some of the on-site tests are pretty good,"
says J. Michael Walsh, who wrote the federal
guidelines before he left government last year
to run a private consulting business. As long
as the test is an FDA-approved immunoassay, the
employer should feel confident using it, he
says. If the employer plans to take action
against an employee, however, Walsh recommends
that any on-site test which is positive be
confirmed by sending the sample to a lab.

One reason it is important to confirm an
on-site test in a lab, especially in the case
of opiates or amphetamines, is a phenomenon
known as cross-reactivity, says Walsh. But if
you use the on-site tests just for marijuana
and cocaine, there is nothing that
cross-reacts, he adds.

The HHS system was set up because of search and
seizure concerns. The first people to be tested
under it were federal employees, and the system
had to pass constitutional muster because it
was government action. "There's a two-pronged
test for search and seizure," explains Evans.
"The search must be justified in its inception,
which means there must be proper reason for the
search. And it must be justified in its scope,
which means you shouldn't search for anything
except what you're searching for." This means
that a drug test shouldn't look for
prescription medication, for example, or poppy
seeds on a bagel. The federal government tried
to deal with both prongs of the
search-and-seizure issue in developing the HHS
guidelines.

Private employers don't need to worry about
search and seizure at all, however.

The federal guidelines initially avoided
on-site testing "because we knew we'd have
court challenges," says Walsh, and officials
wanted the system to withstand legal scrutiny.
But technology has changed, and so has the
sophistication level of people involved in
on-site testing. "Now people know how to use
hand-held systems," says Walsh. In 1985, when
the certification system was set up, there were
only two on-site systems, and they were
tabletop, not hand-held. They required
technicians who were skilled and sophisticated.
"We were concerned about some construction
supervisor running around with one of these in
the back of a pickup truck testing people," he
says.

Interestingly, it is the unions who really like
the federal guidelines, Walsh notes. "The
unions feel very comfortable with my
standards," he says with a wry laugh.

But Evans notes that many employers can't
comply with the HHS guidelines. "They're too
expensive and complicated," he says. "On-site
is cheaper, it's more convenient, it's easier."

If the employer is planning to take action, the
test should be confirmed in a licensed lab,
says Evans. "Most states have got some law
regulating labs."

COSTS OF TESTING

Walsh says the per-test cost from
SAMHSA-certified labs has come down
drastically. "Most of the labs now charge in
the neighborhood of $15 to $20 a specimen,"
says Walsh. What about the cost of collection
and MRO services? Allen says SAPAA can
recommend a third-party administrator who can
do collection, testing, and MRO work for under
$50 a test. (Initial setup costs would probably
be about $500 in addition, depending on the
complexity of the policy, he says.)

THE LIABILITY MYTH

Pressed to explain why they recommend following
the federal testing guidelines even when it's
not required, many people ultimately admit it
is fear of lawsuits.

"The DOT along with GC/MS has been through the
court system," says Allen. If an employer fires
a worker for a positive test and hasn't
followed this system, the employer might be
opening himself up to liability, these people
say. "If you get rid of someone, he might sue
you for hundreds of thousands of dollars," says
SAPAA's Allen.

"There's not a lot of liability in drug
testing," counters Evans. "There's this myth
that employers will be liable." In the one case
in which an employer did lose hundreds of
thousands of dollars, Southern Pacific had been
"beastly" to the employee, says Evans, clearly
going out of its way to defy the San Francisco
anti-testing ordinance.

TECHNO-PHOBIA AT WORK

Another problem for employers, says Evans, is
the fact that drug testing involves scientific
technology, which is unusual in the workplace.
This techno-phobia is "like math phobia," he
says. "So instead, they seize on the idea that
there are too many legal problems."

Finally, Evans says even the gold standard,
GC/MS, won't solve all your problems. "GC/MS
isn't perfect," he says. "It's very complex. I
think the only reason it hasn't been attacked
is because attorneys don't understand it."

One last note: Whether you use a
SAMHSA-certified lab, a state-certified lab, or
an on-site test, don't expect technology to
remain static. The federal government moves
slowly, but even the sacred guidelines are
changing. Stay tuned!



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

DRUG TESTING OF NON-SAFETY-
SENSITIVE WORKERS UPHELD

In one of the most recent of California's
seminal drug-testing rulings, an appeals court
has ruled that an employee who refused to take
a drug test was guilty of misconduct and
therefore did not qualify for unemployment
compensation. In handing down its ruling March
9 in AFL-CIO v. the California Unemployment
Insurance Appeals Board (93 Daily Journal
D.A.R. 3164), the California Court of Appeal
has taken the rights of employers to test
beyond the zone of the safety-sensitive job
position.

The case involved David Hayes, who worked on a
Chevron oil-drilling rig, but not as an oil
worker and not employed by Chevron. Hayes was
employed as a housekeeper by a company which
was under contract with Chevron to maintain the
living quarters for oil workers. The company
required all of its employees to have an annual
physical, which included a drug test. When the
physical was scheduled, however, he told his
supervisor that he could not take the drug test
because he knew he would test positive. He had
been smoking marijuana while on shore leave.

Hayes was fired for refusing to take the test.
But he could not receive unemployment because
the California Unemployment Insurance Appeals
Board said he was discharged for job-related
misconduct.

The AFL-CIO took the case to court on behalf of
Hayes, arguing that what Hayes did off the rig
had nothing to do with his job, and therefore
was not job-related misconduct. Furthermore,
Hayes' job wasn't even safety-sensitive, the
AFL-CIO said. The unemployment board was acting
counter to its earlier decisions, in denying
compensation to someone who did not have a
dangerous job and who was not suspected of
using drugs on the job.

The court disagreed, saying that work on an oil
rig is dangerous, regardless of the job.
"Although a slip and fall in the kitchen of a
restaurant or in a hotel room might not
endanger anyone other than the person who fell,
on an oil platform a slip and fall could be on
outside stairways or areas where the impaired
employee might not only injure himself, but
cause others to leave their posts to rescue
him," the ruling states. "Similarly, spilling
grease which could cause a fire might not be so
much of a concern where all other employees can
leave the threatened area. In a self-contained
area out in the ocean on an oil derrick, the
threat of fire becomes much more significant."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

SURVEY: OVER ONE THIRD OF
EMPLOYERS FIRE AT FIRST POSITIVE

Although most employers refer workers who test
positive for drugs to an EAP or a treatment
program, over one third fire employees for the
first positive test, a recent survey has found.
The positive rate is about 5 percent, according
to the survey of 183 employers conducted by
William M. Mercer.

Most of the companies tested for amphetamines,
barbiturates, cocaine, hallucinogens, and
opiates, according to the survey. Only half
test for alcohol, "even though its prevalence
of abuse far exceeds that of illicit and
prescription drugs," says Mercer consultant
Shael Barger, who is based in San Francisco.

Barger strongly believes that testing can be
used to identify troubled employees and refer
them to treatment. "Drug testing does work, but
there needs to be confidentiality protections
and access to treatment," she tells DIW.

Employees should be encouraged to come forward
if they need help, and returned to their
position once treated, she says. After a
certain point, if an employee is unable to
maintain abstinence, then he may be let go.

"My concern is to protect the employer from
litigation," says Barger. But she also is
concerned that substance abuse problems not be
driven underground by punitive methods.

Noting that the Americans with Disabilities Act
prohibits discrimination against an alcoholic,
Barger says it's unfortunate that the statute
doesn't apply to illicit drugs as well. "It is
a disease," she says of drug addiction. "I wish
the ADA was as emphatic on illicit drugs as
alcohol."

If employers send the workers who test positive
for treatment -- as most of surveyed employers
did -- they will benefit, says Barger.
"Substance abuse can result in work site
accidents, increased absenteeism and lowered
productivity, all of which carry high price
tags," she says. "Even though a drug screening
program detects relatively few substance
abusers, it can still save significant sums by
identifying chemically dependent workers and
motivating them to seek treatment."

Of the employers surveyed, 30 percent do no
drug testing at all, citing concerns about
legal liability, employee privacy, and test
accuracy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

EAPS NEED TQM

Total quality management, or TQM, a buzz-phrase
of the 1980s, is still trying to find its way
into EAPs. While incorporating the principles
of TQM -- encouraging employee participation
and self-esteem, eliminating fear, constantly
improving service, and providing leadership
instead of demanding production quotas -- seem
beyond the scope of EAP activities, they are
important to the survival of the EAP, according
to an article in the March issue of EAPA
Exchange, the monthly house organ of the
Employee Assistance Professionals Association.

Of course, TQM may be too much for external
EAPs -- those which operate on a contract basis
for many different companies, and which often
aren't enough of a participant themselves in
their client companies to play a role in
setting the broad policies that make up TQM.
But for internal EAPs, which operate as part of
a company, TQM is necessary, according to the
article, which is based on a survey of both
internal and external programs.

If EAPs don't get involved in TQM, they may be
seen by management -- which pays the bill -- as
nothing but a dumping ground for troubled
workers. The next step is for the employer to
question the value of having an internal EAP at
all -- and suddenly, the EAP finds itself out
of business in favor of a contract with an
external vendor. Doing TQM is really a matter
of survival, internal EAPs say.

CHANGE AT MOTOROLA

"If we choose not to integrate with other
areas, we run the risk of being relegated to a
corner of the building where we see downtrodden
employees and, eventually, are dropped in favor
of an external vendor," says Sheila Monaghan,
corporate director of the EAP at Motorola. "For
a time, EAPs operated in a nonintegrated way in
order to have sufficient numbers of employees
using their services." The nonintegrated system
allowed supervisors to refer -- or send --
employees to the EAP whenever they thought it
was a good idea.

Under the integrated system, a supervisor
referral is not made until the supervisor has
first consulted with the EAP. Perhaps there are
"alternative strategies" which could be
followed. The purpose is not to enhance the
power of the EAP, but to create a general
problem-solving environment involving
management, HR, and the EAP.

"This means that HR teams need to develop their
own process to interface efficiently in the
referral process," says Monaghan. "When each
team understands and coordinates the process,
together we can further increase our total
efficiency."

No stranger to TQM in its non-EAP world,
Motorola won the Malcolm Baldrige national
quality award in 1988.

BEYOND COUNSELING

In general, EAPs are good at more than
counseling: their skills make them experts at
interviewing a supervisor, for example, to find
out what the problem is. In this way, internal
EAPs are poised to become part of HR. This
means letting go of the old way of doing
things, in which the EAP advocated for the
employee, protecting him from HR and
management.

The advantage of this method is that employees
saw the EAP as a safe haven, and were more
likely to confide in it. The disadvantage was
that the EAP's hands would be tied when it came
to working with HR or management. Ultimately,
management found that subsidizing counseling
for its problem workers was not a
cost-effective goal for its EAP.

Even EAPs which are more focused on counseling
employees than on management and HR can play an
important role in TQM, says Dan Conti, Ph.D.,
EAP director at the First National Bank of
Chicago. Outcome measurements for behavioral
health care -- psychotherapy and substance
abuse treatment -- are especially important to
Conti, whose EAP does managed care as well.
Determining whether treatment works is one way
to incorporate the "spirit" of TQM into the
EAP-managed care combination, an increasingly
popular mix. "We're interested in much more
than a satisfaction survey that asks, `Are you
happy with your provider?,'" he says.
"Sophisticated outcome measurement can drive
real quality improvement -- that is, treatment
effectiveness -- for an EAP-managed care
system.

Another key to EAP TQM is understanding the
customer. The customer is the company --
management and HR -- who is buying the EAP. The
employee is not the customer, he is the user.

Is TQM out of the question altogether for
external EAPs? It better not be, according to
Terry Cowan, executive director of Workers
Assistance Program, based in Austin, Texas.
External EAPs like his shouldn't expect to
simply get referrals, says Cowan, who has seen
the many external EAPs swallowed up by
insurance companies to perform managed care.
"We see ourselves in survival mode right now,"
he says. His advice to internal EAPs who don't
want to be replaced by externals: sit in at
every upper-level management meeting and be a
part of all management decisions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

COMING UP--

--Alcohol Testing Conferences: The Drug and
Alcohol Testing Training Institute is holding a
three-location series of conferences--same
agenda, different sites--this spring and
summer. The program includes discussions of
cost, liabilities, Department of Transportation
regulations, and return-to-duty issues. The
program also includes presentations by a
Medical Review Officer, a lawyer, and Donna
Smith, who heads up the DOT drug-testing
effort. Dates and locations are May 20-21 in
San Diego, June 24-25 in Charlotte, and July
22-23 in Boston. For more information, contact
DATTI, University Research Park, 8701 Mallard
Creek Road, Charlotte, NC 28262; (600) 767-5399
voice, (704)594-9588 (fax).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

HOW TESTING CAN REDUCE WORKERS' COMPENSATION
COSTS

Drug testing is a useful tool for controlling
workers' compensation costs -- at least if you
can convince the insurance company that your
program will reduce claims. Gregory and Howe, a
law firm specializing in management consulting,
has arranged for a drug-testing program for its
clients which improves their chances of
lowering their workers' compensation rates.

"It's been proven that when companies put a
comprehensive drug-testing program in place,
their claims are reduced dramatically," says
George Howe, a principal at the Shelton,
Connecticut-based firm.

It does require an "enlightened" insurance
company to give a discount in exchange for drug
testing, Howe admits.  "AIG is familiar with
Gregory and Howe's program. They know it's
comprehensive, and they can validate that the
company they're underwriting is doing the
testing," he says.

The fact that an outside firm -- Gregory and
Howe -- is running the testing program is very
important to an underwriter, says James Hughes,
president of Windsor Insurance, a broker who
works with the law firm and with AIG. "One of
the things AIG says is that it's great to have
a drug-testing program, but they want to make
sure it has some bite to it," Hughes tells us.

Discounts come in one of two ways, says Howe.
First, if an insurance company is convinced
that a drug-testing program will drastically
reduce workers' compensation claims, there
could be a 10 percent reduction at the start.

More likely, however, is the "gain-sharing"
program. "It's like profit sharing," Hughes
says. "Let's say we go in and check out the
company with AIG, and agree the annual premium
is $300,000. We'll handle claims payment and
review, and we can reduce the costs. We may be
able to reduce the costs by $100,000, and that
savings would then be shared by AIG and the
employer." The broker uses managed care and
fraud detection to reduce claims costs.
Drug-testing is done also.

In order to qualify for a workers compensation
discount from AIG, an employer would have to
conduct random and pre-employment drug testing,
says Hughes. In addition, a third party -- not
the employer -- would have to oversee the
drug-testing program to make sure "it's done
correctly," he says.

For Howe, "correctly" means following
Department of Transportation protocol: using
labs certified by the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, using a
Medical Review Officer to interpret all
positives, and following federal collection
guidelines. Howe says the DOT system is the
most legally sound. With the DOT system, "if a
disgruntled employee wants to take action
against a company, he won't be able to take
them to court," Howe says.

The medical review officer protects the
employee from being labeled a drug user when he
is using only prescription drugs, says Howe.
"Almost weekly we have an opiate positive that
is reversed for dietary or medical reasons," he
says.

Although Gregory and Howe contracts with
laboratories and has a Medical Review Officer,
it is more than a third-party administrator,
says Howe. "There are a lot of TPAs or MRO
organizations that try to sell their services
like they're selling laser beams," he says. "We
start at the top, with the policy." But this
doesn't mean that turnaround time is slow.
"With us, you get good turnaround time -- 24
hours for negatives, and 48 to 72 hours for
positives."

PER-TEST COST: $55

What is the cost of Gregory and Howe's program?
Billing is simple: about $55 per test. The
program setup and administration is built into
the per-test cost. Gregory and Howe also
handles the paperwork--test results are kept on
employees at the law firm. "You're dealing with
an individual's livelihood," says Howe. "So if
an auditor wants to see files, we have them."

As for AIG, the need for antidrug programs in
terms of workers compensation was driven home
by a recent case in which a man fell off a
ladder and broke his arm -- normally about
$3,000 in  claims, says Hughes. But the man's
arm wouldn't heal properly. "It was determined
that the reason it wasn't healing was because
the man was a drug user -- an addict," says
Hughes. The workers' compensation board ruled
that the employer had to pay for inpatient
substance abuse treatment as part of the
workplace injury. "AIG knows the benefits of
having workers who are off drugs," says Hughes.
"But they like to see a comprehensive program."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION OFFERS
MODEL DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE LAWS

The President's Commission on Model State Drug
Laws, which spent most of last year holding
hearings on state legislation needed to deal
with drugs in different arenas, has come up
with six different model acts, as follows:
*  Drug-Free Private Sector Workplace Act;
*  Drug-Free Workplace Workers' Compensation
Premium Reduction Act;
*  Employee Assistance Programs and
Professionals Act;
*  Drug-Free Public Work Force Act;
*  Drug-Free Workplace Act; and
*  Employee Addiction Recovery Act.

The purposes of the proposed laws is to reduce
the costs of medical claims, medical
disability, injuries, theft, absenteeism, and
decreased productivity associated with abuse.
The proposed laws also would help employees get
treatment. The statutes would:
  *Require a drug-free workplace program to
include written policies, EAPs or
rehabilitation resources, employee education,
supervisor training, drug testing, laboratory
standards, and provisions for employee
confidentiality.
*  Protect private employers from litigation
from a good-faith employee drug test, if the
employers have a comprehensive drug-free
program.
*  Provide for a 5 percent reduction in
workers' compensation insurance premiums for
employers with comprehensive drug-free
workplace programs.
*  Allow addicted or alcoholic public-sector
employees to get treatment without job loss.
*  Allow termination or probationary
employment for any public-sector employee who
is convicted of a criminal drug offense.
*  Require all contractors, subcontractors, and
grantees doing business with or for the state
to have comprehensive drug-free workplace
programs.
*  Set up a state licensing entity for EAP
professionals.
*  Give employers a tax credit equal to 50
percent of what they paid for treating an
employee for alcohol or drug abuse.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

BORG-WARNER GUARDS TESTED AS APPLICANTS

Borg-Warner Security Corporation, which owns
Wells Fargo Guard Services and Burns
International Security Services, does drug
testing on a pre-employment basis only. But
with 65,000 security guards as employees and a
high turnover rate, this is a lot of testing.
It's done with an on-site test called the MACH
IV, which screens for cocaine, heroin,
marijuana, and methamphetamines.

If the MACH IV is positive, the sample goes to
a lab for confirmation, says Joe Allen, a
spokesman for the Chicago-based Borg-Warner.

There's a lot of "self-selection" that goes on
with pre-employment testing, says Allen. "When
people come in, there's a large sign that says
all applicants are tested for drugs. Some
people have to go out to feed the parking meter
or something, and they never come back."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

LAB CERTIFICATION: HEADED FOR FDA?

The laboratory certification currently done by
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) may not stay there
forever, according to the chief architect of
the lab program as well as the federally
mandated testing protocols. The certification
program may be headed for the Food and Drug
Administration or the Health Care Financing
Administration.

J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D., who wrote the
guidelines when head of the drug-testing
program at the National Institute on Drug
Abuse, has suggested that the FDA would be a
better place than SAMHSA for the National
Laboratory Certification Program, which he
established. In any event, the certification
program won't go back to NIDA, which is now
part of the National Institutes of Health, and
not involved with regulation. The next move is
up to the Department of Health and Human
Services, which oversees the FDA, HCFA, SAMHSA,
and NIH.

"I really do think HHS has got to do
something," says Walsh, who has been a
workplace drug-testing consultant in Bethesda
since leaving the federal government a year
ago. "The whole program is hanging up in the
air now. And there isn't a good understanding
of how much the private sector relies on it."

While Walsh has no criticism of the way SAMHSA
is running the certification, he says there is
a big problem with lack of funding and lack of
interest. "It's not a high priority now," he
says. As proof, he offers the long-awaited
final rule amending the testing guidelines,
which would lower the cutoff level for
marijuana screens, require Medical Review
Officers to be independent from laboratories,
and make other changes in the protocols. "It's
so long overdue it's ridiculous," says Walsh,
who contends the changes should have been made
four years ago. "There's nothing controversial,
but someone has to sign it," he says. "I never
thought that it would take so long" for
regulatory changes to follow changes in
technology, he adds. The changes aren't merely
formalities, Walsh notes. Lowering the cutoff
level to 50 nanograms per milliliter for
marijuana screens "would triple the positives,"
he says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

CHANGES IN SAMHSA LAB LIST

There are two changes in the list of
laboratories certified by the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) to conduct drug tests for regulated
employers and the federal government.
*  Mayo Medical Laboratories in Rochester,
Minnesota withdrew voluntarily from the
National Laboratory Certification Program on
April 15.
*  Doctors & Physicians Laboratory is now
SmithKline Beecham Clinical Laboratory. The
address is still 801 East Dixie Avenue,
Leesburg, Florida 32748. The telephone number
is (904)787-9006.

The total number of certified labs is 86. The
complete list is published in the April 4
Federal Register. For further information,
contact Giselle Hersh, Division of Workplace
Programs, SAMHSA, Room 13-A-54, 5600 Fishers
Lane, Rockville, MD 20857; (301)443-6014.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

CAN A WORKER BE FIRED FOR A SECOND POSITIVE
TEST
IF HE ISN'T FIRED FOR THE FIRST?

What happened: As a backhoe operator on live
gas lines, William LaGard, an employee of
Columbia Gas of Pennsylvania, was subject to
random drug testing by the requirement of the
federal Department of Transportation.

He also was a member of the Utility Workers
Union, which negotiated a collective bargaining
agreement allowing management to fire workers
for "proper cause."

When he tested positive for cocaine in 1992,
Columbia Gas referred LaGard to the EAP, and he
was afforded the chance for treatment. After he
returned from treatment and the company's
Medical Review Officer cleared him to return to
work, the company worked out a last-chance
agreement with him which clearly stated that
his next positive test for drugs or alcohol
would result in his termination. At this
meeting, LaGard declined union representation.

But less than a year later, LaGard again tested
positive for cocaine. The company fired him,
and the union cried foul.
*If the first positive test wasn't grounds to
fire the worker, then neither was the second
positive test.
*In negotiating directly with LaGard, Columbia
Gas violated the collective bargaining
agreement, making the last-chance agreement
invalid.
*Union and management never agreed that two
positive tests are justification for discharge.

The company rebutted that it did have the right
to fire the worker.
*Had it so desired, Columbia Gas could have
fired him after the first positive test; just
because it waived its right to do so doesn't
mean it can't do so after the second.
*Firing the worker is necessary to uphold
public policy, which is rooted in protecting
the safety of the public.
*LaGard said he didn't want union
representation at the meeting during which the
last-chance agreement was negotiated.

The ruling: LaGard stays fired, ruled
Arbitrator James C. Duff in a January 31
decision. The deciding factor, the referee
said, was "proper cause." When a worker is
employed in a safety-sensitive job, as LaGard
even admitted he was, and when that worker
twice tests positive for drugs, he has no
guarantee of his job, according to the ruling.

And the arbitrator was impressed by the fact
that the worker had been given the chance to go
to treatment. "Nothing guarantees that multiple
treatment and/or rehabilitation opportunities
will be afforded to multiple offenders," said
Duff.

The idea that if a single positive test merits
treatment instead of firing, then so should the
second positive, is "too strained to be
accepted," he said, noting that the employee
had been clearly notified that his next
positive test would not be followed by the same
degree of tolerance.

 As for the validity of the last-chance
agreement, LaGard lost his right to argue this
when he declined union representation at the
meeting, the arbitrator said. Furthermore, the
fact that there was "proper cause" for the
termination made the claim of invalidity moot.
(Case not yet reported.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>