
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B020-197</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi113.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002834 text/html 164107
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:25:57 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:55 GMT
Content-length: 163917
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi113.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & Dogs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(6721 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Top Financial Planning Software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1309 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Financial Planners' Secrets of Success</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1112 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>This Just In:  Getting Back to Business</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(5706 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Editor's Note:  Another Nail in the Coffin?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(922 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting Software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1968 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Information Services:  In Search of On-line CPAs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2060 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Practice Development:  Form 5500 Follow-up</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1742 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Newspages:  Tax Vendors for Sale</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1328 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Quicklooks:  MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics Suite</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1986 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1085 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & Dogs


Each year as the holiday season approaches, the editorial staff at Accounting
Technology gathers for one of the most enjoyable tasks of the year-choosing
products for our annual Diamonds and Dogs article.  Pouring through countless
back issues of computer and industry trades, newspaper clippings, and our own
notes accumulated over the year, we narrow down our choices until we wind up
with the dozen and a half "awards" presented here.

This year, things were really pretty slow for the first half of the year.
With many vendors waiting for the release of Windows 95, not all that much
exciting happened until late summer.  At least, that's what it seems like in
retrospect.  In actuality, it was an interesting year all around.  And, as has
been the trend in recent years, much of what took place was of benefit to you,
both in terms of what you can accomplish, and what it costs to do so.  This is
reflected in the large number of Diamonds, with just a smattering of Mixed
Bags and Dogs.


The brightest diamond of all

Finally, no article on the best of 1995 would be complete without a nod to the
"best of the best."  To the staff here at Accounting Technology, that's you
the reader.

With this first issue of the new year, everyone at Accounting Technology would
like to wish you and yours a happy, healthy, and profitable New Year!

So, without further ado, and presented in no particular order (and with no
real malice intended), here are our choices for the Diamonds and Dogs of 1995.


DIAMONDS

Sometimes you Win(95)...

And it seems as though Microsoft has indeed won big with this newest release
of its graphical operating system.  Often delayed, and put through the largest
beta test in history (more on this later), the software was finally released
with much fanfare on August 24th.  The papers reported users lining up in
computer stores to purchase the upgrade when it went on sale at midnight.
And, with the OEM deals Microsoft cut with hardware vendors, there are
millions of copies out there already, with a fairly large proportion of them
actually being used, rather than stuck on the shelf.

More conservative users, including many accountants, are biding their time,
waiting for a second release.  Of course, as magazine editors, no one expects
us

to be all that conservative, so we followed Win95 through the end of the beta
test and used it exclusively on our production machines (we still test
hardware with Win 3.11, unless it's a PC that comes with Win95 pre-installed).
And, we have to admit that a lot of the hype surrounding Win95 is justified.

We installed it on several workstations effortlessly, while one hung up until
a network card was removed.  The new desktop is really a big improvement over
Win 3.11, and once you get used to it, Windows Explorer is more powerful than
the File Manager it replaces (though you can continue to use File Manager if
you prefer).

Plug and Play, when it works, is a joy, and a terror when it doesn't.  All
told, just as with any operating system that's preceded it (including IBM's
OS/2 Warp), Microsoft Windows 95 has its good points and bad.

Overall, we started out liking it, and as we discover just how to use some of
its not-so-obvious features, that liking grows.


2+2 finally = 4

Last year at this time, Intel was just recovering from a media blitz nailing
the vendor on its cover-up of math problems inherent in its Pentium processor.
Jokes were rampant, and Intel was desperately trying to find some graceful way
out of the mess.  It finally bowed to the inevitable and offered to replace
any Pentium that contained the fault.  You had to give a credit card number,
but if you actually returned the faulty chip, your charge account was never
charged.

This strategy worked just fine.  Today, the Pentium CPU rules.  Sure, you can
still buy a 486, but why would you want to?  Everything goes better with a
Pentium, and system prices on the 75-MHz version (the 60- and 66-MHz CPUs have
all but disappeared) are under $2,000.  Even notebooks are Pentium powered.

Cyrix and AMD are still able competitors, carrying the banner for their "5X86"
technology.  But while the alternate CPUs are powerful, Intel's Pentium still
has the edge in both power and market share.  But that's right now.  You never
know what the future will bring.


How much is that accounting package in the Window(s)?

Accountants, as a professional group, have been rather slow to adopt Windows.
And even those who have moved into the Windows environment haven't embraced
Windows-based accounting applications with much gusto.

Part of this is that while the benefits of Windows-based productivity
applications such as word processing and spreadsheets are pretty obvious,
accounting itself is such a data entry oriented task that it's been difficult
to understand the benefits that a visually oriented approach could offer.  To
borrow from the last, short-lived "Zorro" TV series, most of us just want to
"Get in, make some Z's, and get out."

This situation has resulted in a sort of Catch 22.  With accountants resistant
to Windows-based accounting, vendors have been hesitant to invest much money
and time in R&D.  With few packages available, accountants haven't felt much
pressure to change.

That's changed pretty dramatically over the last two years.  It happened first
in the consumer market the year before last.  Windows-based packages from
Peachtree, Intuit, Microsoft, and scores of other vendors started to dominate
the market.  Not only in accounting applications, but in retail tax prep as
well.  With much of their Windows R&D already a sunk cost, many of these
vendors turned their attention to the professional market.  1995 saw a flood
of products announced and shipped.  And those vendors that don't already have
a Windows product line will most likely offer one this year.  When Win95 was
announced, we received almost two dozen press releases from accounting and tax
software vendors announcing Win95 compliant packages.

We're convinced that Windows-based applications offer concrete benefits in
ease of use, with drop-down menus, a consistent interface, pick-lists, and
similar features.  Easier to use also means easier to learn, so your training
and re-training costs go down as well.

If you're still primarily a DOS shop, it's time for you to take a close look
at Windows applications.  In many cases, they really are better.


CD-ROM gets faster, easier, and cheaper

1995 will also be remembered as the year that CD-ROM became a standard, and
even expected, feature on desktop PCs.  Much of the reason for this is a
one-two punch.  First, the year marked a switch from SCSI- and AT-interfaced
drives to the ATAPI IDE standard, which allows a drive just to plug into a
hard disk cable or second IDE channel on the motherboard if available.

This easy interfacing came along with the arrival of inexpensive quad-speed
drives, which dropped in price from over $400 at the start of the year to
under $150 by year's end.  When you purchase them with a complete system, or
as part of an upgrade kit, it's quite possible to receive a quad-speed drive
that costs in the $100 range.

But quad-speed is hardly even the state of the art.  Driven by more demanding
multimedia applications, six-speed drives are plentiful.  Diamond Multimedia
Systems is shipping an eight-speed drive with its top-of-the-line upgrade kit,
and several vendors are showing (but not yet shipping) ten-speed units.

Many of you already have CD-ROM drives.  But with the silver disc now the
distribution media of choice, if you don't yet have a CD-ROM drive, it's time
to add one.  And if you have a slower drive, it's not very expensive to
upgrade to one of the newer, speedier units.


ZIP and EasyDrive give you lots of space for very little cash

The mass move to Windows has had one not-so-beneficial effect.  Suddenly,
almost everyone is suffering from a lack of hard disk space.  With operating
systems such as Win95 taking up mucho megabytes on their own, it doesn't take
the installation of too many megabyte-hungry application such as Microsoft
Office (up to 75MB) before you start getting Disk Full messages from your PC.

PCs these days are coming with larger hard disk drives, and replacement drives
have dropped below $400 for a gigabyte drive.  But what do you do if you are
already maxed out in your system?  Most PCs will only support two hard disk
drives.  Unless you want to start transferring files back and forth between
diskettes and/or tape, you have a problem.

Well, you did until recently.  Well-known vendors Iomega and SyQuest have
introduced your solution-ZIP and EZ*DRIVE removable media drives.  Both these
vendors have a long track record in the removable media industry.  SyQuest has
been making high-capacity removable cartridge drives since the Apple II.
Iomega followed suit with its Bernoulli Box for the IBM PC in the early 1980s.
Over the years, both have been somewhat successful, mostly in vertical
industries.  Many of Iomega's sales have been to various branches of the
government and military, where the units' ruggedness is greatly valued, and
the relatively high cost is of secondary concern.  SyQuest has been a big hit
in the publishing industry.  Many publications (including this one) send files
created with page layout software to the printing house on SyQuest cartridges.

But relatively high drive and media prices have kept either company from being
as successful as it might have been.  In 1995, however, both vendors
introduced consumer-oriented, high-capacity storage solutions at affordable
prices.  And sales for both have really taken off.

The ZIP drive, introduced first, is a terrific-looking external drive that
uses a special 3.5-inch, flexible-media, removable disk.  Providing 100MB per
diskette, both the drive, at about $200, and the media, at $20 per 100MB, are
easy on your wallet.  We've been testing the parallel-port version of the ZIP,
and we just love it (the review will be in a future issue).  It seems users
do, too.  The drives have been flying off the shelves, and many vendors have
been backordered almost continuously since the drive started shipping.

This situation has worked out pretty well for SyQuest.  Its EZ*DRIVE is a
comparably priced 135MB cartridge hard disk unit, available in both
parallel-port and SCSI versions (as is the ZIP), and in internal and external
versions (the ZIP is strictly external).  We also have an EZ*DRIVE under
review.  Except for some initial problems installing the SCSI interface, it
also has been a joy to use.

In fact, about the only fly in the ointment with either of these drives is
that Iomega has already announced a bigger and better drive.  Its Jaz drive
should be shipping about the time this appears.  And while we haven't yet seen
one, it's expected to sell for under $500, with 1-gigabyte cartridges costing
about $100 each.  If Iomega does as good a job with the Jaz as it did with the
ZIP, there's no way it (or you) can lose.


Tape backup hits rock bottom

While we're on the topic of additional storage, let's not forget tape backup.
1995 will probably be remembered as the year that tape backup became
affordable enough for even home users.

Tape backup is a technology that's been around almost as long as PCs.  We've
seen it go from the large, clunky 3-M cartridge technology to the tiny DAT
(Digital Audio Tape) format.  One thing has remained constant over the years.
Tape backup has been expensive, slow, and generally a pain to use.

That was then.  The popular QIC format speeded up the backup process.  But it
took inexpensive parallel-port tape

drives to make tape backup an attractive technology.  Prices were falling all
during 1995, but MicroSolutions really hastened the process with an 800MB
Travan-technology capable parallel-port drive for under $170.  Iomega quickly
followed suit with a similar Ditto drive.  Colorado Memory Systems, now owned
by Hewlett-Packard, already has a large chunk of the installed market, with
the lion's share of OEM deals with system vendors.  You can be sure Colorado
won't give up any sales easily to other tape drive vendors.

Just to make things even better, backup software has really improved along
with drive and tape technology.  Arcada Software provides the software for
MicroSolutions and Iomega, and sells an enhanced version on its own.  Other
vendors also have excellent software for backup available.

Just about all of today's backup software offers extensive scheduling options
and various data compression features to squeeze more data onto a single tape.

Sure, we know you already have a tape backup drive on your system.  But
perhaps it's an older unit, with limited capacity.  With today's units, and
today's prices, right now is a good time for you to upgrade.


Accountants on-line

When it comes to technology, accountants generally get a bad rap.  The
stereotype is a green eye-shaded clerk bending over a ledger with a quill pen
in hand.  The reality, as we all know, is much different.  Accountants are
usually quick to embrace a technology once the cost/benefits become clear.
And nowhere is this more evident than in telecommunications, this year's
hottest technology.

Everyone's on the on-line services such as CompuServe and Prodigy.  CompuServe
has long served as a support vehicle for numerous accounting software vendors,
and if you sign onto Prodigy's Special Interest Section, the first listing you
find is one for accountants run by Sid Breman.

The Microsoft Network hasn't been left out either.  F&G, Accounting
Techology's publisher, is a Service Provider on MSN, and you'll find current
and back issues of Accounting Technology as well as its sister publications
The Practical Accountant and Accounting Today.  The Accounting Office, an area
run by Educational Edge, also provides MSN subscribers with access to
accountant-oriented resources.

Even more interesting, however, is how accounting software vendors are among
the leading-edge innovators on the Internet.  SBT, well known for its
accounting software products, has an entire new division with the task of
helping accountants find ways to profit from the Internet.  WebTrader, the
division's first product, offers a secure method for conducting business over
the Net.  Abacus Accounting Systems, another well-known software vendor, is
also heavily into Internet development.

And let's not forget the numerous vendors that have established Web home
pages.  If you have an Internet account, be sure to check out Wayne's Web, the
web "home" of Wayne Harding.  Wayne's the VP of CPA Relations for Great Plains
Software, and his section can be found on Great Plains' Web page
(http://www.gps.com).  If you're an Internet "newbie," Wayne's Web is a good
place to start your Web exploring.


Video conferencing hits the big time:  Here's looking at you, kid

One of the breakthrough technologies in the year just past was video
conferencing.  The basic technology has been available for several years, but
it hasn't made much of a splash because of the incredible amount of resources
needed to make it work.  We've all been reading about PicturePhones, perhaps
the ultimate video-conferencing technology, for years.  And for years, they've
been just around the corner.  Some vendors, such as Casio and Matsushita, have
briefly sold consumer videophones, which sent a single frame of video every
five or ten seconds.  These haven't been successful, as you may as well just
paste a picture of a person you're talking to on the phone.

AT&T has had a bit more success.  If you want to video conference, you can
book some time in a local AT&T center in many major cities and have
full-motion video with other conferencees in similar facilities in other
cities.

The problem is bandwidth.  Video signals, when digitized, comprise a lot of
data.  Normal telephone lines don't have the capability of carrying enough
information in real-time to allow full-motion video to be transmitted.  Even
AT&T has had to go to special dedicated lines for its video-conferencing
services.

This limitation is also felt on the network, but things are changing rapidly.
Today's high-speed Ethernet networks can carry much greater information loads.
And ISDN phone lines are many times faster than standard ones.  Real-time data
compression reduces the amount of information that needs to be transmitted,
while Pentium-level CPUs make it possible to do this compression and
decompression on normal desktop PCs.  Finally, video conferencing is becoming
not just technically feasible, but affordable as well.

While it's not yet an off-the-shelf technology, since it needs somewhat
specialized skills to install and set up, there are some big names getting
into video conferencing.  Intel's ProShare comes in several levels of
capability.  We reviewed the mid-level package, which offers collaboration
over a network, but not video.  With ProShare, video conferencing requires an
ISDN telephone line for each workstation, even if you're conferencing
completely in-house.  Corel's new video-conferencing system only requires an
ISDN line for remote conferencing.  In-house, the video signal is sent over an
unused pair of network wires.

Video conferencing still isn't cheap.  With most of the systems available now,
when all of the costs are tallied up (including a video camera for each
workstation), you can expect to pay in the neighborhood of $1,000 per seat,
with prices expected to drop again this year.  But in a mid-level firm, that's
not all that much money to have instant real-time video conferencing.  It may
even be worthwhile to consider setting up a video-conferencing system between
the firm and its most important clients.  After all, how many other accounting
firms could offer a similar service?


Color inkjets:  Better and even cheaper this year

Okay, we gave these inkjet printers a Diamond last year, so we really weren't
planning on doing it again in '95.  However, we've just finished testing a new
batch of color inkjets, and we have to admit that as impressed as we were last
year, we're even more so this time around.

First off, there are more vendors in the field.  Yes, you can buy an
inexpensive monochrome inkjet, but this class of printers is quickly
disappearing, being replaced by low-cost inkjet printers such as the Epson
Stylus IIs, Lexmark 1020, and HP DeskJet 600.  All of these printers are
"color-capable."  If you replace the monochrome print head with a three-color
unit (cyan, magenta, and yellow), you get full-color output.  The blacks are a
little muddy, since they're comprised of a mixture of the three colors, but
overall the color output looks just great.  And at under $350 (the Lexmark is
under $300), none of these will break the bank.

You'll also have more choices in inexpensive four-color inkjets.  The Canon
BJC-4100 and BJC-600e, HP 660, and Epson Stylus Color II all offer excellent
output on plain paper, and are priced in the $550 price range.  Finally, the
Epson Stylus Color Pro and HP 850 offer great output, good speed, and
office-quality durability for well under $1,000.  For adding color to your
proposals and reports, this is definitely the year of the color inkjet.


Multifunction printer/fax systems:  They dice, they slice

We didn't start out liking multifunction office machines.  The idea isn't bad:
a Swiss-army knife approach of incorporating a printer along with a
scanner/fax machine.  After all, many offices need all of these capabilities,
so why pay for separate machines and give up all of that desktop real estate
when you can put them into one handy package?

When we first looked at this solution, we were less than impressed.  Okidata's
Doc*It, one of the first of the breed, was large, expensive, and required a
separate interface card in your PC.  It worked pretty well, but it definitely
wasn't a machine for the masses.  Panasonic's initial venture into this
market, reviewed in the January 1995 printer round-up, was priced right, but
gave us a bit of difficulty in setup and use.  Both these vendors deserve
kudos for their pioneering efforts.

As with most technology, time has brought improvement.  We're currently
reviewing the new breed of office equipment, and there's been a quantum leap
in what these new units offer.  Hewlett-Packard's Office FX, Canon's
Multipass, and Lexmark's Medley are all inkjet based, and work with plain
paper.  All of them give excellent results, and the Lexmark unit can even
print in color!  Brother's MF-4500 and Panasonic's new unit cost a little
more, but both offer a laser printer, with its additional speed, as the basic
print platform.

Couple attractive packaging, easy setup and use, and reasonable prices (in the
neighborhood of $1,000 for laser-based units, under $700 or so for inkjet
based), and you have a real winner sitting on your desk.


Your desk is alive with the sound of music

Accountants have embraced multimedia with both hands.  And they're not only
using multimedia products, but are creating their own multimedia reports and
presentations.  New presentation packages such as PowerPoint, ASAP, and
Astound have wizards and assistants that take you step by step through the
process.  Pre-designed templates offer just the right background, and OLE
(object linking and embedding) makes it simple to place an "object," such as a
graph, video clip, or even sound file, into your presentation.  There's even a
specialized package from Midisoft called Presentation Partner that makes it
easy to go even further, assembling various multimedia pieces into dynamite
dog and pony shows.

Technology has enabled the average user to incorporate a lot of fairly
esoteric "objects" into everyday presentations.  Video capture boards let you
easily use your camcorder to shoot video clips that just "drop" right into
PowerPoint, Freelance Graphics, or even Word for Windows, using the Insert
Object command.  Lotus ScreenCam makes it possible to capture the action on
your screen while you're running an application.

In fact, about the only place this scenario falls down is on the soundtrack.
A really professional multimedia presentation generally features some sort of
musical accompaniment.  You could just connect your CD or tape player to the
microphone input on your sound card, but that's not really a good solution.
Not only are you stuck with the prerecorded length of the song you're
pirating, but you're also violating someone's copyright.  Sound clip
collections, available on CD-ROM, are a better solution, but they're expensive
and also of fixed length.

A better solution is one of the new soundtrack generators.  Available from
vendors such as Sonic Desktop, Yamaha, and Blue Ribbon Software (recently
acquired by Microsoft), these products let you specify a style (rock, jazz,
swing, reggae, country, etc.), a tempo, and a length, then stitch together a
made-to-order file from musical components.  Each one works a bit differently,
but they all let you adjust the instrument mix to some extent and perform some
degree of blending of musical style when your presentation changes mood.

Obviously, none of these products is as good as having a group of professional
musicians record a custom soundtrack specifically authored for you by a
personal composer.  But even if you have family in the music business, you're
not going to get it done for the under-$200 price tag that all of these
products sport.  And you'll be pleasantly surprised at how good a result you
can achieve with just a little playing around.  It's not essential technology,
but it does let you add a good deal of polish to your presentations at minimal
cost in money and effort.


DOGS

Pentium Overdrive:  Sales shift into reverse

One of Intel's marketing strategies when it was first engineering the
changeover from the 486 to the Pentium was to provide an upgrade path.  Just
as it had enabled you to upgrade 486 CPUs by popping in an "Overdrive" chip,
Intel suggested that system vendors include a spare socket on their 486
motherboards where a Pentium Overdrive chip could be plugged in at a later
time, converting the system to a Pentium-based PC.  Well, it sounded nice in
theory, at least before Intel started shooting its own toes off one at a time.

First came the delays.  With the math problems uncovered in the original
Pentium CPU, you can be sure that Intel wasn't about to bring a replacement
CPU to market with the same flaw.  So that delayed the introduction of the
unit for a while.  (Bang!  There goes one toe.)  Retooling the chip production
lines to produce all the additional Pentiums needed to replace the original
CPUs put the Overdrive project even further behind.  (Bang!  There goes
another.)  Then there was the great socket problem.

When Intel first started pitching the Pentium Overdrive at motherboard
vendors, it specified an upgrade socket based on the pin-out design of the
upgrade chip at that time.  Unfortunately, as the Pentium upgrade project
progressed, the chip was continuously redesigned, and the number of pins that
the chip had was changed.  All of a sudden, the original socket wouldn't work
with the upgrade chip.  (Bang!)  Intel respecified the socket configuration,
and many motherboard and system designers went to a different colored socket.

Even if you are willing to open up your PC before ordering your Pentium
Overdrive and look for the socket (and possibly count the number of holes in
it), you still may not be able to get the right Pentium Overdrive for your
system.  Intel has been very slow in releasing different-speed versions.
(Bang!)  And, assuming you've been lucky enough to find and install the
version for your particular 486 system, you may not have seen the speed
increase you expected, since Intel had to leave off some of the Pentium's
performance features to make it compatible with 486 system design.  (Have we
run out of toes yet?)

There are a few companies that have survived in the system upgrade business.
Evergreen Technologies, Improve, and Kingston still provide modules that let
you wring some additional performance out of your existing 486 at a reasonable
cost.  But at this time last year, there were at least two other companies in
this business; they seem to have gone away since then.  Given Intel's own
experiences, this doesn't seem too surprising.


Novell:  Not so Perfect after all?

Back in the '80's, Novell Corporation was king.  Its NetWare software was the
must-have product if you were serious about having a network.  NetWare is
still the most popular network operating system, but over the years other
products, such as Artisoft's LANtastic and Microsoft's Windows NT, have shown
Novell that it has to work to keep its dominance.

But, riding high with its NetWare success, Novell made some acquisitions that
in retrospect may have done more harm than good.  Its UnixWare division,
intended to make Novell as powerful in the Unix market as it is in DOS, has
come and gone, now residing with SCO.  And WordPerfect, once the king of word
processing and a prized Novell acquisition, is on the block, as is the Quattro
Pro spreadsheet software that Novell acquired from Borland.

It's laudable that a company would want to diversify.  After all, an
essentially one-product company such as Novell is at great risk if that one
product becomes less desirable and/or subject to increased competition.
Novell's big mistakes were buying a company with products that its own
management had no experience with (NetWare isn't a retail product, while
WordPerfect's product line is), and moving too slowly out of the DOS
environment.  WordPerfect may still have the largest number of DOS users of
any product, but who cares.  Like it or not, the world is moving to Windows.

Let's hope Novell's foray into retail applications hasn't done too much
damage.  After all, NetWare is still the standard for networking, and with
less of a drain on its resources, hopefully Novell will become a bit quicker
in addressing some of the challenges that newer Windowing environments offer.
As for WordPerfect and Quattro Pro, it may be that they have peaked and are
now waning.

Tax software vendors:  And another one bites the dust

The year just past was a rough one for tax prep software vendors.  Every year
a few more vendors leave the tax prep market.  Some, such as Prentice-Hall
Professional Software, sell out to another vendor.  In P-H's case, it was
acquired by CLR.  With its own GoSystem and EasyGo products, CLR will most
likely concentrate on the FAST!  audit software it acquired, rather than
expending effort on aging tax prep products that compete with its own.  Two
other vendors, FlashTax and Tax Resources, closed their doors before our
annual 1040 Face-Off over the summer.  Right after our 1040 Face-Off was
completed, a fourth vendor, RAM Software, was acquired by SCS/Compute.

It's pretty inevitable that these won't be the last tax prep vendors to close
their doors.  After all, the professional tax prep market is just about
saturated, with very few new, first-time sales being made.  For a vendor to
gain a new client, it either has to cannibalize some other vendor's user base
or buy out another vendor.  The only other places to generate new business are
out in the retail market, as Intuit is doing with its consumer/retail sales of
business tax products, or moving into entirely new markets, as Pencil Pushers
has done with its CFS services division.

The food chain is a fact of nature.  Big fish eat little fish and are
consumed, in turn, by the next rung up the food chain.  But tax prep vendors
aren't fish; they're people who in many cases have spent an enormous amount of
effort trying to build a business.  Change is an unavoidable part of life, but
we always experience a twinge of sadness when we read about another vendor
passing into the pages of tax prep history.


MIXED BAGS

 ...And sometimes you don't

What we didn't like all that much was Microsoft's Win95 Beta Program.  Billed
as the largest beta test ever, it was plagued by media mismanagement and
deadline pressure.  Once Microsoft decided that it couldn't afford the bad
press that was sure to result if it blew another announced shipping deadline,
the highly touted beta program was mostly for show.  Going through several
"final" release candidates, Microsoft's answer to an inability to solve some
fairly major problems was to pare features out of the operating system.  The
strategy worked; after all, it was able to ship a moderately robust product on
August 24th, as promised.  But it wasn't the product Microsoft initially
intended to ship when beta testing started.

We won't state that Microsoft should have let the deadline slip again to
correct, rather than cut, features it had difficulty getting to work.  After
all, at some point you have to bite the bullet and ship a product, even if it
isn't 100 percent of what you had hoped.  It takes a lot of courage to air
your dirty laundry in public, as Microsoft wound up having to do during its
extensive beta test program of Win95.

What we do take umbrage with is all of the hype that went on with this beta
program.  Not only was Win95 the largest beta test in history, it was unique
in that thousands of copies of beta software were sold as part of Microsoft's
Preview program.  Savvy software vendors such as Symantec's Norton division
jumped right on the bandwagon, with "preview" versions of its Win95 utilities.

Come on, guys.  There's such a thing as carrying things too far!


PentiumPro, not for beginners

Just when you thought it was safe to go back into the computer store, you find
out there's a new big fish in the pond.  Intel has had great success pretty
much killing off the 486 in favor of its Pentium CPU.  But the Pentium is a
couple of years old already, and it's old news.  By the time you read this, a
number of vendors will be advertising, and probably shipping, systems with
Intel's next generation of CPU, the PentiumPro.  The PentiumPro has more
transistors, more cache RAM (moved to a separate chip), and at least on paper,
more power.

But just as was the case when almost every new generation of hardware has been
introduced, the advances in hardware have outstripped most users' ability to
take advantage of them.  Yes, you can use a PentiumPro-equipped PC as a sort
of "super" Pentium.  But only if you are already running 32-bit applications
under a 32-bit operating system such as Windows NT, Win95, or OS/2.  If you
still run mostly 16-bit applications (as most of us do), early benchmarks
indicate that these applications run slower on a PentiumPro than on a Pentium.

Additionally, the early marketing hype on the PentiumPro talked up the
benefits that this new CPU would bring to Asymmetric Multiprocessing.  This
technology uses several CPUs within a system and splits the computational load
between them.  Unfortunately, it's been more difficult to get this technology
working reliably than the vendors had anticipated.  Even with the highly
touted PentiumPro.

Make no mistake about it.  Intel will be successful with the PentiumPro CPU,
just as it has been with its other CPU products in the past.  It just won't
happen overnight.  The Pentium CPU, which will achieve speed of 150s and 175
MHz this year, is still going to be the CPU of preference for a while.


IBM 1-2-3?

And, as long as we're talking about strange acquisitions, let's not forget
IBM's 3 billion dollar purchase of Lotus.  You've got to admire IBM; it's a
company that's succeeded in spite of itself.  First there was the IBM PC, a
product that none of IBM's top management at the time believed would sell.
When it took off like a rocket, quickly becoming the standard for desktop
computing, IBM made a series of incredible design decisions.  Remember the
PCjr?  How about IBM's version of the Compaq transportable?  The P70?  And who
can forget the MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) bus?

As incredible as it may seem with this track record, IBM still manages to make
lots of money.  When you're that big, it takes an awful lot to throw you off
the course.  At the same time, Big Blue doesn't exactly have a stellar record
in applications software either.  How many of you remember TopView, IBM's
answer to the original Windows?  The IBM Accounting Series?  Hollywood?  Were
you even aware that IBM started up a PC software division, acquired marketing
rights to a number of products, then closed down the division?

And who else but IBM could consider OS/2 a hit?  Sure, it really is a great
operating system, and it has shipped a couple of million copies, about what
Win95 shipped in the first month of availability.  Even IBM provides Windows
on its Aptiva PCs that it sells through Radio Shack.

With this string of software successes behind it, it kind of makes sense that
IBM would want Lotus.  After all, Lotus has the tremendously successful 1-2-3,
which will hopefully be available for Win95 by the time you read this.  Then
there's AmiPro, oops, we mean WordPro, the hit word-processing package.

We admit it, we're being mean.  Accountants still use 1-2-3, probably more
than any other specific user group.  But how many are buying the newest
version when they go looking for an upgrade?  1-2-3 has steadily given ground
to Excel as Windows has become the operating system of choice.  It's possible
for a product to go into a slide and recover, but it doesn't happen often.
Most of the other Lotus applications, such as Freelance Graphics, are also
being overtaken by products from other vendors.

But it's a good bet that IBM really wanted Lotus for the wildly successful
Notes product.  Notes is the premier groupware product on the market today,
and it almost single-handedly set many of the standards for workflow office
products.  But the paradigm has changed with the popularity of the Internet.
Notes was designed around (and optimized for) a network environment.  The
Internet is sort of a super wide-area network, and the current version of
Notes doesn't work as well with it as some other technologies.  You can be
sure IBM is working on it; it's got a lot of strength and experience in
client-server technology, which is one of the bases of the Internet.

Having many of Lotus's top management people take a hike after the acquisition
can't be helping matters, however.  Notes is a "big company" kind of product.
Lots of "big companies" have made large investments in Notes technology, so
there's a very strong reason for IBM to make a commitment to keeping the
momentum going with the product.

The downside is that technology changes quickly; witness the Internet.  And
while momentum can often be good, it also makes it difficult to change
directions quickly.

Will Notes (and Lotus) survive the IBM approach?  Right now the acquisition is
a Mixed Bag.  But it could go either way this year.


Color lasers:  Set lasers on intermittent

On paper, a color laser printer is almost irresistible.  For around $6,000, or
not quite twice what one of the original LaserJet printers sold for, you get
the best of both worlds.  When you need black and white, your printer zooms
out a speedy 12 pages per minute.  And, when there's a client presentation or
report to do, gorgeous color pages flow from the printer, on plain paper, at 3
pages per minute.  With competition for clients getting fiercer by the minute,
even that six grand price tag doesn't seem all that imposing, measured against
the print-on-demand capabilities offered by one of the new color lasers.
Color inkjets are terrific, but ah, for a color laser!

That's the way it would work if a color laser was as easy to use out of the
box as regular monochrome lasers are.  That hasn't been our experience,
however.  When a major vendor of color lasers offered us the opportunity last
year to look at its latest model, we jumped at the chance.  Weighing in at
over 100 pounds, it took two of us to unpack it and move it into position, and
a fair amount of time to set it up.  Mechanically, with four different color
toners (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black), these printers are more complex
than a single-color laser.  Even this setup, though somewhat time-consuming,
isn't beyond the abilities of most potential users.

But in several months of testing, we ran into problem after problem.  Flaky
drivers for Windows and Windows NT drove us nuts.  Problems with long print
jobs were also disconcerting.  Sometimes the job printed in its entirety,
sometimes the same job printed halfway through, then started spewing pages of
PostScript code.  The vendor's technical support was helpful, but in the end
we decided that we had experienced just too many problems to continue our
review.  Thanking the vendor, we offered to come back at a later time for
another look.

We have another vendor's color laser currently under review at the moment.
This is a new product, and the vendor has a strong background in providing
terrific software drivers.  We won't mention the vendor since we want some
more experience before we decide on a full-scale review, but so far, so good.
We've been running Windows 3.11 drivers under Win95 with no problems yet.  The
next step is to try networking the unit and moving it between a number of
different PCs.  At over 100 pounds (all color lasers are heavy!), this won't
be easy, but we want to make sure that this unit doesn't have the same
problems we ran into with the last printer.  If it doesn't, than you can
expect a review soon, and maybe in next year's Diamonds and Dogs, we can
change the Mixed Bag into a Diamond.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Top Financial Planning Software


Financial planning software can help you and your clients find perfect ways to
earn more money.  Here's a selection of top packages to help you find the
perfect solution for your clients' needs.

The All-Star Line-Up.  BNA Income Tax Planner, BNA Software, 1231 25th St.,
NW, Washington, DC 20037, $495; with Fifty State Planner, $890.  Available now
for either Windows or plain DOS (the DOS version is called BNA Income Tax
Spreadsheet), BNA's planner lets you project federal income tax for up to 10
years.  With the optional Fifty State Planner, you can do the same for all 50
states, the District of Columbia and New York City.  It calculates regular,
alternative minimum and capital gains, self employment, lump sum and estimated
taxes and lets you input data from K-1s and 1099s.  Along with the Income Tax
Planner, BNA sells a Corporate Tax Planner and Estate Tax Planner.

Easy Money Plus, Money Tree Software, 1753 Wooded Knolls Dr., Philomath, OR
97370, (503) 929-2140, $500; Golden Years, $500; Retirement Solutions Plus,
$250.  Easy Money Plus prepares the key pieces in a client's financial plan,
including net worth, cash flow, retirement, survivor, education funding,
estate taxes and income taxes.  It uses questionnaires to create its reports.

Golden Years produces a 52-year projection of assets, income, expenses and
income taxes using a Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows template.

Retirement Solutions Plus supplies nine programs that cover lump sum and early
retirement distributions, 401(k) and IRA accumulation accounts and other
retirement issues.

ExecPlan, ExecPlan, Inc., 777 Alexander Rd., Princeton, NJ 08540, (609)
987-5000, $1,995.  ExecPlan's estate-planning features let you draw up asset
distribution plans.  Using a flowchart, you move assets between family members
and the program recomputes the results.

ExecPlan also offers federal and state tax planning, retirement and education
planning, stock option analysis and cash management.  You can do investment
planning, draw up a capital needs analysis in case of disability or death and
prepare a financial profile.

Vista, ViewPlan, Inc., PO Box 80788, San Diego, CA 92138, (800) 826-2127,
$699.  A Windows-based estate-planning package, Vista provides visual
presentation tools, such as flowcharts and graphs, along with text, that
illustrate estate tax consequences for your clients.  A DOS version, Estate
Forecast Model, is available, and ViewPlan offers Data+, a $99 Windows and DOS
add-on program to help you gather client asset information.

In addition, ViewPlan sells Factuary, a $349 Windows program for calculating
what-if scenarios and tax effects for clients; Progeny, a $349 DOS product
that graphically displays the tax benefits of using generation skipping; and
Benequick, a $349 Windows and DOS product that calculates charitable gift tax
deductions and illustrates their benefits.  Later in the year, ViewPlan
intends to offer Beneview, a Windows product that will graphically display the
tax advantages of charitable trusts.

Expert Series, Sterling Wentworth, 57 W.  200 South, Ste.  500, Salt Lake
City, UT 84101, (800) 752-6637, $695 per module, $1,995 for full system.
Sterling Wentworth's Windows update to its DOS-based Planman incorporates
Retirement Expert, Portfolio Expert, Estate Expert, Risk Management Report and
Expert Tool Kit modules.  Retirement Expert provides 55 reports that you can
customize through a drag-and-drop interface.

Portfolio Expert lets you evaluate your clients' investment objectives and
define 10 portfolio categories and nine portfolio allocations.

Estate Expert analyzes your clients' current estate value and tax liabilities
and estimates what they'll be in the future.

The Risk Management Report covers survivor needs and disability income.  And
the Expert Tool Kit handles lump sum distributions, accumulation, mortgage
refinance, income tax and cash flow.

Financial Planning Professional, Lumen Systems, Inc., 4300 Stevens Creek
Blvd., Ste.  270, San Jose, CA 95129, (800) 233-3461, $1,495 single-user.
This comprehensive financial planning system can produce either modular or
full plans, or macro or micro plans, depending on the amount of information
you want.

Leonard 2000, Mobius Group, P.O.  Box 13959, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
(800) 632-3044, $1,500.  Leonard 2000 generates professional-looking reports
packed with information and graphs.  The reports are organized into sections
for the Objective and Recommendations.

In addition, Mobius sells Leonard 5000, which covers asset and risk
management, cash flow and income taxes and retirement and estate planning.

M-PREPS (Professional Retirement Planning System), a $200 product from Mobius,
offers extensive modeling, historical rates of return for assets, and
projections in full color reports.

PFP Partner, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, P.O.  Box
2209, Jersey City, NJ 07303-2209, (800) 226-5800, $595 for AICPA members, $655
for non-members.  The AICPA's financial planning product automates goal
calculations, producing a five-year statement of projected net worth,
five-year cash flow projection and tables for education, retirement and
user-specified goals.

In addition, the software lets you try out what-if scenarios, showing what
happens when you increase annual contributions according to any rate.  It
handles risk management and performs a needs analysis for life and disability
insurance.

Professional Series, International Financial Data Systems, Inc., P.O.  Box
888165, Atlanta, GA 30356-0165, (800) 554-8004, Professional Series/3, $599;
Professional Series/2, $399; Penny Pincher II, $199.  Professional Series/3
provides an interactive database, including an investment and tax shelter
library, client directory, balance sheet projection by asset category,
mortality table, tax rate maintenance programs and a variety of personalized
reports, including five-year projections of AMT and federal income tax.

Professional Series/2 is a more scaled back product that can store up to 30
investments or tax shelters.  Penny Pincher II analyzes net worth, education
cost and capital needs.

Profiles Plus, Financial Profiles, Inc., 5421 Avenida Encinas, Ste.  A,
Carlsbad, CA 92008, (800) 237-6335, $695.  Profiles Plus includes personal
financial planning and business planning modules, client data management and a
run-time version of Harvard Graphics.

ProPlan, Financial Planning Consultants, Inc., 2507 N.  Verity Pkwy., P.O.
Box 430, Middletown, OH 45042-0430, (800) 666-1656, $495; Lifescape graphing
module, $85; monthly support, $95.  ProPlan handles planning in a variety of
areas:  income tax, investment, risk management, educational funding, cash
flow, estate, survivor income and retirement.  It figures estate income and
liquidity, analyzes retirement income and retirement account projections and
computes the effects of disability for either spouse.

Quicken Financial Planner, Intuit, P.O.  Box 3014, Menlo Park, CA 94026, (800)
816-8025, $39.95.  This retirement planning product takes your clients who use
Quicken through an interview about their finances and retirement goals and
builds a plan.  To refine the plan, they can just click a button and see what
happens if they save more money or less in the bank, retire sooner rather than
later, and invest more conservatively or aggressively.  The program helps
choose an appropriate mutual fund and assists with planning other goals such
as college and a second home purchase.  To top it all off, there are 30
minutes of multimedia advice from Newsweek columnist Jane Bryant Quinn.

Total Resource, Wilson Associates International, Inc., 1355 Terrell Mill Rd.,
Bldg.  1462, Ste.  200, Marietta, GA 30067, (800) 831-7636, $2,495 ($1,000
rebate available).  Total Resource lives up to its name, with capabilities in
the areas of marketing, practice management, asset tracking and portfolio
management, general financial planning, tax and cash flow, retirement, estate,
insurance, education, disability and compliance and commission tracking.  It
includes a database of 2,500 securities and lets you set up your own asset
categories for portfolio tracking.

You can also set up a client prospect database with the system, use
questionnaires to gather data from clients and produce financial statements.

For other purposes, you can produce a survivor needs analysis, see the cash
value of insurance policies, analyze disability needs for your clients and
their spouses and track the status of buy and sell security orders.

Financial planning software can provide valuable information for your clients
and rewarding returns for your practice.


MICHAEL COHN is senior editor of Accounting Technology.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Financial Planners' Secrets of Success


After 10 years of grinding out monthly financial statements and tax returns,
Peggy Ruhlin shut down her CPA practice to go into financial planning.  And
she never looked back.  At the height of the next season, she called her
harried friends at the old firm.  "I'm going skiing," she told them.  "What
are you doing?"  She could almost hear their teeth gnashing.  "I went on two
vacations during that first tax season.  It was wonderful."

Since then, Ruhlin has built a major financial planning practice, Boudros &
Ruhlin, in Columbus, Ohio.  Boudros & Ruhlin manages about $250 million in
client funds, making it a major discount broker's biggest operator in the
region.

And she is not alone.  More and more tax and accounting professionals, many of
them CPAs, are getting into financial planning.  Some enter the field by
accident, pushed by faithful

clients seeking help as they enter their most fruitful years.  Others are
pulled by the huge promise of an exploding market of monied but fretful
baby-boomers.

Different Challenges.  To be sure, the typical fee-only financial planning
firm remains as small a business as the average tax and accounting practice.
Industry sources say most offices have one owner, who may net about $75,000 a
year, and one assistant.  About 25 percent of the financial planners are
women, a much higher level of ownership than in accounting.  Few practices
will have more than $10 million in funds under management, priced at a 1% fee
or less.

But freed from billing by the hour, a practitioner's income is limited only by
his or her ability to develop clients.  Fees based on a percentage of assets
under management can rise with little or no incremental costs, meaning every
new dollar falls straight to the bottom line.  In a bull market year, every
tick upward in the Standard & Poor's index is another clang of the asset
manager's cash register.  "When the S&P is up 25%," said one practitioner,
"clients don't notice the 1% annual charge."

"If your target market is small business and professionals," says CPA Bob
Phillips, "you end up dealing with financial planning issues whether you like
it or not."  Phillips is one of eight partners at the CPA firm of Whipple &
Co., which, with 60 people and revenue of more than $5 million, is one of the
10 largest firms in Indianapolis.

In his firm, Phillips is the one charged with the mission of building the
financial planning practice.  "We decided years ago to help our clients plan
their personal lives as systematically as we do their businesses," he says.
As a result, Phillips is now playing an active role in his clients' investment
decisions and portfolio structuring.

But serious financial planning work, which always involves actual investment
decisions and execution, is much different from traditional estate planning.
The leading financial planners, whether they work on commission or on
fee-only, relish their roles as active players.  They share a desire to be
more than a mere advisor.  They also cherish the challenge of making
investment decisions, choosing products and running money.

People-Oriented Focus.  Many traditional CPAs and tax professionals just don't
have the constitution for it.  "There's a lot more uncertainty in this work,"
says Phillips.  "All of a sudden, you are much more accountable for a lot of
things you can't control."

"You have to be very people-oriented," adds CPA Cynthia Conger.  "It's a lot
more difficult for the technical types to get into the counseling aspects of
this work."  Conger, now one of two principals in the Arkansas Financial
Group, in Little Rock, earned her CPA certificate in 1981, using it first as a
corporate controller and later in insurance sales.  She started full-blown,
comprehensive financial planning in 1985 with an associate from the insurance
agency.

At first, she shunned tax returns.  But bending to client demand, today
Conger's Arkansas Financial Group handles about 175 tax customers a year,
including corporate and fiduciary forms.  Her firm also handles accounting at
six to eight small businesses.  But the core of the business is the 250 to 300
financial plans she writes a year and the $35 million in assets under
management.  Eventually, she and her partner plan to launch a trust company to
administer all the trusts they've put in place for clients.  But before that,
Conger may launch a line of administrative services for individuals, to handle
routine bill-paying and banking chores, which could be invoiced monthly.  "We
deal with a lot of double-doctor households who just don't have the time to do
this kind of thing," she says.

Gary Shalhoob, a Dallas financial planner, agrees.  "CPAs need a much broader
perspective as a financial planner," says Shalhoob.  "You have to weigh not
only the estate and tax consequences, but also the investment ramifications as
well."  Shalhoob developed financial planning units first at Bank of America
and then at Deloitte & Touche and Price Waterhouse before starting his own
firm, Resource Management Group.  He is also a contributing author to "Tax &
Financial Planning for Older Clients," issued by Practitioners Publishing Co.
of Fort Worth, Texas, an affiliate of Faulkner & Gray Inc.

Today Shalhoob works with CPAs, trading referrals, convinced that Big
Six-sized financial planning practices are not economically sensible.  "This
is not a business you can build on leverage," he says.  "All the service is
very personal, nothing can be delegated."  But firms are also limited in their
range of movement.  They might be reluctant to recommend specific stocks or
financial companies, if they are involved as auditors.  Mixing audit clients
and financial planning clients can also complicate carefully groomed
relationships.  "One bad year in the market for a CFO could blow your audit
contract," Shalhoob says.  And, with a big firm's overhead, pricing is a
problem if you can't work on commission.  "Anyone trying to do fee-only
financial planning has a very difficult time making money," Shalhoob says.

So, many CPA financial planners do what Ron Humeney has done.  Humeney, a
Southfield, Mich., CPA, runs two businesses-Starfire Financial, to handle tax
preparation, and Starfire Investment Advisory Sevices, to sell products and
manage assets.  If they are unfettered by CPA regulations, they might do what
Ed Gerstein and Gregg Fisher have done.  Gerstein ran a Brooklyn, N.Y., tax
practice solo until two years ago when he brought nephew Gregg into the
business.  Today, Gerstein crunches tax returns for about 1,500 clients, while
Fisher is attempting to leverage that database into a financial planning
practice.


RICK TELBERG is editor of Accounting Today, also published by Faulkner & Gray.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

This Just In:  Getting Back to Business


If you cringe every time you hear another Congressperson say how great it
would be if only everybody paid a flat tax, it's time for you to investigate
options in business tax preparation.  Compared to the near-universal griping
that goes on about the 1040 individual tax, few politicians are getting much
sound bite time on the evening news if they propose axing corporation taxes.
Sharpening your practice's focus on business tax clients could help save it
from rough times in 1997.

Perhaps in anticipation of greater demand for professional business tax
products next year, software vendors are beefing up their 1065, 1120, and
1120S lines with more capabilities this year.  Even if your firm already has a
solid foundation of business tax clients and the software to service them, you
may want to consider where your current vendor is heading compared to others
in the industry.  We checked with them to find out what their plans are for
the software they'll be shipping this season.

Alpine climbs every mountain

Alpine Data is packing more features into its 1995 Tax/Pack Professional
business modules.  You'll be able to access a preparer scratchpad from any
screen, so you can take notes on a client whose return you're preparing.  Also
more accessible will be the pop-up calculator, which you'll be able to bring
up from within any field.  And a new monthly calendar utility will be popping
up as well.

Alpine is also leaving room for your laser forms software.  It offers a laser
fill feature that lets you view and enter data on laser forms that aren't
included in the Tax/Pack software.  Tax/Pack will then save the data that you
type in to a separate area from the business return data.

Form 1120 customers will now be getting a full billing module.  And Alpine
plans to add the billing module to its 1065 and 1120S products as well.

AM wake-up call

It's morning in America, and AM Software is already enhancing its business tax
software for the coming season.  Whereas the AM-Tax LaserForms product was an
optional add-on last year, this year AM is including it with its 1065, 1120,
and 1120S programs.  But despite bundling the laser software, AM isn't
ignoring other types of printers.  It has improved its graphical printing
features, so you can get official-looking forms on inkjet and dot-matrix
printers without resorting to special fonts or extra software.

Networked offices will now be able to enjoy network compatibility with AM-Tax,
so multiple users can share data files while keeping their own system
settings.  AM has also simplified data entry by offering convenient pick lists
on certain forms.  You'll be able to access them by pressing a function key,
choose the entry you want, point to it, and the program will enter your choice
into the field.

Lower renewal prices will please existing customers.  They're down 20 percent
to $129.  And to go along with the new network compatibility, you can add
extra AM-Tax stations for only 20 percent of the original, first-computer
software price.

More pluses for Andersen

Arthur Andersen LLP is showing its Big 6 muscle with enhancements to its A
Plus business tax line.  A Plus Tax 1120 and 1065 are gaining per-return
pricing and more comprehensive calculations.  You'll also see interfaces to
the AICPA's ATB (Accountant's Trial Balance) and Andersen's own electronic
workpapers products.

For 1065 users, Andersen is providing a special allocations worksheet, as well
as inter-product transfers of K-1 data.  The K-1's will automatically print
with the 1040, saving time for A Plus Tax 1040 users.  Also saving time will
be a direct interface to CD-ROM tax research products like CCH U.S.  Master
Tax Guide, RIA OnPoint, and BNA Tax Practice Series.

Andersen has tinkered with the A Plus interface as well, consolidating screens
and improving screen and application flow.  A multimedia training course will
be available.  And on the boards for next year is a Windows version.

If you're in the tax department of a large corporation or have large corporate
clients, also check out the brand-new Windows-based AACTS (Arthur Andersen
Corporate Tax Solutions) line.  Aimed at corporations with multiple entities
or multiple filing responsibilities, it will handle federal and state tax
compliance, and prepare the 1120.  AACTS will integrate with other Windows
applications, by using facilities like DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange), so it can
update data from other Windows apps in real-time.

One product in the AACTS line, DataOnDemand, will establish dynamic links
between an Excel spreadsheet and your corporate tax information.  Another
product, AACTS Real-Time Tax, will integrate with high-end general ledger
applications such as SAP and Oracle; it will also include support for SQL
(Structured Query Language) and ODBC (Open Data Base Connectivity) standards.
A third product, AACTS-International Planning, will let you build complex tax
scenarios over multiple-year periods, such as calculating dividends and loans
from foreign subsidiaries.  It's a whole new aact for Arthur Andersen.

ATX enhances the spreadsheet

ATX Forms has enhanced its TaxSolver line of spreadsheet-based tax prep
software by adding a Windows-based forms program.  The result is ATX's new
Saber line.  Unlike TaxSolver, which required you to combine the ATX templates
with either 1-2-3 or Excel, Saber cuts out the need for third-party software
by including a built-in spreadsheet program.  Saber also provides an audit
trail, along with the ability to create formulas and write directly on the tax
forms.

ATX sells its 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs in several ways.  Each return is
available in a Basic version for $49, and a Professional version for $99.  The
Basic version includes a few of the most important supporting forms and
schedules, along with extension and depreciation worksheets.  The Professional
version provides more than 100 supporting forms and schedules, together with
the ability to create client letters and invoices.

In addition, bundled packages are available for preparing the 1065, 1120, and
1120S, along with other types of forms.  A basic version of this bundle,
called Business Basic, sells for $149.  The Professional version costs $295.

CCH proves it's a pro

CCH is upgrading the Windows version of its ProSystem fx 1065, 1120, and 1120S
programs by adding interfaces to general ledger and time and billing products.
Also being added to the 1120S product is an interface to CCH Tax Assistant for
S Corporations, a practice management system with research, analysis, and
compliance features.

Installation and printing will also be on the upswing in ProSystem fx.

GoSystem keeps going and going...

CLR/Fast-Tax's GoSystem 2 is really going places in both its DOS and Windows
versions.  The system now supports fast 28,800 bits per second transmission
speeds for electronic filing, and CLR will be offering NetWare 4.1 and Windows
95 support as well this season.

The 1065 program for DOS and Windows will let you perform multiple partner
transfers on the same day.  And it will handle transfers with capital
contributions and distributions while using the same locator, as well as do
transfers for more than five excluded partners.

The 1120 software for DOS and Windows will offer an express consolidation
feature to speed up consolidation time.  You'll also be able to delete rental
properties.  In addition, CLR has reorganized the rent and royalty input, and
will be enhancing the 1120 program's list of activity codes.  The program will
summarize state tax liabilities and supply a common input for state
intangibles.

The Windows version alone has several enhancements.  It now offers
administrative functions that used to be found only in the DOS version.  The
View menu will include a Received Date option.  And CLR is going to be
providing a Windows version of its TaxServer product and will support a
Windows Portable Organizer.

Upcoming hyperlink capabilities in the Windows product will add hyperlinks to
fields, as well as "direct to organizer" hyperlinks.  Workpapers will allow
overrides, DIF import and export, and hyperlinking by field.

Also on the way are better navigation capabilities, including a File
Manager-like expanding folder metaphor.  You'll be able to customize menus
with activity descriptions, toggle menus on or off, bring up a new "active
forms" view, and edit and format customized letters for all return types.
Lots of changes are coming for GoSystem users.

Digitax does graphics

Cold River Software has been promoting its Windows-based 1040 software,
Veritax, for the past couple of seasons.  But even its DOS-based tax product,
Digitax Business Returns, is getting some graphical enhancements.  The 1065,
1120, and 1120S programs will be offering graphically enhanced supporting
schedules and letters.  Also going graphical are the manuals.  They'll be
available in both printed form and in a printable, searchable Adobe Acrobat
electronic format.

Cold River's also moving toward better technical support.  A 24-hour FaxBack
service is now available, as well as a home page on the Internet's World Wide
Web.  Surf the Cold River rapids at http://www.cold-river.com.

CPAS makes new converts

CPASoftware's business tax software is undergoing a conversion for the
upcoming filing season.  You'll be able to convert entities from 1120 to
1220S, or 1120S to 1120.  And CPAS is not only converting its 1120, it's
consolidating it as well.  You'll be able to consolidate up to 10 corporations
with the 1120, as well as prepare supplementals for the first four pages of
your consolidations, along with supplementals for applicable forms, schedules,
and supplemental schedules, such as the 4562, Schedule D, and other income.

In addition to conversion, salvation is at hand.  CPAS's new archiving
features let you save tax returns, input detail, workpapers, and other files
in a compressed format.  CPAS is passing the silver platter too by offering
access to CD-ROM research material.  State clicks will be another new option,
allowing you to buy use of a state package one return at a time (similar to
the pay-per-return concept).

Speaking of states, you'll be able to compute up to five states with a single
compute.  New states joining the CPAS flock include Arizona, California, New
York, and Texas for the 1120.  Entering the 1120S fold will be California, New
York, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin, and new 1065 states for Arizona, California,
New Jersey, and New York.  Only one new city return will be added to the 1065,
1120, and 1120S, but it's a big one:  New York City.

Creating the Ultrabusiness

Creative Solutions is building a better business solution for this coming
season.  It's adding 10 new states to its 1120/1120S package, UltraTax/1120,
upping its coverage to 31 states for both C and S corps.  In UltraTax/1065, 13
new states are joining the Union, for a grand total of 23.  These new programs
will be available on the UltraTax CD-ROM and as pay-per-return options.
UltraTax/1120 is also gaining a two-year comparison and calculation to support
the IRC Section 1377 (a)(2) election for termination of a shareholder
interest.

A new feature to speed data entry to the ultra-quick level will be an Index of
Tax Subjects that helps you locate the proper section of the appropriate data
entry screen when you're not quite sure where to input a particular item.
You'll also be able to generate custom selection lists of commonly used items
specific to your area, such as local banks.

Drake makes good

Drake Software will let you print all its forms in either laser or dot-matrix
mode this season.  You'll be able to access on-line help for almost every data
entry field, and written documentation will be improved.  Over 35 federal
forms will be available.  Drake will also offer a new pay-per-return option,
priced at $250 for up to 20 returns per computer, and $10 apiece for
additional returns.

Dunphy does it

Dunphy Systems' federal 1120 program will offer support this season for Form
1120-W (Estimated Tax for Corporations), with a three-page quarterly
worksheet.  And Dunphy will provide Ohio users with a new quarterly look-up
table for county personal property rates in its Ohio FT1120/FT1120S package.
Michigan users too will be seeing some enhancements.  The new Michigan Single
Business Tax (SBT) program will support all 17 forms for that tax, including
extensions, estimates, and amended returns.  You'll also be able to import
company and shareholder information into the Michigan SBT from other federal
programs, such as Dunphy's 1040, 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The Michigan
SBT will even include laser forms software, so you can make official-looking
printouts for your Michigan business clients.

Exactax minds its business

Exactax has been integrating software from the Business Tax Service of New
York with its own system, and this season will be offering a trial balance
worksheet input system.  You'll be able to input information through a trial
balance income statement and balance sheet into the Business Tax System, so
you can complete the books and use the year-end trial balance, instead of
converting book data into tax return format.

Other enhancements will include automated multiple-state processing, along
with new state returns for Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Virginia.  Exactax
is also making its supporting schedules and instruction letters easier to
read, and its estimated tax section more comprehensive and automatic.  The
program will compute Section 277 Co-op Housing figures, and will offer more
flexibility when you enter detail on a Schedule K-1.

Business Tax System will provide comprehensive net operating loss and
contribution carryover schedules, along with more comprehensive financial
statements, such as the statement of cash flows, interim financial statements,
and sole proprietor (Schedule C) financial statements.  You'll be able to
generate a financial statement from the book data you enter to create a tax
return.

In addition, the system will automatically print the original extension form
for each return that you have on extension.  And it will handle unlimited
K-1's and rental income, as well as comprehensively report rental detail for
each K-1.  You'll be able to prepare automatic book/tax adjustments for items
such as depreciation, amortization, contributions, entertainment, penalties,
officers life insurance, federal income tax, Section 263A, and automobile
lease inclusion.  Exactax will offer expanded customer service hours, from 6
am to 7 pm Pacific time (or 9 am to 10 pm Eastern time).  That should match
many accounting firms' regular hours this tax season.

Intuit pursues two markets

For tax year 1995, Intuit is making a big push to upgrade its business tax
products, for professional tax preparers and small-business taxpayers alike.
A new Homebase feature in the professional software will provide convenient
access to client files and main program functions (such as printing and
transferring).  You'll be able to access the entire TurboTax ProSeries line
from the Homebase as well, and generate any number of copies you want of forms
and schedules for inclusion with your clients' returns.

ProSeries/1120 for Windows will offer an ACE depreciation worksheet.  Fifteen
new states will join the corporate business return list:  Colorado,
Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan
SBT, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, and
Wisconsin.  Client files will be interchangeable with the DOS version.  And
pull-down pick lists will be available for certain fields, such as business
codes and depreciation methods.

ProSeries/1120S for Windows will add a shareholder's basis worksheet that
automatically gets amounts from the Schedule K-1 worksheets.  You'll be able
to have an unlimited number of K-1's, and Intuit has improved both K-1 input
sheets and data entry.  Thirteen new states have been recruited to the 1120S
team:  Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Wisconsin.

Meanwhile, partnerships haven't been overlooked by Intuit.  ProSeries/1065 for
Windows supports unlimited K-1's and the new K-1 input sheets, as well as
interchangeable client files with the DOS version.  Seven new partnership
states include Florida, Georgia, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, and
Pennsylvania.  Furthermore, the California Limited Liability (CA 568) company
return will be available this season, and it will read and transfer data from
the 1065 program.

Intuit isn't stopping there with business tax software.  As discussed in this
issue's Editor's Note, it's also bringing out TurboTax for Business.  This
$79.95 product will enable small-business owners to prepare their own 1065,
1120, and 1120S returns.  As with the personal version of the 1040 product,
TurboTax for Business will include tax advice and tax planning suggestions.
Complete IRS instructions and full-text versions of IRS publications for small
businesses (as well as the text of a book called "Tax Savvy for Small
Business" by tax attorney Fred Daily) will be available on-line, and the help
facility will be context sensitive.

TurboTax for Business will use an interview approach to take taxpayers through
the preparation process.  It can import accounting data from QuickBooks and
Quicken, and will provide automatic error checking and tax-saving tips while
preparing a return.  Intuit will be offering 49 Windows state modules, sold
separately.  After TurboTax for Business prepares a return, it will go back
and check for omissions and errors, and alert users to possible audit items.
In addition, Intuit will be bundling Netscape's Navigator with the package, so
taxpayers will be able to access the new TurboTax home page on the World Wide
Web (http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax) to get tech support, tax advice and
information, and state software.  MacInTax for Business will also be available
for Mac users.

Lacerte adds up

Lacerte Software is adding more forms, features, and states to its
professional tax prep line.  New to its 1120 program, for example, is Form
1120W, the Estimated Tax Worksheet.  And joining the Lacerte 1120 states will
be Delaware, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.

In the Form 1120S program, you'll be able to print K-1 instructions, as well
as collated copies of Schedule K-1, the shareholder transmittal letter, and
K-1 instructions.  When preparing S Corp returns, you'll have the opportunity
to calculate the excess net passive income tax, and print certain election
statements for S Corps.  New 1120S states will include Florida, Kansas,
Missouri, and Utah.

For the 1065 program, Lacerte will now print Schedule K-1 instructions, along
with the contents of the client letter.  States will follow the example of the
federal program on the invoice setup; partnership states will allow for
billing per state K-1, so you'll have an additional option besides billing in
a lump sum.  The Additional K-1's printing option will include a Schedule K-1
collation routine, with three new global user options and three new override
codes that you can make specific for your clients.  When you get to the end of
a return and set the Additional K-1's to generate a specific number of copies,
the program will print the Schedule K-1 Transmittal Letter, federal Schedule
K-1, federal Schedule K-1 instructions, the state Schedule K-1 (or a
Lacerte-generated Partner Summary), and (when required) the state Schedule K-1
instructions.  You can then distribute them to as many partners and members in
your firm as you please.

The new Jumptopartner routine doesn't necessarily put you on the fast track to
promotion in your firm.  But it does let you jump back and forth between
partners in all of the 1065 program's Special Allocation screens.  Even when
you jump in this way, the cursor and line position will stay the same as in
the last entry, making it more convenient to enter special allocations.  This
routine won't replace other input methods; it's simply one more handy-dandy
feature provided by Lacerte.  Also new to the 1065 will be state returns for
Florida, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.

For 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs, new enhancements will include book
depreciation schedules that let you enter and track depreciation for book
purposes.  You'll also have the ability to print different numbers of copies
of depreciation schedules for 1995 and 1996 regular tax, AMT, and book
purposes.  Lacerte will also let you amend prior-year returns as well as
override "corrected" amounts.  There's power for you:  the ability to change
history.  Also new for this coming season in all the programs are slip sheets
and filing instructions.

Laser surgery

Laser Systems is powering up its TaxWorks Corporation 1120, S Corporation
1120S, and Partnership 1065 Business Systems for next season.  All three
programs will generate financial statements that are prepared on an income tax
basis.  You'll also be able to print a customizable letter to accompany the
statements.  When you update clients from last year, you'll have the option of
carrying the ending balance sheet detail information over to the current
year's beginning balance sheet fields.

Three new options will be available to smooth out K-1 processing and printing.
These will let you process, view, and print returns with or without the K-1
information included.

In all the Business Systems will be a new General Information screen.  And
Laser Systems has standardized the format of the date, Social Security, and
Employer Identification Number fields.

In addition, Laser Systems is adding electronic filing to the 1065 System.
For the 1120 System, a new Federal Net Operating Loss Worksheet and Charitable
Contribution Worksheet will help you keep track of NOL and charitable
contribution deduction and carryover figures.  Lastly, the 1120 System is
getting Form 1120X.  X marks the spot for TaxWorks development.

Corporate relief

Micro Vision Software is integrating its 1120 and 1120S software, Tax Relief
CORP, with other vendors' software to improve these programs' productivity.  A
general ledger link will let you import data from major client write-up and
general ledger programs.  The software will also link with Microsoft Excel and
Timeslips.  And the company recently purchased Summit Software, another
business tax software developer.

New states for the Windows version of Tax Relief CORP will include New Jersey
and New York.  For DOS users, new states are Colorado, Delaware, Georgia,
Ohio, and Texas.  Through a third-party developer, it's providing DOS users
with integrated state programs for Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, District of
Columbia, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire,
New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.

For 1065 DOS users, Tax Relief PART is adding two new state programs developed
by Micro Vision, California and New Jersey.  And through a strategic
partnership, DOS users will be getting access to more state programs that
integrate with Micro Vision's own DOS-based software.  These will include
Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Oregon, S.  Carolina, W.  Virginia, and Wisconsin.

For all its Tax Relief products, Micro Vision has added the ability to dial
into its bulletin board from within the program so you can download
corrections and get questions answered.  Client files will be fully
interchangeable between the DOS and Windows software, and Tax Relief for
Windows will also be compatible with both the DOS and Windows state modules.
You'll be able to change your data path from the activate screen, and Micro
Vision is adding expanded fields throughout the software, along with more
detailed diagnostic messages.  Finally, Tax Relief products will be available
on CD-ROM with either an unlimited use license or on a pay-per-return basis.

Pencil Pushers gets to the point

The Damirus Corp., which makes Pencil Pushers Tax Software, is focusing most
of its development efforts on a future Windows product and on shipping its DOS
product bug-free and on time.  In the meantime, for this tax season, it's
adding a Florida corporate return to its business tax line, along with a few
unusual business credit forms.

SCS/Compute advances on both fronts

SCS/Compute is enhancing both its Tax Machine and LMS Tax lines.  For Tax
Machine, you'll be able to print K-1 labels for partners, shareholders, and
beneficiaries.  New state modules will include Louisiana, Mississippi, and New
Mexico.  One new city module, a Philadelphia S Corporation return, will also
be available.  Tax Machine will be released on CD-ROM, and you'll be able to
link the program to other accounting products, such as SCS's own DataWrite and
the AICPA's ATB.  Or you can use Audisys's TAXi to import accounting
information into Tax Machine.

For LMS Tax Business Programs, SCS will be offering simplified data entry
screens and input forms for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S.  You'll be able to
print mailing labels for each K-1 in the partnership and S-Corp returns.  SCS
is improving LMS's link to DataWrite and ATB, and offering TAXi for importing
data from other accounting applications.

TaascFORCE is up to the task

Tax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TaascFORCE) is building a better
Professional Tax System.  This coming season, it will be providing a free
Practice Manager that generates specialized client lists and sorted mailing
labels.  Other new extras will include file compression, the ability to create
an itemized schedule for any input field, carryforward of specified state
information from last year's state returns, and support for up to 999
depreciable assets.

New states for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S products will include Alabama,
Arkansas, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Louisiana, and New Mexico.  New
forms on the roster will be 1120A (Corporation Short Form), 1120X (Corporation
Amended Return), 2848 (Power of Attorney), 8271 (Tax Shelter Registration
Number), 8586 (Low Income Housing Credit), 8822 (Change of Address), and TD F
90-22 1 (Foreign Bank Accounts).

On the 1120S and 1065, TAASC has enhanced the Schedule K-1 in several ways.
The software will automatically handle special allocations, let you select
which shareholder or partner K-1's to adjust for rounding, and print
shareholder/partner numbers on each K-1.

In addition, the Professional Tax System will be able to convert existing C
Corp data to an S Corp return, and will add a new field where you can enter
the title of your firm's signing officer.  The transmittal letter for the
partnership state programs will offer paragraphs about the tax due and
estimated tax.  And Form 4684 will now support multiple casualty dates.  Next
tax season will be less of a casualty with TAASC on the job.

TaxByte does more

TaxByte will be expanding the depreciation capabilities of its Tax
Commissioner business tax products, increasing depreciation capacity from 250
assets to 450.  A trial balance import feature is also new, along with an
enhanced direct data input system, and more automatic calculations.  TaxByte
has also added general letters and customizable, client-specific letters for
each K-1, along with an enhanced, automated invoice feature that does updates
for time and billing.

In the 1120 package, there will be a net operating loss carryforward feature
from prior years.  Tax Commissioner will also carry over depreciation from the
1040 version into the business tax products and perform conversions from one
entity to another, such as for a C Corporation that becomes an S Corp.  Lots
of transitions are underway in the business tax arena, and Tax Commissioner
will be policing them.

TAX$IMPLE builds up

TAX$IMPLE's 1995 Business Tax Programs are looking to 1995 and beyond.
They'll include a three-year comparative summary report and will automatically
generate supporting schedules.  You'll be able to do year-to-year transfers
for all your balance sheets, worksheets, and supporting schedules.  TAX$IMPLE
will also support RAM drives, and will let you transfer business K-1's
directly into the TAX$IMPLE 1040 program.  The business programs are also
gaining Forms 851, 1120X, 1139, 4466, 8810, the 1120-A short form, Schedule H,
and Schedule A for Form 1120-W.

Mouse support is also on schedule for this season, along with enhanced
printing features.  You'll be able to choose specific forms and the number of
copies per form to print, as well as print state and federal forms in
combination.  Text for 22 topics will be available for your transmittal or
cover letters.  You'll be able to say plenty with TAX$IMPLE.

TenKey has it together

TenKey will be offering four business tax programs in one this season.  Tax
Shop Entities will contain 1120, 1120S, 1065, and 1041 programs in the same
package, together with laser software and a depreciation program.  The
software will be available for Windows (with Windows 95 compatibility) this
season, and you'll be able to transfer data from the DOS program to the
Windows version.

The Windows version will also include all the features in the DOS program,
such as built-in electronic mail and communications.  This allows access to
TenKey's on-line Problems Resolution Database, which gets updated with each
message received from an on-line user.

Pennsylvania will be joining the entire Tax Shop Entities state roster, and to
just the 1065 software TenKey is also adding California, Illinois, and New
York.  In addition, a third-party add-on program, TAXi Tax Import Bridge, will
be available to import data from other vendors' general ledger and client
write-up software into Tax Shop Entities.

Growing Universal

Universal Tax Systems is improving its TaxWise business tax software with a
galaxy of new options.  You'll be able to print a mailing label with your tax
returns or from the Query Database Screen.  The program will highlight
incomplete forms in red.  You'll also be able to invoke the 1120, 1120S, and
1065 modules without exiting to DOS.  The program will flag estimated amounts,
so you'll be able to distinguish them from your actual data.  Universal will
also let you order federal and state 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs from the
same CD-ROM platter as the 1040 and 1041.

New for this season are 18 state business modules, bringing TaxWise's total to
23 states:  Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia,
Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New
Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin.  In addition, you'll have the
ability to print out as many blank forms as necessary for a client.

New menu options will enable you to apply updates, install state software,
copy master forms and macros from one user to another, batch your problem
returns together for transmission to Universal's service bureau, shell to DOS,
and install soft fonts.  Universal will also be offering a conversion program
from its 1040 product to do a prior-year carryforward of client data.

In addition to these new features, Universal is enhancing some old ones.  The
business modules will include customized database and diagnostic screens.
Mailing labels will be able to contain phone numbers.  You'll be able to query
the database to learn the amount of a fee deposit, and access a scratchpad and
check information when you've printed more than a single check.  The client
letter has improved to allow for multiple letters, letterhead paper,
signatures, refund or balance-due amounts, and if-then logic for which
paragraphs to include.  The depreciation worksheet has also been enhanced,
letting you access a new spreadsheet while TaxWise is displaying a list of
existing assets.  It will let you compute next year's depreciation, display
it, and show a list of depreciated assets.  All in all, TaxWise seems to be
getting wiser every year.

Xpress train to your taxes

Xpress Software is improving practice management and database functions in
Xpress Business Returns, its 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The company is
also expanding the messages and diagnostics it provides for the preparation
process.  And Xpress is developing an interface for importing data from other
programs, along with adding state business returns for Alabama and Louisiana.

Vendors like Xpress are making improvements where they can to their business
tax products.  And with the world of 1040 tax prep increasingly moving into
the hands of sophisticated, PC-equipped taxpayers, it's a good idea to beef up
your practice with the latest business tax software, so you can provide
whatever services your business clients require.


Michael Cohn is senior editor of Accounting Technology.

For More Information

Alpine Data, Inc., 737 S.  Townsend Ave., Montrose, CO 81401, (800) 525-1040,
fax (303) 249-8511, http:\\alpine@rmii.com.

AM Software, PO Box 25010, Kansas City, MO 64119, (800) 858-8537, fax (816)
741-1517.

Arthur Andersen LLP, 2805 Fruitville Rd., Sarasota, FL 34237, (800) USA-1040,
fax (813) 953-5310.

CCH, Inc., Worldway Postal Center, PO Box 92938, Los Angeles, CA 90009, (800)
45-PROFX, fax (310) 543-8104.

CLR/Fast-Tax, 2395 Midway Rd., Carrolton, TX 75006, (800) FAST-TAX, fax (214)
250-8104.

Cold River Software, Inc., 4420 Varsity Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48108-2274, (800)
DIGITAX, fax (313) 677-6647, http://www.-cold-river.com.

CPASoftware, One Pensacola Plaza, Ste.  500, Pensacola, FL 32501, (904)
434-2685, fax (904) 433-8198.

Creative Solutions, 7322 Newman Blvd., Dexter, MI 48130, (800) 968-8900, fax
(312) 426-5946.

Drake Software, 106 Palmer St., Franklin, NC 28734, (800) 890-9500, fax (704)
524-9549, http://www.1040.com

Dunphy Systems, Inc., 6740 Huntley Rd., Ste.103, Columbus, OH 43229, (614)
431-0846, fax (614) 431-0776.

Exactax, Inc., 2301 W.  Lincoln Ave., Ste.  100, Anaheim, CA 92801, (800)
352-3638, fax (714) 778-2571.

Intuit, Inc., 100 Juliad Ct., Ste.  107, Fredericksburg, VA 22406-1124, (800)
934-1040, fax (800) 685-7036, http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax.

Lacerte Software Corp., 4835 LBJ Freeway, Dallas TX 75244-6098, (800)
765-7777, fax (214) 770-8955.

Laser Systems, PO Box 407, Kaysville, UT 84037, (800) 230-2322, fax (801)
552-8900.

Micro Vision Software, Inc., 140 Fell Ct., Hauppauge, NY 11788-4360, (800)
TAX-RELIEF, fax (516) 232-3481.

Pencil Pushers Tax Software (division of the Damirus Corp.), 10 New England
Executive Park, Burlington, MA 01803, (800) 370-2500, fax (617) 273-0575.

SCS/Compute, Inc., 2252 Welsh Industrial Ct., St.  Louis, MO 63146, (800)
326-1040 fax (206) 644-7372.

Tax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TAASC), 6914 S.  Yorktown Ave., Tulsa, OK
74136, (800) 998-9990, fax (918) 493-6189.

TaxByte, Inc., 1801 6th Ave., Moline, IL 61265, (800) 245-8299, fax (309)
764-0976.

TAX$IMPLE, Inc., 3155 Rte.  10, Ste.  114, Denville, NJ 07834, (800) 323-2662,
fax (201) 366-5877.

TenKey, 5422 Carrier Dr., Ste.  201, Orlando, FL 32819, (800) 300-8244, fax
(407) 351-0966, tssales@tenkey.com.

Universal Tax Systems, Inc., 215 Broad St., Rome, GA 30161-3021, (800)
755-9473, fax (706) 236-9168.

Xpress Software, Inc., 1327 Broad River Rd., Columbia, SC 29210, (803)
731-1040, fax (803) 750-4144.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Editor's Note:  Another Nail in the Coffin?


I've just come out of a meeting with Intuit, and I'm both impressed and
disturbed.  You know Intuit.  It's the company that bought TurboTax a few
years back.  TurboTax already pretty much owned the consumer tax prep market,
and a great deal of the professional market as well, when Intuit bought
ChipSoft.  With savvy marketing and constant improvements, the vendor has been
able to keep its position in an increasingly turbulent and voracious market.
Having captured the high ground, Intuit is about to fire the opening salvo in
a new war.  And if you don't react the right way, and quickly enough, you
could be one of the ones who gets winged.

Taking it to the streets

What I found both exciting and disturbing is Intuit's announcement of consumer
versions of its business tax products.  Of course, "consumer" is probably a
bit of a misnomer.  Perhaps the term "retail" is more accurate, though these
products do differ a bit in capability from the ProSeries entity products.

But make no mistake about it.  If you currently prepare 1065, 1120, or 1120S
returns for the non-Fortune 1000 set, these products will let your current
clients do a pretty good job in many cases of preparing their own returns.  As
with the current crop of retail, consumer-oriented 1040 products, just how
good a job depends on the complexity of the business transactions and
organization, and how savvy the person trying to produce the return is.  At
the very least, if this series of products is even half as successful as
Intuit's consumer version of TurboTax 1040, it has the potential to do a lot
of damage to the revenue stream in many accounting and tax prep practices.

The end of the world as we know it?

This move into your client base isn't totally unexpected.  After all, did you
really think that the PC had empowered just you?  You haven't been blind to
the advantages offered by computerizing, and neither will some of your
clients.  And the more work they do, the less will be left for you.

But this is old news.  The accounting profession has undergone some dramatic
changes in the last decade.  And it will continue to change in the years to
come.  That's part of life.  And, to be realistic, most professions undergo
similar, if sometimes less dramatic, changes.  Just look at the practice of
medicine.  With the advent of managed health care plans more of the burden of
the health care process is placed on the consumer.  FDA approval of formerly
prescription medications for over-the-counter sales has accelerated this
process.  Think of these products as the Quickens and TurboTaxes of the
medical profession.

New challenges = new opportunities

But the availability of more options for self-care hasn't put doctors out of
business.  After all, you've always had the option of forgoing the physician
and trying to go it alone.  Sometimes you can.  Unless you're in frail shape,
there's not much a doctor can do for you if you're suffering from a cold or
flu.  You can pretty much take care of yourself.  It's when that cold or flu
turns into something more dangerous that the doctor's involvement becomes not
only desirable, but frequently critical.  You might be as good as any doctor
when it comes to a cold, but pneumonia is another story.  That requires
medications that aren't available to you without a doctor's say-so.  And
there's good reason for that.  Administration of these medications requires
that someone have the training and experience to recognize when they are
appropriate, and the judgment to know which medication, and how much of it, to
use.

And training, experience, and judgment are really what are important in our
profession as well.  Yes, you are going to lose business clients to computer
programs that let them prepare their own returns.  Get used to that, because
even if it doesn't happen this year, it is going to happen.

But that doesn't mean you have to give up your tax practice, only that you
have to change with the times.  Because no matter how easy Intuit and other
vendors make the tax preparation process, there are always going to be
questions that require a judgment call.  And judgment isn't something that can
be easily packaged in a computer program, artificial intelligence research
notwithstanding.  It comes from experience, and the long application of this
experience to real-world situations and decisions.

I think that the real money isn't going to be made by the vendors of tax prep
software.  It's going to be made by readers like you who have the savvy, guts,
and vision to be able to adapt.  To stop thinking of themselves as tax
preparers, and start thinking of themselves as tax consultants.  And who take
the initiative in marketing themselves as a solution and source of experienced
advice for those consumers of both the personal and business tax prep products
who are willing to do the grunt work, but smart enough to understand that they
will occasionally need to turn to someone with the training and background to
help them face those judgment calls.

New challenges have a way of also creating new opportunities.  I think the
practice of our profession is going to be very different in coming years.  And
I also think that Accounting is going to be not only a lot more interesting,
but for people with the right attitude, a lot more profitable as well.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting Software


If you or your clients need an accounting software program with powerful
multicurrency and foreign-language capabilities, consider SunSystems, a
product of Great Britain-based Systems Union, Ltd., (10 Bank St., White
Plains, NY 10606, (914) 948-7770).  This innovative program offers tools to
meet the accounting and information requirements of businesses in many
countries.  It's available in 20 languages, including French, German, Spanish,
Russian, Japanese, Chinese, and Arabic.

Systems Union, Ltd.  was founded in 1981 by a small team of financial and
technical experts.  Its SunSystems product was first released in 1982 and has
been regularly upgraded over the years.  Today, Systems Union employs over 300
people in 15 locations, with offices in North America, Europe, and Pacific
Asia.  Systems Union also maintains an international network of
representatives.

Flexible features

SunSystems consists of seven accounting and business modules, as well as
several utility software packages.  Accounting and business modules include
Ledger Accounting (Accounts Payable, Accounts Receivable, General Ledger),
Fixed Assets, Corporate Allocations, Sales Order Processing, Purchase Order
Processing, Inventory Control, SunQuery report writer, and the SZ screen
modifier utility.

It's easy to install SunSystems on a PC or network.  Loading the diskettes
takes from 15 to 30 minutes.  The program requires at least a 25-MHz 386 or
486 PC with 8MB RAM for the Windows version, or 540K for the DOS version.  For
this review, we tested the Windows version of SunSystems running on a Novell
LAN.  Although this review focuses on the Windows product, the DOS version
offers similar functionality.

Systems Union's software uses a single set of source code, facilitating
customization, a clean user interface, and high functionality.  SunSystems
also enables you to customize information to meet your unique specifications.
For instance, each SunSystems module can be configured to select and report on
various vendor, customer, asset, and inventory information by using analysis
codes.  You can customize these codes to track and report transactions by
customer region, customer sales territory, vendor group, item product type,
and asset location.  And you can customize the chart of accounts by using
account analysis codes.  They provide a 60-character code block, with up to 10
alphanumeric characters for the account code, plus 50 additional characters.

The SZ utility, a screen modifier, lets you customize input screen labels.
(However, data screens cannot be reconfigured to call additional prompts, nor
can you develop new forms using existing ones.)  In addition, you may need to
modify multiple screens when you want to make changes to an input screen,
since other screens use data from input screens.  Although SZ is flexible when
changing text descriptions, field lengths, and removing unnecessary fields,
you need to document all changes, since upgrades override all of SZ's changes.

By and large, however, each module promotes user flexibility.  For example,
the Ledger Accounting module, which consists of Accounts Receivable, Accounts
Payable, and General Ledger, lets you configure journal types in which journal
entries are preset and posted according to classifications such as cash
receipts, prepayments, sales invoices, and foreign currency journals.

You can also configure the Sales and Purchasing modules with various types of
predefined sales and purchasing transactions.  You'll be able to enter preset
information for orders according to the type of order (for example, sales and
purchase order types for specific customers, vendors, countries, or items).

But while the Purchasing module has been designed for flexibility, none of its
standard reports lets you sort information by purchase order type, and only a
couple allow for sorting by analysis code (analysis codes permit you to
organize information in all the modules).  The Purchasing module also lacks a
report writer for customizing or designing reports, or for reporting on
purchase order information by analysis code or purchase order type.  One way
to solve this problem is to use the SunQuery report writer to customize
reports.  When Systems Union releases the purchase order layout report writer,
as well as a Report Definition utility for the Purchasing module, this step
won't be necessary.

Besides the problems with the Purchasing module's reports, we also had
difficulty copying multiple purchase and sales orders in the Purchasing and
Sales modules.  Although the copy command (<F3>) successfully duplicated the
previous Header information screen, field by field, the <F3> key could not be
used for the detail screen.  This is because it only copies the detail line
above the current detail line of the purchase order, as opposed to the last
detail line in the previous purchase order.  This problem was solved by
implementing a macro procedure to record the information for the first PO,
which allowed us to copy the same information into new purchase and sales
orders.

The gang of four

SunQuery, the user-defined transaction-level report writer, offers flexible
data selection, report layout, and sorting features.  Although SunQuery is
fairly flexible and includes more GUI enhancements in its latest version, the
fully graphical report writer that's currently under development will be an
especially welcome upgrade for Windows users.

The Ledger Accounting module includes three other report writers:  Financial
Analysis, Financial Statements, and Financial Tables.  The Financial Analysis
Report Writer provides the easiest way to report on expenditures, in summary
or detail, with flexible sorting options.  The Financial Statements Report
Writer offers enhanced reporting facilities that produce customized income
statements, balance sheets, and other financials.  The Financial Tables Report
Writer can produce reports in a matrix format that you can consolidate from
multiple ledgers to do comparisons of companies or individual departments.
Each report writer is easy to customize.

The latest release of SunSystems also includes a powerful new enhancement, the
Data Dictionary.  The dictionary stores all the information related to
SunSystems data files, including field name, length, start position,
justification, and so forth, in a single location.  This feature enhances the
Ledger Accounting module by including a Report Definition tool that lets you
customize the layout and content of standard SunSystems reports.  It also
allows you to create an unlimited number of custom layouts, because the Report
Definition tool can now read the Data Dictionary directly.

Systems Union is currently developing the Report Definition for all other
SunBusiness modules as well, including Purchasing.  The Data Dictionary should
make it easier for outside vendors to develop and maintain links and
interfaces with SunSystems.  That will facilitate implementation of features
such as Form Entry and Document Imaging, enhancing SunSystems' leadership
position in the marketplace.

We were unable to alter SunSystems' reports with third-party tools because it
didn't generate reports in ASCII format.  Although the reports could be
designed to be generated in other third-party tool formats (such as Lotus),
the generated reports only included summary raw data and therefore did not
include column headings or subtotals.  However, we plan to use the newly
released Data Dictionary as the link between a third-party report writer to
generate and alter the look of the reports (font types and sizes).

The wide, wide world of accounting

The program's international accounting flexibility is one of its strongest
selling points.  It's an excellent solution for international businesses whose
books need to conform to the accounting conventions of a particular country.
Users can access a common database in their choice of the following languages:
English, French, German, or Spanish.

Strong multicurrency support is another program hallmark.  You can work with,
consolidate, and report in an unlimited number of currencies, as well as
maintain inventory and create multicurrency orders and invoices.  The program
also performs currency conversion during data entry, and converts foreign
currency to base currency or vice versa.

A sophisticated mapping facility offered in the program allows you to map out
a chart of accounts from one database to another to satisfy country-mandated
chart of accounts and company-wide reporting standards.

SunSystems offers predefined charts of accounts to accommodate varying
statutory requirements for more than 50 countries.  The program complies with
domestic and international financial standards, such as GAAP (Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles), FASB (US standards), CICA (Canadian
standards), SSAP (Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales),
and IAS (International Accounting Standards).

New features have been added to address some of the European tax reporting
requirements for the Value Added Tax (VAT).  Although SunSystems allows you to
customize VAT reports and procedures for maintaining VAT information, the new
version includes an updated Tax Listing Report and a Day Book Listing that
generates sequential references against transactions.

Strong security and more

SunSystems Accounting Software sports strong data security features.  You can
restrict any user's or company's field access to menu options, analysis codes,
or account types.  And you can set up user groups for easier maintenance and
tighter reins on security.

SunSystems includes drill-down capability within its Ledger Accounting module,
letting you trace a journal entry back to its source.  It's designed to post
only balanced journal entries and offers the option to "put the journal
on-hold" if corrections or supervisory approvals need to be made, making the
product a real-time solution.  SunSystems also lets you post entries in
separate accounting periods, as long as the periods are "open" and you can
access them.

A powerful, flexible budget ledger feature lets you maintain up to 10 budget
ledgers at either the account or project level.  This provides a great deal of
flexibility for financial reports and analysis.

The combined ledger is designed to present information in real time.  All
reports and inquiries paint an immediate snapshot of a company's actual
position rather than its position the last time you ran a report.

An intermediate ledger, or rough book, allows all users to post complete
transactions in a working ledger.  This feature, originally designed to meet
Italian statutory requirements, helps reduce numerous adjusting entries.

Issues and challenges

SunSystems is a very flexible accounting system and can provide powerful
functionality if you set up the system properly.  But you'll need to invest a
great deal of time and effort into designing the system before implementing
it, since an incorrect installation can lead to major modifications later, and
you may overlook key features if you implement the setup phase too hastily.

The average cost of a single-user SunSystems license (for both Windows and DOS
versions) ranges from $2,000 to $5,000 per module, and for a four-user license
from $2,500 to $10,000 per module.  Complete product support is available
through comprehensive manuals, a telephone hot-line, on-line system help,
messages, and user defined help areas, where specific on-line assistance is
provided.  You can also direct questions regarding any SunSystems module to
the technical support staff by paying an additional support fee, which
includes free upgrades upon request and use of technical bulletins.  A full
range of client-server products is also available, including support for SQL
Server and Oracle.

The Sun will come out tomorrow

What does the future hold for SunSystems?  Over the years Systems Union has
become a leader in international accounting and business applications by
offering a wide range of solutions for small to large companies.  Systems
Union allies with many major hardware and software vendors, keeps abreast of
new technology, and focuses research and development efforts on improving its
product.

The company plans to continue enhancing the graphical user interface (GUI) for
each operating environment it supports.  In addition, the current Microsoft
SQL Server version of SunSystems will be ported to Sybase SQL Server 10.  This
will allow support for SQL technology on a number of Unix platforms, including
the RS/6000, Sun SPARC, and HP 9000 machines, as well as SCO Unix systems.

Although SunSystems is currently available in 20 languages, Systems Union
intends to add new translations over the next three years.  In addition,
Systems Union plans to work with foreign-language authors to improve
documentation and modules.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Information Services:  In Search of On-line CPAs


With various commercial on-line services (such as CompuServe, America Online,
and Prodigy) and the Internet in the news so much these days, you're probably
wondering if it's worth your time to check out their diverse offerings.

For the average accountant, the answer is a qualified yes.  There are specific
resources for accountants on CompuServe and the Internet, as well as features
on America Online and Prodigy that might appeal to the average accountant.  In
this article, we'll review the major on-line services, as well as examine
accounting-related services on the Internet.

On the one hand, the major on-line services feature a limited number of
accounting-related subject areas.  Only CompuServe devotes entire areas to
discussions of accounting information.  On the Internet, there is a Usenet
newsgroup devoted to financial software.

So what's an accountant to do?

The commercial on-line world is mainly a good place for accountants to find
additional information about computing.  Most computer magazines sponsor
on-line forums of some sort, ranging from ZD Net on CompuServe (which includes
information from PC Magazine, PC Week, and more) to the varied offerings on
America Online's Newsstand service (representing PC World, Windows, and
WordPerfect magazines).  And all three commercial services feature a wealth of
mainstream financial information, ranging from extensive market reporting on
the Prodigy CNBC area to a wide variety of investment information on the
America Online Personal Finance Forum (including Morningstar Mutual Funds
listings, a Tax Forum, and various magazines).

Try before you buy

In addition, America Online and CompuServe feature large libraries of
shareware-software that you can try out and pay for later if you like it.
While a good chunk of shareware tends to be amateurish, many useful programs
are available, particularly small tools that perform specific functions.

A search through the America Online software libraries, using the keyword
"accounting," yields over 800 matches.  Granted, this number includes many
home-oriented shareware packages for tasks like balancing checkbooks and
calculating mortgage payments, but some of the software may be of interest to
the accounting professional.

And, of course, there's one additional reason to go with any on-line service:
universal electronic mail.  If you join a commercial on-line service or
procure an Internet account, you can exchange electronic mail with any other
Internet or commercial service user.  (This doesn't extend to files, by the
way; a file attached to an America Online mail message can be received only by
an America Online user.)  With over 28 million e-mail users in America, you
can be sure you'll have a few clients who will appreciate the instant
communications offered via e-mail.

Who else is out there?

Other specialized on-line services are available that you may find useful,
depending on your needs.  Dow Jones runs an on-line business-news service that
you can access via MCI Mail (800/444-6245) or Knight Ridder (formerly Dialog)
Information Services (800/334-2564).  The DowVision service is also accessible
from Coopers & Lybrand's Tax News Network (800/528-5816), which provides
extensive tax information of its own, in addition to the Dow Jones material
and articles from other tax research providers.  Both the LEXIS/NEXIS on-line
service (800/227-4908) and Knight Ridder feature Dun's Financial Records Plus
and Standard & Poor's Corporate Descriptions.  You can also find useful
accounting information on Creative Solutions' bulletin board system ARNE
(800/968-8900).

Before you get started

To access on-line services or the Internet, you'll need a modem-the faster,
the better.  A high-speed modem is a good investment.  These days you can find
decent high-speed modems running at 28.8K bits per second for $200 or so.
America Online, CompuServe, and many Internet service providers offer 28.8Kbps
access, while Prodigy and CompuServe top out at 14.4Kbps.

America Online and Prodigy require you to use their free software to access
their services; you can find Prodigy starter kits in most computer stores,
while America Online distributes its access software with many magazines, as
well as through direct mail solicitations and bundling deals with computer
makers.  You can access CompuServe with any communications software package
(such as Procomm Plus), but a graphical front-end, WinCIM, is also available.
Getting on the Internet typically means using specialized software, especially
if you want to access the World Wide Web (see "The Net Surfer" in the December
'95 issue of Accounting Technology for more details).

America Online

America Online combines a lot of consumer-oriented information with a slew of
on-line magazines, such as Your Money and Worth.  Most of this information is
probably of little interest to the average accountant.  Yes, there are some
areas you might find useful in an eclectic practice, such as the Morningstar
guide to mutual funds, but by and large these services are for generalists,
not accountants.

The newest version of AOL software for Windows (there is a Mac version as
well) will feature full Internet access, however, including a top-notch Web
browser from InternetWorks.  It should be fully released by the time you read
this article.  And America Online is the cheapest commercial on-line service,
making its Internet access even more financially attractive.

CompuServe

The only major on-line service to feature forums specifically for accountants
is CompuServe.  The Accounting Vendor Forum offers areas run by various
accounting software vendors (including Best!Ware, BNA, Champion Business
Systems, Manzanita Software, NEBS, Open Systems, Outlook Software, SBT
Accounting, SCALA, Solomon Software, Versatile Solutions, XP Systems, ZPAY
Payroll, and others), as well as a number of general discussion groups (The
Break Room, Ask the CPAs, Accounting Training, Tax Issues, and Accounting
Software).

While discussions in the vendor forums probably won't interest you if you're
not using the vendor's software, the general discussion areas are lively and
filled with postings.  I found one message describing a hypothetical business
transaction, in which the author asked other members of the forum what the
appropriate journal entries and taxable income and deductions would be, and
whether the transaction qualified as a royalty, commission, or sale of
intangible property rights.  This question yielded several responses from
other accountants participating in the forum.  In addition to advice and
discussion, software libraries specifically for accountants are available on
the forum.

The recently opened Accountants Forum on CompuServe is sponsored by the AICPA.
It includes message areas devoted to general information and ethics;
accounting; audit, compilation, and review; taxes; information technology;
personal financial planning; management accounting and industry; government;
CPA firms; universities and colleges; and management consulting.  Also within
the forums, you will find separate libraries devoted to many of these same
subjects.

CompuServe also allows access to the Internet (including File Transfer
Protocol and Telnet features, Usenet newsgroups, as well as the World Wide Web
if you use CompuServe's NetLauncher software).  For any accountant, it's clear
that CompuServe is the place to begin the on-line quest, if only because of
the existence of an Accounting Vendors Forum and the AICPA's new Accountants
Forum.

CompuServe's pricing plan allows access to over 3,000 Internet addresses,
including e-mail.  They also offer software for DOS and Macintosh users.

Prodigy

As the most consumer-oriented major on-line service, Prodigy doesn't provide
much information of direct interest to accountants.  But that doesn't mean
Prodigy is a total wash, only that its information tends to be general in
nature.

Prodigy does have the most extensive financial information on-line, however.
It's the official on-line service of CNBC, the cable service that devotes
daily programming to business topics.  Yes, you'll find the stock listings
offered by all the major on-line services.  You can also buy and sell stock on
Prodigy and set up "track lists" to keep tabs on specific stocks in your
portfolio.  And Prodigy's CNBC area goes further by offering complete market
information, including Dow Jones averages, gold prices, Treasury bond yields,
and a U.S.  dollar index.  It also gives you an overview of futures and
mutual-fund information, with listings of over 6,000 funds.  And for financial
experts, Kiplinger's magazine is on-line.

In addition, Prodigy offers full Internet access, including newsgroups, file
transfer capability, and a World Wide Web browser.  While the Internet is a
vast, amorphous entity, you'll find some useful resources there for an
accounting practice, and one way to reach those resources is through Prodigy.

Prodigy's pricing plans are more varied, offering plans starting at $9.95 per
month, with its top plan costing $24.95 per month.  Each plan includes a
number of free access hours, with minimal charges for additional hours and
minutes.  Prodigy also offers on-line software compatible with DOS and
Macintosh machines, providing access for almost all computer environments.

The Internet

Despite the ad-hoc nature of the Internet, a surprising number of resources
are available on the Net that your firm could find valuable.  The main trick
is finding their locations.  I've done a few searches and come up with several
accounting resources on the World Wide Web that can also serve as a
springboard to other Internet accounting treasures.

With a Web browser, good places to start are the Accountants Home Page
(http://www.servtech.com/re/acct.html) and the Accounting Resources on the
Internet Home Page
(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/internet/internet.htm).  Both sites
offer listings for other accounting resources on the Web.  Some of these
listings are general in nature (most of you won't need to know about the NY
State Assembly or care about accessing the THOMAS Web service run by the
Federal Government).

Some sites, however, are operated by prominent accounting organizations.  For
instance, the Education Materials Committee of the American Accounting
Association runs its own home page
(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/aaa/aaa.htm), which also contains
pointers to other accounting-related resources on the Internet.  In addition,
there's a low-traffic Usenet newsgroup called
comp.os.ms-windows.apps.financial where you can discuss various Windows-based
financial applications.

Load up your software and log on

The on-line world is rapidly becoming a valuable business tool in American
society.  While some services, such as America Online and Prodigy, still need
to beef up their accounting-specific resources, there's a wealth of
information already available on CompuServe, the Internet, and several
specialized services.

The on-line world has a way of creeping up on you, and it won't be long before
information services begin creating more content of interest to accountants.
The brand new Microsoft Network, in fact, is already developing such
resources, and you'll find Accounting Technology, as well as other Faulkner &
Gray accounting publications, and areas such as the Accounting Office and the
CCH Business Owner's Toolkit, on-line there right now.


Kevin Reichard contributes to a variety of publications and has written 15
computer books for MIS:Press/M&T Books.  His electronic-mail address is
reichard@mr.net.


America Online America Online Inc.  8619 Westwood Center Dr.  Vienna, VA
22182-2285 (800) 827-6364

Price:  $9.95 per month, five free hours; extra hours cost $2.95

Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGA
graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better, mouse.

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Full Internet access; wide range of discussion areas.

Liabilities:  No specific forums for accountants.


CompuServe CompuServe 5000 Arlington Centre Blvd.  PO Box 20961 Columbus, OH
43220-9910 (800) 487-9197

Price:  Standard Pricing Plan is $9.95 per month for 5 hours of connect time.
Extra Internet hours cost $2.95 per hour.  The Super Value Club Plan costs
$24.95 per month for 20 hours of connect time.  Extra hours cost $1.95 each.

Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGA
graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Specific forums for accountants; many software libraries.

Liabilities:  Most expensive on-line service if you wander past the free
services.


Prodigy Prodigy Services Co.  445 Hamilton Ave.  White Plains, NY 10601 (800)
PRODIGY

Price:  Basic Plan offers 5 hours of Core features for $9.95, with extra hours
costing $2.95; Value Plan offers unlimited access to Core features and 5 hours
of Plus features for $14.95, with each extra hour of Plus costing $2.95; 30/30
Plan offers 30 hours for $29.95, with each extra hour costing $2.95.

Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 5MB of hard disk
space, 4MB of RAM, VGA graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.


The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Strong financial tracking capabilities; full Internet access.

Liabilities:  Little content of direct interest to accountants.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Practice Development:  Form 5500 Follow-up


In the August 1995 issue we looked at eight pension return preparation
packages.  These ranged from simple forms-oriented programs to comprehensive
employee benefits administration systems.  As a follow-up, this time around we
looked at two additional entries in this growing field:  ATX Tax Solver 5500
Benefit Plan and Shepard's Form 5500 System.

ATX solves your 5500 needs

Offered by ATX Forms Inc., ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan differs from the
other pension software packages we've looked at in that it's spreadsheet
based.  The vendor's family of software includes modules to prepare forms in
all the major income tax-filing areas, including individual, business,
fiduciary, and payroll taxes.  In addition to tax preparation products, ATX
also offers a depreciation system and a tax planner.

All of ATX Forms' applications are available in either 1-2-3 or Excel
versions.  ATX supplied the software to us on a single 3.5-inch diskette, and
we quickly installed it by simply typing ATX at the command line prompt.  We
used the Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows edition for this review, but the software
supports both the DOS and Windows versions of 1-2-3.  You can also get any of
the ATX products for the Macintosh (which work with the Mac version of Excel).
And, if you'd rather not have to play with a spreadsheet at all, ATX just
introduced its Saber line of software, which doesn't require you to have a
spreadsheet program installed.

The 47-page user guide covers operating instructions for all of the ATX
modules, and provides information for specific modules as needed.  The
documentation, though not voluminous, adequately covers getting started;
entering, saving, and printing tax information; menus and macros; tips and
techniques; and troubleshooting.  Instructions in the manual and on-screen are
good enough that someone not familiar with spreadsheets will be able to
produce returns.  If you already feel comfortable using a spreadsheet, you'll
be right at home with the product.

Once you're in the spreadsheet program, select the main file, !OPENATX, to
reveal starting instructions and a list of supported forms.  Forms included in
the package are the 5500, 5500-C/R, 5500-EZ, supporting schedules A, B, C, E,
F, G, P, SSA, and forms 2848, 4506, 4571, 5558, 8453E, 8821, 8822, 945, SS4,
and W9.  To process a client, check off the forms you wish to prepare, then
press Ctrl-N.  This automatically creates a taxpayer directory, copies the
forms into the directory, and opens Page 1.  The program makes good use of
spreadsheet macro facilities, including over a dozen macros that automate such
tasks as opening, updating, saving, and printing files.  You can also select
these tasks from a pull-down menu.

How many forms am I holding up?

One useful feature is that you can have more than just a single form open at
the same time.  Just how many can be open simultaneously depends on the amount
of memory available.  Given enough memory, you could conceivably have them all
open.  Once you open a form, you can key your data into an on-screen
reproduction of the original form.  The screen is color-coded, displaying the
form in black, the data in blue, and the instructions in purple.  You have a
choice of using Input Mode (by pressing the Ctrl-I key combination), or you
can move around freely as in any spreadsheet.  If you choose Input Mode, the
right arrow key takes you to the next input cell.  All cells not requiring
input are protected, and the program carries over standard information, such
as name, address, and identification numbers, to other forms as appropriate.

ATX Tax Solver 5500 automatically performs math calculations on the financial
input areas and produces balanced statements.  However, it's still possible to
have an out-of-balance condition, since the program automatically carries the
net asset amount from the balance sheet to the income statement.

When you complete one page or form, you call up the next, until you've
finished them all.  You can easily print to an HP-compatible laser printer by
using the macros provided, and ATX also supports dot-matrix and inkjet
printers.  You have the option of selecting and printing one or all forms, and
using a batch-printing mode.  The printed forms are clear, professional
looking, and IRS approved.  No diagnostics are available to alert you to
problems or erroneous input, but you can produce a two-year comparison of the
income and expense entries to provide some troubleshooting help.

To transfer client information to the next year, a macro (Ctrl-U) updates the
new forms with carryover information.  ATX Tax Solver 5500 doesn't produce an
invoice or client transmittal letter, however, and Forms 990-T and 5330 Return
of Excise Taxes Related to Employee Benefit Plans are not available in this
module.

No help for the weary?

On-line help is pretty much taken for granted these days, and this is one
place in which ATX Tax Solver 5500 is a bit weak.  If you've grown used to tax
prep software that gives you explanations and advice on a line-item basis, you
may be a bit disappointed.  ATX assumes that you know what you're doing when
it comes to Form 5500 preparation.  While the standard spreadsheet help
screens are available, neither the screen nor manual provides help on the
technical aspects of 5500 preparation.  You also need to step through
inapplicable input boxes; since the program doesn't automatically skip them,
you need to know which items require responses.

ATX Tax Solver 5500 isn't the fanciest product to produce 5500s.  But for a
reasonable price, it supplies an efficient way to get the job done, although
it does require you to be conversant with the Form 5500 preparation process.

Should you need help, technical support is available on weekdays from 9 a.m.
to 5 p.m., EST.  The back of the manual also offers some troubleshooting
advice.

Does Shepard's lead the flock?

Shepard's/McGraw-Hill is a well-known, venerable publisher of books and
services.  Less well-known is its expanding line of software.  One of the
newest is the Shepard's Form 5500 System reviewed here.  Other Shepard's
software products include a tax forms library in addition to an integrated
family of estate planning, preparation, and accounting programs.

The software is Windows based, and you install it through the Program Manager
by using the File Run command.  The install routine establishes a new program
group, with separate icons for the 5500 and 5500-C/R.

The User's Manual is a brief 11 pages, but it covers basic program operations
efficiently.  It uses screen shots to good advantage to illustrate the primary
steps.  Making up for the sparse documentation is extensive on-line help to
assist you in working with the program, along with on-line IRS instructions
for the forms and line-by-line instructions.  Particularly useful is the split
screen option; while you input various lines on the form in the upper window,
the instructions for those lines automatically appear in the lower window.

Most practitioners don't produce Form 5500 all that frequently, so a nice
feature in the help function is the indexes for two Shepard's publications,
ERISA Practice and Procedure and Guide to Pension and Profit Sharing Plans.
Shepard's offers these books at a discount to purchasers of its 5500 software.

Clicking on the program icon brings up the opening screen, consisting of Page
1 of the 5500 form.  The familiar Windows menu and tool bars cross the top of
the screen.  In addition to standard icons on the tool bar, you'll find icons
for the six pages of the 5500 form.  You can use these icons to open one or
more of the pages at the same time.  Supporting forms are accessible from the
Form pull-down menu, including Schedules A, B, C, E, F, G, P, Form 5558, and
SSA.

To start a new return, just begin inputting information into the on-screen
Page 1.  Otherwise, open an existing file using the File menu or icon.  Input
is straightforward and easy since you're working with an accurate reproduction
of the actual form.  When you enter an item, the cursor automatically moves to
the next input field, and you can use the Tab key or mouse to skip a field.
The software doesn't automatically skip inapplicable entry fields, so you need
to be aware of which entries are appropriate, based on what you've entered
previously for a client.

Shepard's Form 5500 System carries over names, dates, and identification
numbers to other forms.  It automatically totals amounts in the financial and
numerical fields, and carries over the total of net assets on the balance
sheet to the income statement to show the change in net assets.  Everything
balances fine, but be careful if you change amounts later, or the income
statement may no longer foot.

With your input complete, you're ready to print.  As with the ATX package
reviewed above, the Shepard's software provides no diagnostics to alert you to
potential errors or inconsistencies.  Printing to an HP-compatible laser
printer produces crisp, clear IRS forms, however, and Shepard's includes
downloadable soft fonts.  You can print one, several, or all forms at once.
This 5500 system doesn't contain client transmittal letters, invoices, or
Forms 5500-EZ, 5330, or 990-T, though you can obtain the forms by purchasing
Shepard's separate forms library package.

Technical support is available at a toll-free number on weekdays from 7:00
a.m.  to 5:00 p.m.  Mountain time.

Shepard's Form 5500 System is easy to learn and use, letting you produce
high-quality 5500 forms in a short time.  Although it lacks some bells and
whistles of more comprehensive (and expensive) packages, it does the basic
task of creating a Form 5500 very well.


Gerald Herter, MBA, CPA is president of Sterman, Higashi & Herter, an
accounting firm in Tustin, CA.


ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan Price:  $99 ATX Forms Inc.  P.O.  Box 630
Washburn, ME 04786 (800) 944-8883, (207) 455-4603 fax (207) 455-0963

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Practical, well integrated, spreadsheet-based package; produces
professional-looking forms.

Liabilities:  Lacks on-line help screens or instructions for 5500 preparation;
few diagnostic or data management features.


Shepard's Form 5500 System Price:  $129 Shepard's/McGraw-Hill, Inc.  555
Middle Creek Pkwy.  Colorado Springs, CO 80935-3530 (800) 525-2474, (719)
488-3000 fax (719) 481-7391

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Straightforward; easy to use; attractive Windows interface and forms
output; good on-line help for the price.

Liabilities:  Lacks diagnostics.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Newspages:  Tax Vendors for Sale


An offer you can't refuse Dept.  What would you do with a couple of billion
dollars?  Illinois-based tax research publisher and tax prep software
developer CCH, Inc.  announced in late November that it had been sold to
Wolters Kluwer NV, an Amsterdam-based international publisher, for a cool $1.9
billion.  CCH's product line includes ProSystem fx, CCH Access, and CCH Tax
Assistant.

According to CCH public relations manager Mary Dale Walters, the Dutch company
wanted to acquire CCH's technology knowledge for use in the European market,
as well as to increase its presence in the US market through technologies like
the CCH Business Owners Toolkit on the Microsoft Network.  She doesn't foresee
many immediate changes in CCH's own product line, however.

"There's a chance of new and better technology down the road," she says.  The
cash infusion "will give us more impetus for continued development.  We're
already aggressively pursuing on-line activities.  We can do more."

Founded over 103 years ago, CCH was named Commerce Clearing House until last
year.  Although it's a publicly traded business, the majority of stock has
been in the hands of the Thorne family up until now, and Oakleigh Thorne,
president and CEO, will continue to manage the company.

One hurdle that CCH and other vendors were working on overcoming at press time
was Congress's and the President's budget wrangling last autumn.  "Obviously
we can't do anything until they do something," says Walters.  "At this point,
we're not sure when we'll have that legislation.  There are a number of
retroactive provisions in that bill."  Although CCH began shipping a
preliminary version of its tax software as early as November, the delays in
the final forms may mean that many taxpayers will have to file amended
returns.  For extra info, you can call CCH at (800) 45-PROFX.

More tax mergers Dept.  The CCH deal was preceded last autumn by another tax
vendor acquisition.  This one involved RAM Software, makers of RAM 1040
Professional Tax Software, which was picked up by SCS/Compute, makers of Tax
Machine and LMS Tax.  Unlike SCS's purchase of Accountant's Microsystems
Inc.'s Tax Machine line several years ago, SCS won't continue development on
the RAM program.

"They're taking features in RAM and adding it to their own," says RAM vice
president Frances Michelon.  "They wanted to expand their market share."
RAM's head programmer Richard Michelon will be writing a program to convert
RAM 1040 Professional Tax Software data to Tax Machine and LMS Tax formats.

SCS is setting up special support lines to help RAM customers make it through
the transition, according to LMS Tax product manager Lou Ann Vandemore.
"We're contacting each of their customers and offering them LMS Tax and Tax
Machine," she says.  Future RAM-inspired enhancements to SCS's tax products
may include its multistate processing, speed, and the way it accounted for
automobiles.  Call SCS/Compute at (800) 736-4587 for more information.

New on CD-ROM dept.  The second issue of Faulkner & Gray's The Electronic
Accountant began shipping last November.  Featuring advanced multimedia
functionality, the new issue is the first out from the product's new
Editor-in-Chief (and Accounting Technology Consulting Editor) Laurence K.
Zuckerman, CPA, MST.

The cover story, "Discomania:  The Best CD-ROMs for Accountants," includes
demonstrations of popular tax research, forms, spreadsheet, and CPE software
products.  Also on the disc are war stories about malpractice insurance,
pension compliance tax planning, 1040 software, installing a tape backup
drive, and the manufacturing practice niche.  For a free copy of the
Electronic Accountant, call (800) 535-8403.

Down with Unix Dept.  Platinum Software announced the general release of
Platinum SQL NT 3.2 last November, a client/server accounting solution that
takes advantage of Microsoft's BackOffice suite, primarily its Windows NT and
Microsoft SQL Server components.  New modules in Platinum SQL NT include Asset
Management and Advanced General Ledger Allocations.

A new financial alerts feature will send an administrator an e-mail alert if a
specified threshold is exceeded, such as a cash balance going above or below a
certain level.  Queue cards will help train users through processes like
entering vouchers.

The new release signals a switch in strategy for Platinum, which used to
support the Unix market by running on top of Sybase's version of SQL Server.
No longer.  Platinum is now betting on Windows NT over Unix.

"We have to make a choice," says Kevin Dowling, Platinum's vice president of
marketing.  "We see more and more of our customer base have been interested in
an NT and SQL Server solution.  We think Windows NT will be the dominant
client/server operating system.  We decided to focus our energies on providing
a solution that's integrated and almost plug-and-play with BackOffice,
reducing the risks of having all the pieces fit together."

To help its Unix customers make the transition, Platinum is becoming partners
with Microsoft and Compaq to provide the necessary software and hardware.
"We'll release product upgrades for a year and do product support for the year
after that," comments Dowling.  "They can continue to use the product and will
have access to the source code at the end of 1996."  Dowling also says that
another vendor may eventually take over Platinum's Sybase offering.  Platinum
SQL NT sells for $10,000 to $15,000 per module, plus per-user fees.

Several modules for the network-based Platinum for Windows product are also
finally in release, including two general ledger modules (standard and
premiere), along with a cash management module.  By the time you read this,
accounts payable and accounts receivable should be available, and in March,
Platinum plans to release order entry, purchase order, and inventory modules.
For more information on these products, call Platinum at (714) 453-4000.

Going vertical Dept.  Intuit's latest editions of QuickBooks move the
market-leading small-business accounting solution onto the path of vertical
accounting software.  QuickBooks 4.0 takes a small-business user through a
step-by-step interview that customizes their books according to the industry
they're in and generates customized documentation for over 20 different
industries.  The software also offers customized fields, as well as different
methods of handling income.  Other new features include contact management,
to-do lists, mail merge, and the ability to print 1099, 940, and 941 forms.

This new QuickBooks line will be available in several iterations, in both
Windows ($99) and Macintosh ($119) versions on disk, and in a Windows version
on CD-ROM ($129).  QuickBooks Pro 4.0 for Windows ($189) and QuickBooks Pro
4.0 for Macintosh ($189) will add time tracking, estimating, and advanced job
costing features.

The company has also announced a fix to a bug in version 3.0.  When QuickBooks
3.0 was allowed to condense data, the average cost of inventory items could be
affected, causing inventory values and the cost of goods sold to be under- or
over-valued.  Intuit estimates that only a few users will be affected by this
error.  For more details, call (800) 238-4247.

In other Intuit news, the company is introducing a version of its retail
TurboTax and MacInTax programs designed with special business advice for
customers who need to prepare their own Schedule C.  The product will be
called TurboTax (or MacInTax) for Business/Sole Proprietorship.  For more
details, check out Intuit's new Web site at http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax or
you can just call them at (800) 934-1040.  Fresh fruit Dept.  The latest
version of Peachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5, began shipping in
November.  It offers a multimedia setup feature with video and audio clips
that take small-business users through the process of automating their books.
The $129 program includes 75 business templates.

Other new features provide management tools such as an events log that alerts
you when quotes expire or invoices go uncollected.  Also new are a to-do list,
alert signals for when customers exceed credit limits and inventory items are
down, and additional customized reporting and drill-down capabilities.  To
learn more, phone (800) 247-3224, or connect to the Peachtree Web site at
http://www.peach.com.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Quicklooks:  MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics Suite


Problem:  you have a phone, fax machine, and modem, but you only have one
phone line.  Or you have several phones, modems, fax machines, and other
telecommunication devices, and more than one phone line, but still not enough
lines to go around.  Expensive solution:  add more phone lines and pay an
extra $250 or so per line every year to the phone company.  Another expensive
solution:  set up a network, including a complicated network modem
configuration.  Better solution:  make a one-time investment of about $349 in
MAXShare, a new state-of-the-art line-sharing device.

At approximately 6.5 by 9.5 by 1 inch, MAXShare doesn't take up a lot of desk
space.  However, it does allow you to share multiple telecom devices
automatically.  In fact, MAXShare permits up to eight devices to share up to
four lines.

MAXShare is easy-to-use hardware that works with your existing phone lines.
It uses an included 9-volt power transformer that plugs into any standard AC
electric outlet.  After you plug the transformer into the back of MAXShare and
your electrical outlet, simply connect MAXShare to a standard RJ-11 phone jack
and then connect your phone, fax, modem, or any other telecom device to one of
MAXShare's eight RJ-11 jack connectors.  The entire process takes only
seconds.  There are no switches to set, no software to install, and no network
required.  If you do need technical support, it's available toll free, from
Monday through Friday, from 9 to 5.

Automatic routing

MAXShare's operation is completely transparent.  It automatically routes
incoming calls to the assigned telecom devices.  In other words, MAXShare
sends calls that come in on phone line 1 to telecom device 1, calls that
arrive on phone line 2 to telecom device 2, and so on, up to the unit's
four-line maximum.

There are limitations, of course.  For starters, modems connected to telecom
device jacks 5 through 8 cannot receive incoming calls.  Perhaps more
important, if the telecom device associated with an incoming call is in use,
MAXShare does not route the call, and the caller hears a continuous ringing
signal (there is no charge to long-distance callers when this occurs).  This
may be inconvenient for your callers, and you certainly would not want your
primary client phone lines to behave this way.  However, you can minimize this
problem (for example, by using your modem after business hours).

MAXShare also prevents accidental interruption of phone lines in use and is
designed to eliminate conflicts.  For example, when a modem attempts to dial
out, the modem in essence takes its "handset" off-hook, "listens" for a dial
tone, then dials the number.  Enter MAXShare.  When it detects that your modem
has gone off-hook, it assigns it to any phone line that's available.  At this
point, the modem gets the dial tone that it's waiting for and makes the call.

But what if you try to access a modem when all outgoing MAXShare lines are in
use?  MAXShare will cause your modem to deliver a "No Dial Tone" message to
your communications software, which typically prompts you to try again later
when phone lines are available.  MAXShare will not interrupt the current
session in progress or cause irritating or costly disconnections.

Room to grow

MaxShare offers several advantages.  For starters, competitive line-sharing
devices, which may be less expensive than MAXShare, only work with a single
phone line.  MAXShare accommodates up to four phone lines, which gives you
room to grow.

In fact, if you're considering setting up a network to share phone lines and
telecom devices, you may want to consider MAXShare as a more affordable
alternative.  It makes adding extra phone lines easy and reduces the need for
more network modems.  MAXShare also connects to any modem; you can use it with
virtually all PC, Macintosh, and Unix workstations.

Currently, I have my telephone, fax/answering machine, and modem hooked up to
MAXShare, which is connected to a single outgoing telephone line.  MAXShare
works well for my SOHO (Small Office/Home Office) setup, and this versatile
device may be helpful for you too.

-Laurence K.  Zuckerman, CPA, MST


HiJaak Graphics Suite

Boldly go where no accountant has gone before.  Instead of just using a
spreadsheet program in your practice to graph data in financial statements and
other reports into bar and pie charts, and a presentation graphics program to
dazzle clients at meetings, and a desktop publishing program to produce
newsletters and related correspondence, you can use HiJaak Graphics Suite to
relieve the frustration of employing separate tools for heavy-duty graphics
chores.  It matches up programs and graphical data with compatible file
structures, sharpens your output, and lets you capture, modify, and enhance
images.  The $99 Suite provides an integrated set of utilities with
sophisticated graphics capabilities.

Each program in the Windows-based Suite performs different functions.  You can
use them separately for simple tasks, or collectively for multi-function jobs.
Browser, the desktop publishing program, manages files and organizes projects,
offering easy access to the other components.  Smuggler helps you search for
and import files from other applications in over 75 formats.  TouchUp turns
dull, fuzzy images into bright, crisp ones, and offers various enhancement
capabilities.  PRO is a screen capture feature that saves images in many
formats, and Draw lets you customize and modify images with 15 drawing tools.

Killing two birds with one stone

If you're comfortable using Windows, you can get started quickly, but
operating the program fully and efficiently takes some time and patience.  My
first encounter with the program was a few months ago while reviewing pension
software packages (Accounting Technology, August 1995).  HiJaak PRO produced
the screen shots that appeared in the story.  Being short on time and long on
pension packages, I ignored other features and ventured directly into
capturing the screen images.  Surprisingly, I was able to produce
professional-looking illustrations in short order, with a quick stop over in
Retouch and File Conversion.  E-mailing the images to the editors didn't
affect their quality or reduce the resolution size.  I later returned to the
program for a closer look and discovered the extensive nature of the other
programs within the Suite.

Available on eight 3.5-inch diskettes or one CD-ROM, HiJaak loads through the
Windows File Run command.  The CD-ROM version contains 3,000 additional clip
art images as a bonus.  Full installation requires 40MB of hard disk space,
but running the program from the CD requires only 1MB of disk space.

HiJaak furnishes you with a several-hundred-page User Guide that contains
screen pictures and diagrams for each application.  The Getting Started manual
includes an overview and installation instructions, along with a four-lesson
tutorial that shows you how to create a flier combining text and graphics from
various sources.

To organize the components in your project, begin with HiJaak Browser.  Here
you catalog, view, and search for files.  A file index tree similar to the
Windows File Manager appears on the left side of a split screen, allowing you
to collect various files that contain pertinent data for the job at hand.  On
the right, Browser displays "thumbnail" images of the files in the collection.
You can open, copy, print, or move these images.  When you're ready to work on
a thumbnail, you drag it to the appropriate icon to launch the HiJaak program
you need.

For example, you may have a thumbnail of a map you want to use for a project.
Just drag the thumbnail to the HiJaak PRO icon to launch that program.  With
the thumbnail now in PRO, you set the options for how you want the image
captured and where to store it.  PRO takes a "snapshot" and places it in a
file.  If the designated application requires the image to be in a different
format, PRO can convert it at your direction.  PRO can capture pictures in
both Windows and DOS environments.

To place the picture in your text file, first open HiJaak Smuggler.  Smuggler
stays running in the background until you're ready to use it.  In Browser's
file manager, locate the file containing your text; it will appear as a
thumbnail.  Clicking on the thumbnail launches the word processing app in
which the text was written.  Smuggler will have attached itself to the title
bar of the word processor, so you just click on the icon there.  After
indicating where you want the picture, as well as its size and resolution,
Smuggler places it there.

Touch up your images

If the image appears fuzzy or dark, you can filter it with HiJaak TouchUp.
TouchUp works with color, grayscale, or black and white images in a variety of
formats.  It produces an instantaneous display while you change various
factors, so you can experiment and adjust the image as you go.  A variety of
retouch tools are at your disposal, such as color, texture, brightness,
contrast, halftones, airbrush, pen, eraser, sharpening, softening, embossing,
sculpting, highlighting, sizing, positioning, and more.  Even though you may
need to consult the manual to learn each of these tools, you can intuitively
perform many tasks on your own by simply moving various gauges and trying the
tool icons.

With HiJaak Draw, you can create some of your own artwork to convey a
particular message in your project.  Draw contains a vast array of drawing
tools.  Whether you merely want to produce a geometric figure with some text
inside, or compose a new work of art, Draw will accommodate you.  The Draw
manual is over 350 pages long and offers ample features and intricacies to
serve both amateur and professional illustrators.

Draw lets you organize artwork into multiple layers and pages.  Twenty-three
drawing methods extend the versatility of its 15 drawing tools for creating
lines, boxes, circles, and other objects.  For example, it offers seven
methods for drawing a rectangle, such as corner-to-corner and
center-to-corner.

Your freehand drawing can be natural, or you can set tolerance limits that
smooth out irregularities in your lines and shapes.  You can also program your
text in many fonts and shapes, so they can flow straight or curve around
objects at your command.  Additional tools help you position, shape,
transform, and arrange these objects.  They can be painted with a choice of
several color models, each with seemingly endless colors and gradations.

Draw sets up and manages various clipart libraries, letting you easily import
and export images.  Numerous print options accommodate your specifications.
For instance, if the finished product exceeds your paper size, Draw can tile
the picture onto several sheets if you want a large image, or scale it down to
a single sheet.  And if you're sending artwork to a printing press, you can
produce the work in color-separated format.

How suite it is!

When you incorporate the five HiJaak modules into the HiJaak Graphics Suite,
the result is a comprehensive, integrated solution to your graphics needs.
You'll be impressed with all you can do graphically to enhance client
presentations and proposals with relatively little expertise, with the help of
this useful, time-saving software.  l

-Gerald Herter, CPA


MAXShare Price:  $459 MAXBase, Inc.  668 American Legion Dr.  P.O.  Box 2127
Teaneck, NJ 07666 (800) 631-1121

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Effective telecommunication device; easy to set up; accommodates up
to four phone lines.

Liabilities:  Lines in use do not produce a busy signal-rather a continous
ring.


HiJaak Graphics Suite Price:  $99 Inset Systems Inc.  71 Commerce Dr.
Brookfield, CT 06804 (203) 740-2400

Requires:  IBM PC or compatible, 386 or better, 4MB RAM (8MB recommended),
Windows 3.1 or later, 40MB hard disk space for full installation or CD-ROM
plus 1MB disk space.

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Powerful, comprehensive set of graphics utilities, functional in a
wide variety of formats.

Liabilities:  None significant.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound


"One of the last great tax shelters," said Charles Ratner, a principal in
Ernst & Young's Cleveland office and the firm's national director of personal
insurance counseling, when describing life insurance.  He explained the reason
is that life insurance's cash value builds up tax-free and can be accessed
during the insured's lifetime through tax-free withdrawals and loans and there
is an income tax-free death benefit.

Whole or variable life insurance is usually favored because of the substantial
cash value that can be built up.  Also, second-to-die policies are
increasingly being used when the marital deduction can insulate the first
spouse's estate from estate tax.

Tax-Wise Moves.  If you don't want the policy proceeds to be included in an
insured estate, then you must make sure that the insured was never the policy
owner or the insured must have transferred ownership more then three years
before death.

A common way of making sure that the insured doesn't own the policy is through
the creation of an irrevocable life insurance trust (ILIT).  The insured
normally transfers cash annually to the ILIT to pay the premiums.  If
possible, the trust takes out the policy so the above three-year rule doesn't
come into play.  In order for the cash contributions to qualify for the gift
tax annual exclusion, the ILIT normally gives the trust beneficiaries a
Crummey withdrawal power.

In setting up an ILIT, a financial planner must be aware of whether a
generation skipping transfer (GST) tax can apply.  Because life insurance is a
leverage vehicle, the amount that can eventually be subject to the GST tax can
be quite substantial.  Accordingly, there is a strategy that can allocate part
of the GST $1 million exemption to amounts being transferred to the trust.

ILITs are also being used in conjunction with lifetime charitable transfers.
Bill Fleming, director of personal financial planning in the Hartford, Conn.
office of Coopers & Lybrand, noted that wealth transferred to charity is often
replaced by using the savings on income taxes from the charitable transfers to
purchase life insurance that is owned by a ILIT.  "This technique works
particularly well if the individual is in their 50s, rather than their 60s,"
added Fleming.

Split Dollar.  Many of the more creative uses of life insurance involve
split-dollar insurance being used as compensation.  A split-dollar arrangement
basically allows the insured to pay the lower term value of a policy while the
employer pays for the cash-value part of the much higher premium.  What
usually happens is that the company pays the entire premium and then reports
income to the insured.  The amount reportable as income is based on tables
(PS-58 for individual policies and PS-38 for survivorship policies) or the
term equivalents provided by the insurance company.  No deduction is allowed
for the employer.  The net result is that the insured owns the policy and owes
the company the amount that it paid as cash-value premiums.  Normally, at a
later date (or at the insured's death) the company is paid back.

A split-dollar arrangement can be used for an owner of the closely held
business or for a key employee.  The cash value is growing tax-free and,
usually on retirement, if desired, the insured can withdraw premiums and even
take a loan against the policy.  As long as the policy is not surrendered, the
insured is getting a tax-free stream of income.  (Note:  The same tax-free
stream is available with normal respect to whole or variable life.)  Upon
death, the payout will be reduced by the amounts owed on the policy.  Fleming
said that split-dollar insurance is particularly attractive to transfer to an
ILIT "because the value of the gift subject to the annual exclusion is the
lower PS-58, PS-38 or term premium value."

Tom McCaskill, president of McCaskill & Associate, a family business
consulting firm in Wichita, Kansas, widely uses a variable split-dollar
insurance policy as the funding mechanism to pass the business to younger
generations when a business owner is alive.  He pointed out that a variable
policy allows the business to fluctuate the insurance premiums to a prescribed
maximum and also allows the insured to make the investment decisions with
respect to the policy.

Split-dollar arrangements are also used by large shareholders of publicly
traded corporations so that there are sufficient funds to pay estate taxes,
according to James Hodge, chairman of The Eyrie Group based in Danville,
California, a consulting company to first-generation business owners.  Hodge
makes an important point about all split-dollar arrangements that you want to
eventually rollout the company (end its premium payments).  He said that as
the insured gets older, the imputed income that the insured will have
increases if the company is paying the entire premium.

Life insurance is also widely used in cross-purchase agreements.  That is when
owners of closely held business purchase individual policies on each of the
other co-owners.  The problem is if there are five business owners, then each
owner has to buy four policies.  According to Fleming, many business owners
now use an escrow or partnership arrangement whereby only five (rather than
20) policies are purchased and the surviving owners each receive a portion of
the insurance proceeds, which are used to purchase the deceased business
owner's stock.

Bigger Hazards.  Although the benefits of life insurance are substantial, the
risks are also substantial from a tax standpoint.  McCaskill says there are
numerous pitfalls along the way that can trip up the plan.  One is that you
can overfund the premiums so that the IRS will say it is not an insurance
policy building up tax-free.  Also, there will be problems if the insurance
company imposes a penalty for a partial surrender or if a surrender is
considered by the IRS to be a complete surrender of the policy with a huge
income tax liability being imposed.

McCaskill said that a common problem he sees with split-dollar is that the
company and individual don't follow through and make a formal split-dollar
arrangement.

Ratner warned that you must particularly watch out for inflated expectations
about the rate of return of investments in variable life policies.  He added
that the amount of premium selected should be able to sustain the death
benefit even against poor performance of the investment.  He summed up his
concerns this way, "You don't want to make today's solution tomorrow's
problem."

HOWARD W.  WOLOSKY, J.D., LL.  M., is executive editor of The Practical
Accountant.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>