
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-40</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B044-49</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in08.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021030 text/html 66410
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:29 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMT
Content-length: 66223
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in08.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 11, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS&nbsp;CARRIER WIN ON LATE&nbsp;NOTICE GROUNDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SD NY DENIES CARRIERS&nbsp;JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF&nbsp;COVERAGE, LOST POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(957 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NJ APP. CT.: CLEANUP&nbsp;COVERAGE CASE TO PROCEED&nbsp;IN BOTH NJ AND NY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1000 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SECOND CIRCUIT RULES IN&nbsp;DISPUTE OVER NATIONAL&nbsp;GYPSUM COVERAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(909 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>CA HIGH CT. RULES&nbsp;SURETIES NOT EXEMPT&nbsp;FROM PROP. 103</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(756 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>CA CT. APP.: LENDER&nbsp;MUST BEAR LOSS FROM&nbsp;PHONY PREMIUM FINANCING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>D AK: INSURER CANNOT&nbsp;RESCIND POLICY BASED&nbsp;ON BOUNCED CHECK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(479 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DE SUPER. CT.: NONPARTY&nbsp;INSURER OBLIGATED FOR&nbsp;UNDERINSURED COVERAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(617 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>MI CT. APP. ALLOWS&nbsp;DEPOSITION OF LEGISLATIVE&nbsp;AIDE IN INSURANCE CASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(371 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>INSURER NOT LIABLE&nbsp;FOR FAILURE TO SETTLE&nbsp;MALPRACTICE SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(485 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>CA SUP CT.: INSURERS&nbsp;REQUIRED TO NOTIFY&nbsp;PUC OF POLICY EXPIRATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(853 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>ATTORNEY NOT ENTITLED&nbsp;TO LOSS OF INCOME FROM&nbsp;THEFT OF EVIDENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(592 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>MI APP. CT. UPHOLDS&nbsp;$374,319 AWARD TO BUSINESS&nbsp;FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(341 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>VA HIGH CT.: SEPARATE&nbsp;POLICY LIMIT APPLIES TO&nbsp;EACH MOLESTATION VICTIM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>MO APP. CT. FINDS&nbsp;INSURER NOT LIABLE&nbsp;FOR MOLESTATION JUDGMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(307 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>MO CT. APP.: RES JUDICATA&nbsp;BARS EX-DIRECTORS'&nbsp;SUIT AGAINST INSURER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS
CARRIER WIN ON LATE
NOTICE GROUNDS

     A company that waited 14 months to notify its insurers that
it might be partly liable for cleaning a hazardous waste site
cannot claim insurance coverage, the Illinois Appellate Court,
First District stated in an opinion published Dec. 14.
Industrial Coatings Group Inc. v. American Motorists Insurance
Co. et al., No. 1-94-1491 (IL App. Ct., 1st Dist.).

     Industrial Coatings Group Inc. learned in February 1986 that
it faced potential liability for hazardous waste contamination at
a site in Griffith, IN, where Industrial's predecessor had sent
used machinery solvent for processing and return.  The appellate
panel wrote that the policyholder should have notified its
carriers at that time.

     The predecessor Joanna Western Mills Co. sent dirty solvent
to the American Chemical Services site from 1959 to 1985.  In
operating the site for more than 25 years, American Chemical
buried more than 20,000 drums containing hazardous materials at
the site.  Many of the drums leaked or were punctured while other
hazardous materials were pumped into retention ponds on the site.

     After testing by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
the American Chemical site was designated as a Superfund site.
Industrial Coatings' insurance policies provided that in the
event of an occurrence, written notice to the insurers giving the
particulars was required "as soon as practicable."  The insured,
however, did not give written notice to the insurers until more
than 14 months after it had received the EPA's letter requesting
voluntary participation in the site cleanup.

     The Cook County Circuit Court found that Industrial Coatings
gave its insurance companies late notice, that it thereby
breached a condition precedent to coverage under its insurance
policies and that the company therefore had no right to obtain
coverage for the pollution claim which had been asserted against
it.

     The state appellate panel affirmed, finding that the delay
in notice precluded coverage.  "Under Illinois law, a delay of
even a few months in giving notice breaches the policy as a
matter of law, defeats coverage and justifies the entry of
summary judgment for the insurance company," the court said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

SD NY DENIES CARRIERS
JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF
COVERAGE, LOST POLICY

     U.S. District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of the Southern
District of New York on Nov. 22 denied summary judgment to
Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.
on a policyholder's coverage demands stemming from environmental
liabilities at a North Carolina site.  Unimax Corp. et al. v.
Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. et al., No. 92 Civ. 6115 (KTD)
(SD NY).

     The judge rejected the carriers' contention that North
Carolina law should be construed so as to find that no
occurrences triggering coverage happened during their policy
periods.

     In 1968, the insured Unimax Corp. purchased for its
subsidiary JFD Electronics Corp. a television antenna production
facility sited in Oxford, NC.  JFD leased the site and operated
the facility over the ensuing 11 years.  In 1979, JFD sublet the
site to an affiliate of Ventura Electronics Corp., which also
assumed the facility's operations.  The following year, JFD
purchased the remainder interest from Unimax and conveyed the
site to Ventura.

     In 1986, volatile organic compounds were discovered in the
site's groundwater; the state and the EPA commenced a cleanup the
following year.  In 1988, Ventura's successor brought a
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act cost recovery action against Unimax and JFD.  The
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) notified the insureds that
they were regarded as potentially responsible parties with
respect to the site in the fall of 1989; the policyholders
asserted they first learned of the contamination in August 1988.

     That same month, the insureds tendered notice to both
Lumbermens and Liberty Mutual; both carriers refused coverage.
Lumbermens had written Unimax and JFD umbrella comprehensive
catastrophe liability coverage over 1969-1971; the insureds
asserted that Lumbermens had also issued them primary policies
covering 1968-1972.  Liberty Mutual issued the policyholders
primary comprehensive general liability (CGL) coverage over 1975-
1979.

     Judge Duffy first considered the insurers' bid for summary
judgment on the ground that under North Carolina law, an
occurrence does not take place until discovery of contamination,
and that such discovery did not occur within the policy period.
The insureds rejoined that New York law should be applied, and
that an injury-in-fact trigger should be recognized.

     The court preliminarily concluded that no conflict existed
between the laws of the interested states.  "This case," wrote
the judge, "is centered on insurance policies -- i.e. contracts -
- and the appropriate conflicts analysis begins with each State's
contract laws.  New York and North Carolina apply the same rules
for contract interpretation."

     In looking to the policy language, the court found that it
"clearly states that an occurrence takes place if physical injury
results during the policy period."  The judge further noted that
under either state's precedents, "contamination is deemed to be
physical injury."  The court further rejected Liberty Mutual's
contention that the insureds never responded to its summary
judgment with evidence demonstrating that contamination occurred
within the policy period.  "The focus of Liberty Mutual's motion
was that contamination was not considered under the law to be
property damage until the discovery of the damage," Judge Duffy
stated.

     The court then considered the policyholder's cross-motion
for summary judgment on the issue of the carriers' duty to
defend.  The judge granted the motion as to Lumbermens, finding
the insurer to have made no argument beyond the trigger issue.
Liberty Mutual's policy contained a pollution exclusion clause,
which the insurer argued would void coverage if New York law were
applicable to the dispute.

     On the present facts, however, the court noted that "an
endorsement to the contract specifically deleted the pollution
exclusion clause with regards to operations in North Carolina.
If New York law governs these policies, that endorsement was
misleading and created, at least, an ambiguity [that] must be
construed in favor of the insured."

     The court ultimately refused the insureds judgment against
Liberty Mutual, finding the insurer had raised a genuine of
material fact as to the plaintiffs' knowledge of their claims.
JFD had knowledge of its potential liabilities as early as 1972,
Liberty Mutual had argued, and therefore its notice was untimely.

     The policyholders claimed that Liberty Mutual waived its
late notice defense by not raising the defense in its 1990
disclaimer of coverage; the carrier responded that it had
insufficient knowledge of the underlying facts until discovery
had commenced.  Judge Duffy denied the insureds summary judgment
on the waiver issue.

     The court lastly denied Lumbermens summary judgment with
respect to the two CGL policies it asserted were lost.  With
respect to the 1968-1971 policy (1ZL policy), the court noted
that the insureds proffered some 100 pages bearing the 1ZL number
that were turned over by Lumbermens during discovery.  "The only
pages known to be missing are two endorsements and the policy
jacket," wrote the court.  "I find it incredible that Lumbermens
would retain this file, which imposes liability, but lose the
documents that may have relieved Lumbermens of liability."  Judge
Duffy stated that liability would be measured according to the
terms of the policy as discovered in the insurer's files.

     As to the 1971-1972 policy (8ZL policy), the judge found
that the plaintiffs had demonstrated its existence, due to a
reference to it in Lumbermens' umbrella policy.  The court denied
the insureds summary judgment, however, finding that material
issues of fact remained concerning the 8ZL policy's content.

     Bruce Bienboim and Aidan Synnott of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,
Wharton & Garrison, New York, represent the insureds.

     Frank Torres of Evans, Orr, Pacelli, Norton & Laffan, P.C.,
New York; and Judith Fournie Helms, Catherine M. Connelly-Warren
and Katherine E. Tammaro of Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney &
Preiss, Chicago, represent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co.  Robert
L. Joyce of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, New York,
represents Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

NJ APP. CT.: CLEANUP
COVERAGE CASE TO PROCEED
IN BOTH NJ AND NY

     After granting leave to appeal to 76 insurers who challenged
the New Jersey Superior Court's refusal to stay or dismiss an
environmental cleanup coverage dispute, the New Jersey Superior
Court Appellate Division found that the trial court properly
refused to stay or dismiss the case even though an identical case
involving the same parties is pending in New York state court.
American Home Products et al. v. Adriatic Insurance Co. et al.,
No. A-5209-94T2 (NJ Super. Ct., App. Div.).

     In rejecting the insurers' argument that the trial court
erred in applying a forum non conveniens analysis in its decision
to allow the case to proceed, the appellate panel held that New
Jersey's interests in this case constituted sufficient special
equities to justify denying the comity-stay application.

     American Home Products (AHP), a Delaware corporation, is a
manufacturer and distributor of agricultural, food and healthcare
products.  In April 1991, AHP and its subsidiaries filed actions
in Delaware state court, seeking coverage for various government
and private actions stemming from contamination at 32 sites in 11
states.  One of these sites is located in New York; there are no
sites in Delaware.

     The New York action was filed on June 27, 1991, by Employers
Insurance of Wausau, which sought a declaration that it is not
obligated to provide coverage for contamination under its eight
excess policies.  Wausau named AHP and the remaining 76 insurers
as defendants.  AHP moved for dismissal of the New York action,
and 14 of the insurers moved for dismissal of the Delaware
action. The New York Supreme Court stayed AHP's motion pending
the outcome of the dismissal motion in the Delaware court.

     The Delaware court dismissed the action on forum non
conveniens grounds in November 1991.  Upon termination of the
case, the New York trial court dismissed as moot AHP's motion to
dismiss the New York action.

     On June 1, 1992, AHP filed an action in the Superior Court
of New Jersey, seeking declaratory relief against 80 insurance
companies.  Forty-three insurance companies are the appellants in
this appeal, which involves the same issues and the same parties
as the case pending in New York.  One month after this action was
filed, AHP moved to dismiss the New York action on forum non
conveniens grounds.  Wausau and other insurance companies opposed
AHP's motion and cross-moved, seeking an order enjoining AHP from
filing an action in any other district but New York.

     In December 1992, the New York Supreme Court dismissed the
action except as to a single New York site.  Several insurance
companies appealed, and in December 1994, the New York Supreme
Court Appellate Division reversed the dismissal, reinstating the
New York action in its entirety.  The appellate court did not
enjoin AHP from proceeding in New Jersey.

     Meanwhile, AHP moved its corporate headquarters from New
York to Madison, NJ.  Several of the insurers moved to dismiss or
stay the New Jersey action on the basis of comity and the entire-
controversy doctrine.  The New Jersey Superior court, however,
permitted the action to proceed, finding there were "special
equities" involved.  The court then granted the insurers' motion
for leave to appeal in June 1995.

     In refusing to stay or dismiss the action, the New Jersey
Superior Court noted that although an action involving the same
parties and similar issues is pending in New York, this does not
bar the New Jersey court's jurisdiction; however, the New Jersey
action can be stayed until the New York action is adjudicated.

     The trial court referred to the New Jersey Supreme Court's
decision in Yancoskie v. Delaware River Port Auth., 78 N.J. 321
(1978), which held that when an identical action is pending in
another state, the court "which first acquires jurisdiction has
precedence in the absence of special equities."

     In the appeal, the insurers contended that the court "made a
clear error of law" when it did not stay the case pending the New
York action.  They further maintained that the court erred in
applying a forum non conveniens analysis, which relieved AHP of
its burden to prove special equities to avoid a stay based on
comity.  Under a forum non conveniens application, the defendant
must prove that serious inconvenience would occur if the case is
tried in the plaintiff's chosen forum.  Under this application,
it is also required of the defendant to prove that the plaintiff
will not suffer hardship if the case is transferred.

     The insurers sought to have the case dismissed on comity
grounds, and that AHP needs to prove the existence of "special
equities."  However, the appellate panel noted that the forum non
conveniens factors such as convenience, fairness and connections
with the respective forums can be examined in a comity analysis
to determine whether making a stay in New Jersey would be unjust
or unfair to the interests of the parties.

     In affirming the trial court's holding, the panel noted that
1) AHP was formerly headquartered in New Jersey, 2) 10 of the
sites allegedly covered by the policies are located in New
Jersey, 3) six of the defendant insurers are headquartered in New
Jersey, 4) one-third of the estimated $89 million in cleanup
damages may be attributable to New Jersey sites, 5) New Jersey
law will probably be applied to the coverage issues regarding the
New Jersey sites, and 6) the New Jersey case was "well along" and
discovery has been proceeding for the past two years.  The panel
also found that AHP has a "legitimate presence" in New Jersey.

     "We think the judge fairly and within his sound discretion
concluded that New Jersey's interests in this case constituted
sufficient special equities to justify denying the comity-stay
application," held the panel.  "These factors would be relevant
to a forum non analysis and would have justified a denial of a
motion to dismiss...," the panel continued. "However, we find no
abuse of discretion in also considering these factors as "special
equities" for comity-stay purposes."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

SECOND CIRCUIT RULES IN
DISPUTE OVER NATIONAL
GYPSUM COVERAGE

     In a lengthy opinion issued Dec. 13, a panel of the Second
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled on numerous issues affecting
the scope of insurance coverage available to Asbestos Claims
Management Corp. (ACMC), formerly known as National Gypsum Co.,
for asbestos-related personal injury and property damage claims.
Stonewall Insurance Co. v. Asbestos Claims Management Corp. et
al., Nos. 93-7314(L) et al. (2nd Cir.);  see Insurance Industry
LR, July 23, 1992.

     Some of the rulings -- those concerning trigger of coverage,
the expected or intended exclusions, and coverage for settlements
paid by National Gypsum through the Center for Claims Resolution
-- appear to favor ACMC.  Other rulings -- those concerning the
allocation of liability for periods during which National Gypsum
was uninsured and the calculation of deductibles for property
damage claims -- appear to favor the insurers.

     Some of the panel's rulings apply only to coverage for
asbestos personal injury claims.  In particular, the panel:

--      ruled that the district court correctly determined that
under applicable New York and Texas law, the occurrence-based
policies sold to National Gypsum could be triggered throughout a
gradual disease process where injury can be shown by a
preponderance of the evidence to be occurring at each point in
that process;

--      affirmed a jury finding against Commercial Union
Insurance Co. that injury occurred continuously from first
exposure through claim or death for all asbestos diseases;

--      upheld a trial court finding applicable to other insurers
that injury occurred continuously from exposure through
manifestation for non-cancer cases but not for cancer cases, and
remanded for further consideration of the court's finding with
regard to cancer claims "in view of the ambiguity in the District
Court's application of the injury-in-fact approach to cancer
claims";

--      upheld the district court's allocation to National Gypsum
of the pro rata share of liability attributable to those periods
during which National Gypsum was uninsured;

--      affirmed a district court ruling that National Gypsum did
not expect or intend bodily injuries from its products; and

--      upheld district court rulings that payments made by
National Gypsum through the Asbestos Claims Facility and the
Center for Claims Resolution in settlement of asbestos claims
were reasonable and are covered by the policies sold to National
Gypsum.

     Some of the court's rulings apply only to coverage for
asbestos property damage claims.  Specifically, the panel ruled
that:

--      the costs of removing and replacing asbestos products
from buildings are properly considered "property damage" as the
term is used in the policies;

--      the district court properly determined that National
Gypsum could not establish by a preponderance of the evidence
that property damage was occurring continuously or at any given
point following installation of National Gypsum's building
materials; and

--      the district court erred in holding that, for purposes of
"per occurrence" deductible provisions in the policies, all the
asbestos property damage claims arose out of a single occurrence
-- National Gypsum's decision to manufacture and sell asbestos-
containing building materials.  Instead, each installation of
National Gypsum's products was a separate occurrence, requiring
the application of another deductible, the panel said.

     The Insurance Environmental Litigation Association (IELA), a
trade association of 20 major insurers, applauded the rulings
requiring National Gypsum to assume a share of liability for
periods during which it was uninsured and requiring application
of another deductible for each installation of National Gypsum
asbestos building products.

     The Second Circuit's decision "properly limits insurers'
liability to the their fair share of the risk," said Thomas W.
Brunner, counsel to IELA and a partner at Wiley, Rein & Fielding
in Washington, DC, in a prepared statement.

     "The Court's formula enforces a policyholder's conscious
business decision to forgo insurance and rejects the
policyholder's attempt to obtain a windfall of coverage for its
uninsured periods," he added.

     The court ruled in an action brought by Stonewall Insurance
Co. for a declaratory judgment that it has no duty to indemnify
National Gypsum for property damage claims arising from asbestos
products made by the company between 1931 and 1981.  The action
also named other National Gypsum insurers.  National Gypsum later
counterclaimed for coverage of asbestos personal injury claims
against it.  All of the policies at issue in the action are
occurrence-based, that is, they are triggered by personal injury
or property damage which occurs during a policy period.

     Commercial Union opted for a jury trial to resolve its
coverage dispute with National Gypsum.  All of the other insurers
opted for a bench trial.  After the two trials, the district
court entered a series of partial declaratory judgments which
determined coverage for asbestos personal injury claims under
Commercial Union policies involved in the jury trial, determined
coverage for asbestos bodily injury claims under insurance
policies involved in the bench trial, and determined coverage for
asbestos property damage claims.  The district court also
certified its rulings for interlocutory appeal under 28 U.S.C.
Section 1292(b).

     Asbestos Claims Management Corp. assumed liability for
National Gypsum's asbestos liabilities in the company's Chapter
11 bankruptcy proceedings.  It is represented in the action by
Thomas M. Reiter, Donald E. Seymour and Gail Kamnitz with
Kirkpatrick & Lockhart of Pittsburgh.

     Twelve different insurance companies participated in the
proceedings in the Second Circuit.  Amicus briefs were filed by
Mid-American Legal Foundation, Insurance Environmental Litigation
Association, Armstrong World Industries, Inc., The Flintkote Co.,
Western MacArthur Co. and Owens-Illinois, Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

CA HIGH CT. RULES
SURETIES NOT EXEMPT
FROM PROP. 103

     The California high court ruled Dec. 14 that the surety
industry is not exempt from Proposition 103, a 1990 act imposing
a 20 % rate rollback on premiums, because the exemption did not
further the purpose of the initiative.  Amwest Surety Insurance
Co. v. Wilson et al., No. SO37405 (CA Sup. Ct.).

     "It is true that excluding some forms of insurance would
allow the commissioner to focus greater resources upon the
remaining forms of insurance...but this premise cannot further
the purposes of Proposition 103 because voters did not limit its
provisions to a few forms of insurance of greatest concern to the
public...," the panel held, affirming a state appeals court
decision.

     In 1988, California passed Proposition 103, or the Insurance
Rate Reduction and Reform Act, which imposed a rate rollback, and
required any subsequent rate increase be approved by the state
insurance commissioner.  The proposition states that it may not
be amended by the state legislature "except to further its
purposes."

     Two years later, the California legislature enacted Section
1861.135 of the state insurance code, thereby exempting surety
insurance from Proposition 103.

     On Nov. 9, 1988 -- one week after Proposition 103 was
enacted -- Amwest Surety Insurance Co. filed a suit against
Governor Pete Wilson and Insurance Commissioner Chuck Quackenbush
in Los Angeles Superior Court, challenging the validity of
Proposition 103 as applied to surety insurance.  In 1990, Voter
Revolt, the organization that drafted Proposition 103, intervened
in the suit to challenge the validity of Section 1861.135,
asserting that it did not further the purposes of
Proposition 103.  The superior court disagreed, finding the
section valid.  Voters Revolt and the insurance commissioner
appealed.

     A divided California Court of Appeal panel reversed the
trial court's opinion, holding that Section 1861.135 was, in
fact, invalid.  The panel noted that under the state
constitution, the legislature cannot amend an initiative statute
without voter approval unless the statute specifies otherwise.
The panel found Proposition 103 permits legislative amendments
that further the purposes of the initiative, but that Section
1861.135 did not serve such purposes.  Amwest appealed to the
state Supreme Court.

               The high court agreed with the appeals panel, holding that
"exempting surety insurance from the rate rollback provision of
Proposition 103 [did not] further the purposes of the initiative
for the reason that a rate reduction was unnecessary in the case
of surety insurance."

     Amwest and its amicus curiae, Surety Company of the Pacific,
argued that the high court is limited to Proposition 103's
express statement of purpose, which is to protect customers,
encourage competition, and ensure that rates are fair and
affordable.  The panel disagreed, referring to California Housing
Finance Agency v. Patitucci, 22 Cal.3d 171, 177, which held that
"when a constitutional amendment is subject to varying
interpretations, evidence of its purpose may be drawn from many
sources."

     Amwest further contended that clarification of Proposition
103 is needed, because the materials about the proposition which
was distributed to the voters did not mention surety insurance
and did not include a summary of Section 1851.  Thus, Amwest
argued, the voters probably did not understand that the
proposition applied to surety insurance, and that "it would
further the purposes of the proposition to make it say what the
voters thought it meant."

     The panel struck down the surety's argument, holding that it
is "merely a collateral attack upon [the proposition] which has
been adopted by a majority vote of the people who must be assumed
to have voted intelligently...."  The panel further noted that
the insurance regulations set forth prior to the passage of the
proposition applied to surety insurance, and that the initiative
"altered the substance of those regulations, but did not purport
to alter the scope."  Thus, the panel concluded, Proposition 103
applied to surety insurance.

     Amwest then maintained that exempting surety insurance
furthers the purposes of the proposition because the rates for
surety insurance "have long been stable and reasonable" and it
was thus unnecessary to apply the provisions to surety insurance.
Once again, the panel disagreed.

     "If the rates for surety insurance already were fair and
reasonable, the rate rollback might, in large part, be avoided,"
held the panel.  "Exempting surety insurance from this provision
does not further [the proposition's] purpose."

     The panel added that exempting surety insurance from the
requirement that the commissioner approve any rate change prior
to its use likewise fails to further the provision's purpose,
because the requirement is to prevent future abuses in setting
rates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

CA CT. APP.: LENDER
MUST BEAR LOSS FROM
PHONY PREMIUM FINANCING

     Losses stemming from a fraudulent insurance premium
financing transaction arranged by an agent which is not
authorized by the insured must be borne by the lender, not the
insurer, the California Court of Appeal, First District, ruled
Dec. 13, upholding a state Superior Court decision.  California
Indemnity Insurance Premium Finance Co. v. Fireman's Fund
Insurance Co., No. A068421 (CA Ct. App.).

     The panel found that because the transaction was not
authorized by the insured, the lender must bear the loss under
the California Insurance Code.

     In 1992, an insurance agent used unauthorized premium
financing transactions in an attempt to convert funds to his
personal use.  The agent signed the premium financing documents
"on behalf" of the insureds without obtaining their
authorization, then kept the cash proceeds of the unearned
premium without paying the required monthly payments to the
lender, California Indemnity Insurance Premium Finance Co. (CII).

     When CII tried to cancel the insured's policies, issued by
Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., it discovered that the insureds did
not seek premium financing, and that the policies were already
paid in full by the insureds.  Thus, Fireman's Fund refused to
cancel the policies.  Meanwhile, the agent filed a bankruptcy
petition, leaving a $36,000 loss to be absorbed by either CII or
Fireman's Fund.

     The matter was tried in Marin County, CA, Superior Court,
which held that CII must bear the loss.  CII appealed.

     The California Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the
trial court, referring to Pacific Auto Insurance Co. v. Wolff,
which noted that Section 2309 of the California Civil Code, which
was amended in 1973, provides that "an insured could not escape
from a premium financing agreement, which the insurance agent had
been orally authorized to sign, merely because the insured did
not give that agent written authorization to cancel the policy
thus financed."  (Pacific Auto Insurance Co. v. Wolff, [1977] 72
Cal.App.3d 537, 541.)

     However, the appellate panel noted that Section 2309 does
not allow insurance agents to make legally binding premium
financing arrangements which were not authorized by the insured;
rather, it allows the insured to authorize another party to
execute the right to cancel.  "In light of [this], we are not
impressed by CII's argument that the implicit intention of the
1973 amendment was that authorization by the insured was no
longer necessary," held the panel.

     CII maintained, however, that the Doctrine of Latent
Equities provides that "where an assignee purchases an assignment
for value in good faith...the assignee takes the claim free from
equities of all others except the original obligor."

     The panel refused to apply the doctrine to this case, noting
there was no valid assignment of rights to CII; thus, there is no
question of latent equities following a valid assignment.

     CII also argued that the trial court erred in its decision
because the agent received the funds "in a fiduciary capacity"
under Section 1733 and was guilty of theft.  While the panel
agreed with this conclusion, it dismissed CII's argument, holding
that the agent received the funds from CII as proceeds from a
fraudulent financing arrangement, not from the insureds as
premium payments.

     The panel also found CII's additional arguments to be
without merit.

     Arguing for CII were Todd F. Haines and Joshua N. Willis of
the Law Offices of Raymond A. Greenberg, Calabasas, CA.  Arguing
for Fireman's Fund was Arthur D. Levy of Ewell & Levy, San
Francisco, CA; and Douglas Cole Grijalva of Fireman's Fund,
Novato, CA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

D AK: INSURER CANNOT
RESCIND POLICY BASED
ON BOUNCED CHECK

     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 22 that
an insurer is obligated to pay an uninsured motorist claim even
though the policyholder's premium payment check was not honored
by her bank, because the policy did not expressly provide that
coverage would be resinded in such a situation. Davis v.
Criterion Casualty Co., No. 94-36141 (9th Cir.).

     Plaintiff Mary Davis' car insurance policy with Criterion
Casualty Co. was canceled in Dec. 1992, when Davis failed to make
a premium payment.  After purchasing a new car, Davis went to
Criterion to reinstate her policy.  She paid the premium by check
on January 13, 1993, which was deposited by the insurer.

     On January 28, Davis was hit by an uninsured driver.
Unfortunately, on the same day of the accident, Davis' check
bounced.   Criterion mailed Davis a notice of cancellation and
refused to pay her claim.  Davis filed suit against the insurer
in Alaska state court, seeking uninsured motorist coverage.
Criterion removed the case to U.S. District Court for the
District of Alaska based on diversity of citizenship.  Both
parties moved for summary judgement.

     Criterion maintained that because Davis' initial policy was
not immediately reinstated, the second policy was not a "renewal"
of the first policy, but rather a new policy.  Thus, the insurer
argued that it had the right to rescind the new policy because
Davis' check did not clear.

     The district court granted Criterion summary judgment,
finding no Alaska statute precluded the insurer's "common law
right of rescission," and that the Alaska Supreme Court would
find that the policy in this case was properly rescinded.  Davis
appealed.

     The Ninth Circuit panel reversed the lower court's grant of
summary judgment.

     First, the panel found that the second, disputed policy
explicitly provided that a service fee of $10 would be added to
the insured's account if her check were not honored by her bank.
"This language clearly signals that the penalty incurred for
bouncing a check is a $10 fee, not the absence of coverage," the
panel noted.

     The panel concluded that the facts of this case favor Davis
more strongly than the "intermediate doctrine" outlined by John
A. Appleman's Insurance Law and Practice, which states that if an
insurer accepts a check as payment of a premium and issues a
receipt, it waives its right to rescind the policy even if the
check is dishonored.

     "Under these circumstances," the panel held, "the honoring
of Davis' check was not a condition precedent to Criterion's
provision of insurance.  Accordingly...there was coverage until
cancellation."

     The panel noted that Criterion could have protected itself
by simply providing in the policy that no coverage would exist if
the insured's check is not honored.

     The panel also found that Criterion did not meet Alaska's
20-day notice requirement for cancellation when it rescinded
Davis' policy.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

DE SUPER. CT.: NONPARTY
INSURER OBLIGATED FOR
UNDERINSURED COVERAGE

     An insurer is obligated to make underinsurance coverage
payments to a policyholder after a state Superior Court
arbitrator determined that her injuries were caused by a third
party, even though the insurer was not a party to the
arbitration, ruled the Delaware Supreme Court, thereby reversing
an opinion by the state Superior Court.  Sutch v. State Farm
Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., No. 183 (DE Super. Ct.).

     In its Dec. 28 opinion, the court found that the insurer had
ample notification of the policyholder's suit against the third
party and thus would have been able to defend its interests.

     Deborah Sutch was injured in a three-car accident on Dec. 5,
1991.  Sutch filed a negligence suit in Delaware Superior Court
against a third-party tortfeasor.  After arbitration, the trial
court found in favor of Sutch for $100,000.  Sutch's carrier paid
half of the award, which was the limit of the third-party's
liability coverage.

     Sutch demanded the remaining $50,000 from her underinsured
motorist insurer, State Farm Mutual Insurance Co.  When State
Farm refused, Sutch filed suit against the insurer in Delaware
Superior Court, contending that she was entitled to the sum under
Delaware insurance law, and that the collateral estoppel bar in
Delaware Superior Court Civil Rule 16.1(j) "does not entitle
State Farm to relitigate the issues of liability and damages."

     Sutch and State Farm then filed cross-motions for summary
judgment.

     After an arbitration hearing, the trial court granted
summary judgment to State Farm, holding that the judgment entered
against Dale was not binding because State Farm was not a party
to the underlying suit.  Sutch appealed to the Delaware Supreme
Court, contending that the superior court erred in holding that
State Farm had shown prejudice resulting from Sutch's failure to
comply with the notice provisions of her policy.

     The court reversed the decision of the trial court, holding
that Rule 16.1(j) is not applicable to this case because the
parties did not request a trial de novo after the arbitration
decision became final.

     The court noted that Rule 16.1(j) expressly provides that
when an arbitrator's award is entered as a judgment, "after the
time for requesting a trial de novo has expired, the judgment
shall have the same force and effect as a judgment of the
superior court in a civil action except it shall not be subject
to appeal."

     Regarding the issue of collateral estoppel, the court held
that although State Farm was not a party to the arbitration, it
was notified of the decision a month before the entry of judgment
in the superior court.  "Thus, State Farm had the opportunity to
intervene in the proceedings between Dale and Sutch to protect
its interests, once it was notified of the demand for payment of
underinsurance benefits," noted the court, holding that the
arbitration decision was binding upon the insurer.

     In addition, the court disagreed with State Farm's
alternative argument that Sutch did not notify State Farm of her
suit against the third party until the arbitrator's decision was
rendered, as required by her policy.
               "This court has held that the lack of notification to a
carrier does not necessarily relieve the carrier of making
payments pursuant to the policy," noted the court.  "When the
insured fails to comply with a notification provision, the
carrier has the burden of showing it was thereby prejudiced."

     The court found that because State Farm had notice of the
suit, it did not show such prejudice.

     Arguing for Sutch was David H. Erisman of Erisman & Curtin,
Wilmington, DE.  Arguing for State Farm was Francis J. Jones Jr.
and Eileen K. Anderson of Morris, James, Hitchens & Williams,
Wilmington, DE.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MI CT. APP. ALLOWS
DEPOSITION OF LEGISLATIVE
AIDE IN INSURANCE CASE

     A state Senate aide must give deposition testimony
concerning disclosure of confidential information about an
investigation by the state Insurance Bureau, a Michigan Court of
Appeals panel ruled Nov. 14, holding that the aide is not
shielded by the Speech and Debate provision of the state
Constitution because the questions do not concern matters within
the legislative sphere.  Michigan Education Special Services
Association v. Insurance Commissioner et al., No. 171303 (MI
Ct. App.).

     The nonprofit Michigan Education Special Services
Association is a third-party administrator for a teachers union's
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health plan; the union is politically
active, primarily on behalf of Democrats.  The association sued
the state insurance commissioner in Ingham County, MI Circuit
Court, alleging that an Insurance Bureau investigation was
politically motivated.

     Judge James R. Giddings issued a temporary restraining order
prohibiting the bureau from releasing any information about the
investigation.  However, a Republican state senator learned of
the investigation and issued a press release announcing that the
bureau would soon investigate the association.

     Senate aide John Prange was deposed but refused to disclose
how the senator's office learned of the investigation.  Prange
contended he cannot be constitutionally compelled to answer
questions regarding the content of statements the senator made to
him because they were made in the confines of the senator's
office and not disclosed to the public. Judge Giddings disagreed
with Prange and granted the association's motion to compel
discovery.

     In an opinion by Judge Kathleen Jansen, the Michigan Court
of Appeals panel rejected Prange's argument that the information
sought is privileged under the Speech or Debate Clause of the
Michigan Constitution.  The communication between Prange and the
senator in the senator's office was not within the sphere of
legitimate legislative activity because it related to an
administrative agency's actions, the panel held.

     Even if the senator had been involved in introducing
legislation concerning health care coverage for teachers, the
questions asked of Prange were not an integral part of
legislative deliberations, noted the panel.

     On the insurance commissioner's cross-appeal, the panel
declined to overturn the temporary restraining order against
releasing information about the investigation to the public.
However, it found the commissioner may raise the issue on remand.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

INSURER NOT LIABLE
FOR FAILURE TO SETTLE
MALPRACTICE SUIT

     An HMO's malpractice insurer is not liable for more than its
$2 million policy limits although it refused to settle for that
limit until jury deliberations began, a federal judge in Missouri
ruled Nov. 3, holding that the insurer's obligation to tender the
policy limits at the time of negotiation was not certain enough
to make its insistence on a release from the HMO wrongful.
Humana Kansas City Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company,
No. 93-1248-CV-W-6 (WD MO).

     In 1989, Humana Kansas City was sued in Jackson County, MO,
Circuit Court for obstetrical malpractice.  It sought defense and
indemnification under its $2 million professional liability
policy from Continental Casualty.  Humana initially assessed the
settlement value of the case at $100,000, but the patient
demanded a settlement for the policy limits.

     As the malpractice trial opened and started to go poorly for
the HMO, Humana demanded Continental tender its policy limits;
later in the trial, a lawyer predicted a verdict of about
$2 million and a $1.5 million settlement value.  The patient then
offered to accept $3.25 million by a specified deadline or
$4 million after the close of evidence.  Continental refused to
tender its policy limits unless Humana waived indemnification for
any amount above $2 million; Humana agreed, allegedly only if the
case were settled, not if it went to verdict.

     Before the jury returned its $13 million verdict, the
parties settled for $5 million.  Humana then filed a
diversity-based complaint in U.S. District Court for the Western
District of Missouri alleging bad-faith refusal to settle.

     Senior Judge Howard F. Sachs granted summary judgment in
favor of Continental.  First, he found sufficient evidence that
the parties had mutually agreed that Continental would tender the
policy limits in exchange for Humana's release of any
indemnification claim, even if Humana had no other choice under
the circumstances.

     Furthermore, the judge found the insurer's obligation to
tender the policy limits had not been established at the time of
the negotiations because there had not yet been a verdict of at
least $2 million.  As a result, the insurer's agreement to do so
furnished adequate consideration to support Humana's release, he
said.

     Next, the judge rejected Humana's argument that a release
from liability for a bad-faith claim is not a proper subject for
contract and violates public policy.

     Although the estimated settlement value of the case began to
rise from less than $2 million once the trial began,
Continental's obligation to tender $2 million was not so certain
that its demand for a release was wrongful, Judge Sachs held.  He
also rejected Humana's duress claim, saying any economic exigency
that existed cannot be attributed to a wrongful act by the
insurer.

     John E. Turner of Kansas City, MO, and Donald W. Vasos of
Kansas City, KS, represented Humana.  James D. Griffin and
M. Courtney Koger of Overland Park, KS, represented Continental.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

CA SUP CT.: INSURERS
REQUIRED TO NOTIFY
PUC OF POLICY EXPIRATION

     A divided California Supreme Court panel ruled Dec. 29 that
a highway carrier insurer is liable for an accident that occurred
nine years after the policy expired, because the insurer failed
to provide the state public utilities commission with the
required 30 day cancellation notice after the policy's
expiration.

     The panel found, however, that an insurer is entitled to
seek reimbursement from the carrier under the public utilities
commission's regulatory scheme.

     In 1989, an Amtrak train and a truck owned by Tab
Transportation, Inc. caused three deaths and several injuries,
resulting in $6 million in legal claims against Tab for wrongful
death, personal injury, and property damage against Tab.  Tab
sought recovery under three insurance policies.  Two of the three
insurers contributed a total of $1.6 million to a global
settlement.  Transamerica Insurance Co., however, did not
participate in the settlement.

     Transamerica filed an action in May 1992 for declaratory
judgment in the San Francisco County Superior Court, asserting
that it was not liable for damages under the $500,000 one-year
liability policy it issued to Tab for the period between February
1, 1980, and February 1, 1981.

     The Public Utilities Commission (PUC) of California requires
that liability policies issued to highway carriers may only be
canceled after 30 days' written notice is submitted to the PUC.
Transamerica did not give the PUC the required notice of
cancellation when Tab failed to renew the policy. Although Tab
replaced the Transamerica policy with a new policy issued by
another insurer, neither party notified the PUC of the
cancellation of the Transamerica policy.

     Transamerica asserted that if it were liable for damages, it
was entitled under PUC regulations to be reimbursed by Tab for
any payments made under the policy.  Tab filed a cross-complaint
contending that it was entitled to coverage under the policy
because Transamerica had filed with the PUC expressly stating
that its policy was effective in 1980 until canceled.  The trial
court granted Tab's motion for summary adjudication on this
basis.

     The case was tried on the remaining issue of whether
Transamerica was entitled to reimbursement by Tab.  The trial
court ruled in favor of the insurer, referring to a PUC
endorsement attached to the Transamerica policy providing for Tab
to reimburse Transamerica "for any payment made as the result of
obligations arising under the endorsement."

     Both parties appealed.  Transamerica challenged the trial
court's summary adjudication in favor of Tab on the coverage
issue, and Tab cross-appealed on the issue of Transamerica's
right to reimbursement.  The California Court of Appeals reversed
on the coverage issue, concluding that the Transamerica policy
had, in fact, expired on Feb. 1, 1981 and that Transamerica had
no obligation to give written notice of cancellation to the PUC.
Tab filed a petition for review in the California Supreme Court,
which was granted.

     The high court panel reversed the appeals court's
determination, referring to Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v. Allstate
Ins. Co., supra, 234 Cal.App.3d, which held that a 30 day notice
of cancellation submitted to the PUC is required before a policy
covering a highway carrier is terminated.

     "In addition to providing an efficient means for the PUC to
administer the financial responsibility requirements imposed on
highway carriers, the policy on file with the PUC serves as
assurance that the public is protected...," noted the panel.
"These important considerations far outweigh the slight burden
imposed by the statute on an insurer of providing the PUC with 30
days' written notice of cancellation."

               On the issue of whether Transamerica is entitled to
reimbursement by Tab for payment of damages resulting from the
accident, the panel found that the regulatory scheme of the PUC
allows highway carriers to pay damages to the public, but
prevents the carriers from "reaping an undeserved windfall" by
allowing the insurer to seek reimbursement from the carrier.

     However, the panel noted that if the carrier is insolvent
and cannot reimburse the insurer, the risk of loss falls on the
insurer.

The Dissenting Opinions
     Judge Armand Arabian and Judge Marvin Baxter dissented with
the majority.  "I agree with the holding of the Court of Appeal
on the coverage issue," Judge Baxter wrote, "and would affirm the
judgment of that court.  Since the Court of Appeal determined the
issue of coverage in favor of Transamerica, it did not reach or
address the further issue of Transamerica's right to
reimbursement under the terms of the standard form endorsement.
I would likewise refrain."

     Judge Baxter noted in a similar case that the Ninth Circuit
U.S. Court of Appeals found a distinction between "non-renewal"
and "expiration" of a policy, and held that notice is only
required in the event of cancellation, not expiration.

     Judge Arabian agreed with Judge Baxter on the issue of
reimbursement, but added that although Transamerica

     "The reimbursement 'consolation' plainly and unjustly
ignores the reality that resort to expired insurance coverage
will only be necessary if the insured...is insolvent.  If for
this reason an injured claimant cannot recover full damages, an
indemnitee insurer obviously will fare no better," Judge Arabian
contended.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

ATTORNEY NOT ENTITLED
TO LOSS OF INCOME FROM
THEFT OF EVIDENCE

     A personal injury attorney is not entitled to recover
damages resulting from loss of income after $433 worth of
evidence he was planning to use in court was stolen from his
office, because he could not show his practice was suspended or
harmed by the theft, the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals
ruled Dec. 29, upholding a California federal court decision.
Winters v. State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. et al., No. 93-56412
(9th Cir.).

     Jack Winters was representing a man who was injured while
using an electric-powered handsaw purchased from J.C. Penney,
Inc.  Winters purchased five handsaws to aid in arguing his case,
and kept them in his office.  Unfortunately, they were stolen
from the office and never recovered.  The court ruled in favor of
J.C. Penney.

     Winters submitted claims for theft of the saws and lost
income to his business insurer, State Farm Fire and Casualty Co.
The insurer paid Winters $433, the cash value of the saws, but
denied his loss of income claim.

     Winters filed a claim in the San Diego County Superior Court
against State Farm, alleging breach of contract.  State Farm
removed the action to U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of California and moved for partial summary judgment.

     The district court granted summary judgment to the insurer,
holding that the business personal property loss provision of
Winters' policy "covers only the value of the property involved,
and does not cover the insured's potential legal liability to
third parties in contract or in tort."  The court concluded that
Winters' recovery was limited to the cash value of the saws.

     The lower court further determined that Winters failed to
demonstrate that the theft of the saws prevented him from
continuing to practice law, and that Winters' claim did not
constitute recoverable "extra expenses" because the losses were
not sustained during a "period of restoration," as required by
the policy.

     Winters appealed, contending that the court erred in
awarding summary judgment because the value of the saws is a
disputed issue of material fact.  Moreover, he argued that the
term "legally liable" is ambiguous.

     The Ninth Circuit panel affirmed the district court's
decision, finding that courts interpreting policy language nearly
identical to the State Farm policy held that coverage is only
provided for the cash value of the property -- not for liability
to third parties.

     In addition, the panel found that the personal property
coverage section of the policy requires property loss to be
adjusted on the basis of actual cash value.  Furthermore, if
"legally liable" were interpreted as Winters urged, the personal
property section "would be redundant of the business liability
portion of the policy," held the panel.

     The panel also determined that under the "limit of
liability" provision, Winters is only entitled to actual cash
value where he did not inform State Farm he had replaced the saws
within one year of the loss.

     Finally, the panel upheld the district court's holding that
any loss stemming from the theft is "speculative" because he
could not prove that he would have won the case if the saws had
not been stolen.  Furthermore, because Winters' practice was not
suspended, he is not entitled to losses under the policy, the
panel found.

     Arguing for Winters was Robert E. Adams of Winters &
Associates, San Diego, CA.  Arguing for State Farm was Stephen E.
Smith of Ramsay, Johnson & Klunder, Irvine, CA; and Peter
Abrahams and Holly R. Paul of Horvitz & Levy, Encino, CA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MI APP. CT. UPHOLDS
$374,319 AWARD TO BUSINESS
FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT

     The Michigan Court of Appeals Dec. 1 affirmed a $374,319
award against an insurer that failed to honor a policyholder's
business interruption claim, holding that the policyholder
presented sufficient evidence that its business losses were
caused by physical damage to its insured computer system.
Synchronized Design & Development Company Inc. v. Chubb Group of
Insurance Companies, No. 164340 (MI Ct. App.).

     Synchronized Design & Development Co. obtained a broad
insurance policy from Chubb Group.  The policy covered business
interruptions caused by damage to a covered risk.  After
lightning storms caused power surges and outages that damaged
Synchronized's computer equipment, the company filed a claim for
damage to the equipment and for several thousand dollars in
business interruption losses.

     A dispute arose over the amount of loss, and Chubb
eventually rejected the proof of loss after paying out $114,294.
A breach-of-contract complaint was filed in Macomb County, MI,
Circuit Court. Chubb counterclaimed to void the policy on the
basis of an allegedly falsified and inflated damage claim and to
recoup its $114,294.

     At trial before Judge Deborah A. Servitto, the jury awarded
Synchronized $291,777 and rejected Chubb's counterclaim for fraud
and false swearing.  Judge Servitto denied Synchronized's motion
for sanctions.  Judgment was entered for $374,319 plus costs and
post-judgment interest.

     The Michigan Court of Appeals panel affirmed in a per curiam
opinion, finding that Chubb was not entitled to a directed
verdict because the jury could reasonably conclude that the
physical damage to the computers caused the claimed business
loss.  Nor was there an abuse of discretion in the trial judge's
denial of post-trial defense motions on the fraud counterclaim,
the panel held.

     On procedural issues, the panel rejected defense challenges
to the admission of evidence from Synchronized's experts, to the
jury instructions on Chubb's counterclaim and to exclusion of
evidence about the tax fraud conviction of Synchronized's
majority shareholder.

     On cross-appeal, the panel upheld the denial of sanctions,
holding that Judge Servitto had not clearly erred in ruling that
the counterclaim was not frivolous.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

VA HIGH CT.: SEPARATE
POLICY LIMIT APPLIES TO
EACH MOLESTATION VICTIM

     A per-occurrence policy limit applies to each victim
molested by the same assailant even if the attacks were part of a
pattern of criminal conduct, the Virginia Supreme Court ruled
Dec. 13, setting the maximum exposure of an insurer at
$7 million, or $1 million per purported victim, rather than at
the $1 million policy limit collectively for all the victims.
S. F. (Doe) et al. v. West American Insurance Company, No. 950120
(VA Sup. Ct.).

     West American issued a business liability policy to the
owners of Harbor View Apartments, whose resident manager
allegedly molested seven children on multiple occasions.  The
policy provided up to $1 million coverage per occurrence.

     The victims sued the Harbor View owners on a theory of
negligent hiring, selection, retention and supervision of the
resident manager, who was previously convicted of child
molestation and was on parole when hired.

     West American filed a declaratory judgment complaint in City
of Norfolk Circuit Court.  Judge John E. Clarkson ruled the
insurer is at risk for only the $1 million policy limit because
the allegedly negligent hiring constituted only a single
occurrence.

     The state high court reversed in an opinion by Justice Leroy
R. Hassell Sr.

     The policy's definition of occurrence was ambiguous and thus
must be construed against West American and interpreted in a way
that grants rather than withholds coverage, the court held.  For
example, as written, an occurrence could be deemed as the
insureds' negligent hiring, or their negligent supervision or
their negligent retention of the resident manager, noted the
court.

     Moreover, the court held that although each victim was
molested more than once, those attacks constituted only one
occurrence per victim.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MO APP. CT. FINDS
INSURER NOT LIABLE
FOR MOLESTATION JUDGMENT

     A homeowners' insurer is not liable for a molestation-
related judgment because child sexual abuse is inherently
intentional misconduct, the Missouri Court of Appeals ruled
Dec. 5, rejecting a victim's attempt to garnish his assailant's
insurer.  M.A.B. et al. v. Nicely et al., Nos. WD 50462 &
WD 50528 (MO Ct. App.).

     The panel also ordered the victim to pay the insurer's
attorneys' fees and costs in the garnishment action and appeal.

     M.A.B. claimed he was sexually abused by Kenneth Nicely
while Nicely's homeowners' policy from Union Mutual Insurance Co.
was in effect.  The policy included bodily injury coverage but
excluded damage "which is expected or intended by the insured."

     M.A.B. won a $100,000 personal injury judgment against
Nicely, then brought a garnishment action against Union Mutual in
Jackson County, MO, Circuit Court to collect.  Judge Jon R. Gray
rejected Nicely's denial of the assaults but quashed M.A.B's writ
of garnishment.  He also denied Union Mutual's motion for
indemnification of attorneys' fees and costs.

     The Missouri Court of Appeals, Western District, modified
the lower court's ruling in an opinion by Chief Judge Gary A.
Fenner.

     The panel agreed with Judge Gray that Union Mutual is not
liable for the underlying judgment because of the exclusionary
language in the policy.  In the context of child sexual abuse, an
inferred-intent standard applies, the court held, so the
molestation of M.A.B. is deemed by law to have been intentional
on Nicely's part, noted the panel.  Intent to molest is the same
thing as the intent to harm, the panel noted.

     On the insurer's cross-appeal, the panel said M.A.B. is
required to pay Union Mutual's fees and costs for defense of the
garnishment action.  In an unsuccessful garnishment action or
appeal, court rules require taxing the garnishor for the
garnishee's expenses, said the panel.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MO CT. APP.: RES JUDICATA
BARS EX-DIRECTORS'
SUIT AGAINST INSURER

     Res judicata bars former officers and directors of a
corporation from suing the company's insurance broker for failing
to obtain adequate coverage for securities fraud claims, the
Missouri Court of Appeals ruled Nov. 28, finding a prior Kansas
decision blocking the ex-directors' suit on statute of
limitations precludes relitigation in Missouri.  Bendis et al. v.
Alexander and Alexander Inc., No. WD 50698 (MO Ct. App.).
               The four plaintiffs were officers and directors of
Comprehensive Health Care Systems Inc., a Kansas corporation.
Alexander and Alexander, a Maryland corporation authorized to do
business in Kansas and Missouri, procured insurance for
Comprehensive, including an officers and directors policy.
Coverage was obtained from Federal Insurance Co. and Hartford
Accident & Indemnity Co.

     In 1986, Comprehensive merged with TBG Inc.  TBG later filed
a federal court complaint accusing the ex-directors of
misrepresenting Comprehensive's financial status and violating
securities laws.  When Federal and Hartford refused to defend or
indemnify, the ex-directors sued them in the District of Kansas;
the insurers won on summary judgment.

     The ex-directors sued Alexander and Alexander in the
District of Kansas for failure to perform a risk evaluation for
Comprehensive and for failure to obtain insurance to defend and
indemnify them against the underlying securities and common law
claims in the TBG case.  Alexander and Alexander won summary
judgment based on the Kansas statute of limitations.

     The ex-directors then filed a petition against the broker in
Jackson County, MO, Circuit Court, with the same allegations as
their unsuccessful Kansas federal complaint.  Judge Jon R. Gray
granted summary judgment in favor of Alexander and Alexander.

     The Missouri Court of Appeals, Western District, affirmed in
an opinion by Judge Laura Denvir Stith, finding the suit barred
by res judicata.  There was an identity of parties, underlying
facts, causes of action and issues in the Kansas federal and
Missouri state litigation, held the panel.

     A potential difference over whether the Kansas or Missouri
limitations period applies does not preclude res judicata, found
the panel, because the statute of limitations is an affirmative
defense and has no effect on subject matter jurisdiction.  In
addition, adopting the ex-directors' position would allow
plaintiffs to forum-shop for a state with a longer limitations
period, defeating the purpose of the res judicata doctrine.

     The court denied the broker's request for damages for a
frivolous appeal.

     David W. White, Alan V. Johnson and William F. Logan of
Overland Park, KS, represented the ex-directors.  Eric T. Swanson
and Theresa Shean Hall of Kansas City appeared for the insurance
broker.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>