
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B30-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B002-250</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch10.html 205.156.212.5 19970114210005 text/html 39146
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 20:58:09 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:45:55 GMT
Content-length: 38959
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ch10.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 2, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>***************&nbsp;SLANTS &TRENDS&nbsp;***************</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(390 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS COULD PLACE&nbsp;BURDEN ON STATE CLEANUP PROGRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(744 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS TOP THE LIST&nbsp;OF KEY CONCERNS FOR UPCOMING YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(596 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>LAND DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS&nbsp;H.R. 2036 APPROVED IN COMMITTEE;&nbsp;BILL REQUIRES REPORT ON RELEASES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(409 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>DIOXIN&nbsp;ASME REPORT FINDS MINIMAL LINKAGE&nbsp;BETWEEN CHLORINE, DIOXIN EMISSIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(451 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>SUPERFUND&nbsp;LOVE CANAL AGREEMENT EXEMPLIFIES&nbsp;NEED FOR QUICKER SETTLEMENTS: CMA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(382 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>INTERNATIONAL MARKETS&nbsp;BAN ON U.S. IMPORT OF PCBS PROVOKES&nbsp;CANADIAN COMPANIES TO SUE MINISTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(358 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>CIEC BIOSOLIDS TECHNOLOGY CUTS NOX&nbsp;EMISSIONS IN CALIFORNIA CEMENT KILNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>MILITARY, FHA AWARD VERSAR CONTRACTS&nbsp;TO CONTROL POLLUTION, STUDY BRIDGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(494 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>CHICAGO BROWNFIELDS FORUM RELEASES&nbsp;MODEL FINANCING GUIDELINES FOR BANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(705 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>ERM CASE STUDY DEMONSTRATES NEED&nbsp;FOR UNDERSTANDING OF PERMIT PROCESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(504 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

***************
SLANTS &TRENDS
***************


Spread the word - congressional republicans entering this
Election Year Should Find More Support For Environmental
protections, and some House leaders may stress this to
colleagues, industry analyst predict. "A number of
Republicans like [New York Rep. Sherwood] Boehlert already
recognize the depth of support for environmental controls,
and they are trying to encourage the party to temper its
stand so it's not anti-environmental," said Doug MacMillan,
executive director for the Environmental Technology Council.
"What they hear in their districts will make them recognize
the depth of public support for it." Superfund Reform '95
Executive George Baker agreed that should GOP legislators
fail to push through environmental reforms, especially to
Superfund, Republicans could "lose the political public
relations war" and could be deemed anti-environment.
"They've allowed their opponents to forecast them as rolling
back" environmental controls, he said.

   EPA, meanwhile, must stand firm with its environmental
policies as Congress attempts to reduce agency staffing and
budget, MacMillan added. Since 1994, "EPA has reversed
course on number of important environmental policies in an
apparent attempt to placate some of its adversaries," he
said. Along with making public statements supporting strict
environmental standards, the agency must not backpeddle on
its regulations. EPA cannot be "talking a good game, while
quietly surrendering to its opposition," he said.


JOIN THE CLUB - EPA began preparing to shut down the federal
Superfund program Jan. 2. The agency is unable to pay nearly
2,000 of its own employees in the program, and 8,000
contractors who perform remediation work. Superfund was not
affected immediately by the federal shutdown because most of
these employees are paid directly from the fund, rather than
from budget appropriations, said Jim Mathews, deputy
assistant administrator for EPA's Office of Solid Waste and
Emergency Response (HWN, Dec. 18, 1995, p. 399). Though
Congress has not reauthorized the program nor issued its
allotment for the next fiscal year, Superfund has operated
since October off a surplus in last year's fund, Mathews
said. That money will run out Jan. 2, and the agency will
begin shutting down the program. Only emergency personnel
will continue working, reducing the agency's program
employees from more than 3,000 to only 80. Several large
Superfund sites will continue cleanups during the shutdown,
while many will cease operations, he said. Contact: Jim
Mathews, EPA, (202) 260-4610.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS COULD PLACE
BURDEN ON STATE CLEANUP PROGRAMS


   Superfund reform bills now stalled in Congress may place
a larger burden on state cleanups, or halt remediation
activities outright, according to several state
environmental officials.

   H.R. 2500, proposed by Rep. Michael Oxley (R-Ohio), and
S. 1285, proposed by Sen. Robert Smith (R-N.H.), could
create an intense burden on state remediation programs, Kris
Hoellen, assistant deputy director for the Washington-based
Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste Management
Officials told the National Council of State Legislatures at
the council's annual meeting Dec. 14 in Washington. Under
these bills, litigation could increase from sites that
already have selected a remedy if they find a more cost-
effective method. State officials also fear the bills would
cap the number of National Priorities List (NPL) sites,
leaving states to fund many cleanups themselves.

   Oxley's bill would pre-empt states from enacting cleanup
standards more stringent than federal levels, Hoellen said.
Smith's bill, however, would allow states to pay the
difference for tougher standards, but it is unlikely states
would not have the funds to enforce further site remediation
beyond federal standards, she said.

   The House version of Superfund reform would cap the NPL
at 125 sites over the next seven years, while 90 sites would
be allowed over three years on the Senate side. There now
are 1,700 NPL-qualified sites EPA has yet to place on the
list, Hoellen said. Shifting these sites to state authority
could overwhelm state agencies, she added.

   Pre-enforcement litigation would greatly hinder site
cleanups, Hoellen told HWN. Both bills would allow parties
to reopen remedy cases if they show they can save at least
$1 million using another method. In addition, the Senate
version of the bill would shift more program costs to the
states, compared with cost-sharing provisions in Oxley's
bill, she said.

   Many states also do not want to pay for orphan shares,
Hoellen said. Particularly, states do not want large
potentially responsible parties cashed out of liability,
which could leave state agencies "holding the bag," she
said.

   If either bill passes in its present form, all new work
on existing sites will stop, said Ed Putnam, associate
director of remediation planning and design for the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. New Jersey
could only continue ongoing work, he said. Superfund would
continue to fund immediate contamination removal programs,
but states could not afford to take additional remedial
action, he added.

   "There always has been competition for funds among state
regulatory agencies," Putnam said. "There's simply going to
be more competition" if Congress reforms Superfund.

   Remediators would not be able to remove contaminated soil
from some sites, preferring to close off the area, he said.
Furthermore, states would not clean aquifers, preferring to
monitor plumes and treat contaminated wells, Putnam said.

   Putnam finds no significant difference for states between
the bills. Both make the pursuit of funding competitive
between states. "It's just a question of how competitive,"
he said.

Reauthorization Still Up in the Air

   A more pressing question for states is the future of
Superfund, which lacks a reauthorization bill and its taxing
authority, Putnam said. "Superfund is stalled; there is no
new work occurring," he said. Faced with the possibility of
significant changes in the law possibly months away and a
dwindling funding mechanism, it is difficult for states to
make any long-term plans for Superfund remediation, Putnam
said.

   Spending money and manpower to maintain retroactive
liability costs more than it would to repeal it, said a
commercial consultant who deals in government affairs.

   If the remedy process is not reformed, states could not
afford remediation, the consultant told HWN. There are many
state agencies who are competent enough to handle cleanups
more efficiently than EPA can, he said. "There are a number
of states embarrassed by EPA's performance" in Superfund
cleanups, he added.

   States do not spend nearly as much money on cleanups as
EPA, the consultant said. Particularly, states historically
do not take as long to select a remedy or to complete
cleanups.

   Though EPA is blaming the Republican Congress for
stalling the Superfund program, the consultant criticized
President Clinton, who vetoed the recent Veteran's
Administration/Department of Housing and Urban Development
bill last month that would have extended Superfund taxes. In
addition, EPA has been dragging its feet in assisting with a
compromise Superfund reauthorization bill, he added. "EPA
has been working overtime to stop the bill," he said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS TOP THE LIST
OF KEY CONCERNS FOR UPCOMING YEAR


   Congressional action on Republican Superfund reforms this
year could significantly alter the course of how hazardous
waste is managed, affecting many aspects ranging from
impending rulemaking to technology, according to several
industry analysts.

   Superfund reform, a priority on the Republican agenda, is
expected to be the key issue in the industry in 1996. Many
Democrats have criticized the reform efforts so far, but GOP
members likely will collaborate more this year with their
colleagues across the aisle to approve a reform package,
said George Baker, executive director of Superfund Reform
'95. The debate should move rapidly because 1996 is an
election year, and most work will be completed by August to
gear up for elections in the fall, he said.

   Republicans "need Democrats to be comfortable with [the
reforms], and get broad support from industry, small
businesses and municipalities," Baker said. "These reforms
are needed to effectively clean up a number of sites
faster." Once a reform package is adopted, Superfund
reauthorization should proceed smoothly, he added.

   Congressional delays on Superfund reform last year
frustrated members of the Chemical Manufacturers Association
(CMA). As the debate drags on, the association is concerned
that legislators will tinker with proposed bills further,
allowing more exemptions. "We're getting to the point where
deals will be made here and there," said CMA spokesman Matt
Weinstock. "As long as it floats around, there are more
chances for industry to make carveouts. Congress needs to
get this thing done without creating a new unfair system."

   CMA also urges Congress to pass H.R. 2036. The bill would
streamline land disposal restrictions under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) (see story, this page).
"The bill will make management of waste fairer and easier to
comply," Weinstock said, praising the bipartisan effort to
approve the bill. "If we could have had that effort on
Superfund, we'd be done."

   EPA's Hazardous Waste Identification Rule (HWIR),
scheduled for promulgation late this year, also may impact
hazardous waste management (HWN, Dec. 4, 1995, p. 384).
However, Title 9 of H.R. 2500, Rep. Michael Oxley's (R-Ohio)
Superfund reform bill, could render HWIR moot. Officials
with the Environmental Technology Council (ETC) oppose this
portion of the bill because it would allow states to adopt
provisions freeing the management of remediation waste from
RCRA's Subtitle C requirements or the Toxic Substance
Control Act.

   "We believe some modified national standards for hot
spots makes sense for Superfund and RCRA waste," said ETC
Executive Director Doug MacMillan. "If the bill passes,
there will be no purpose to go forward with the [HWIR]
contaminated media rule" to be proposed soon.

   Superfund reforms also could severely hamper marketing
innovative technologies for hazardous waste this year. Bills
in the House and Senate largely favor closing off a
hazardous site rather than seeking permanent remediation,
MacMillan said. "That will be a serious disincentive for
innovative site cleanup technology," he said. "Why worry
about detoxifying waste if you can fence a site off or
provide alternatives to water supply?"

   EPA anticipates proposing its hazardous waste combustion
strategy this year, which has been a bone of contention in
recent years between hazardous waste incinerators and cement
kilns. The agency is slated to propose emission standards
for cement kilns and to determine proper handling of cement
kiln dust. "If EPA could get some realistic, applicable
standards for air emissions and for combustion residues, the
long-running controversies would die down," MacMillan said.
"That would be positive because the arguments between the
various groups have eroded the general public's confidence
about combustion."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

LAND DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS
H.R. 2036 APPROVED IN COMMITTEE;
BILL REQUIRES REPORT ON RELEASES


   EPA next year may ask particular landfills and treatment
systems accepting treated hazardous waste to provide data
for a five-year study on the threat of the sites' waste
stream to human health and the environment.

   The House Commerce Committee Dec. 21 passed H.R. 2036,
the Land Disposal Flexibility Act, with relatively minor
amendments. The bill, sponsored by Rep. Michael Oxley (R-
Ohio), passed the committee's Commerce, Trade and Hazardous
Materials Subcommittee in November (HWN, Dec. 11, 1995, p.
394).

   The measure would allow EPA to set land disposal
standards now prohibited by a federal court decision. The
agency in 1990 exempted from Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) standards treated hazardous waste at
treatment systems regulated under the Clean Water Act and
nonhazardous deep injection wells regulated under the Clean
Drinking Water Act. In 1992, however, the Washington, D.C.,
District Court directed EPA to apply RCRA standards to these
wastes, which some industry officials said adds up to $800
million annually in compliance costs.

   Democrats worked extensively with Republican committee
members to pass the bill to the House floor, with Rep.
Blanche Lambert Lincoln (D-Ark.) working with Oxley to
address many Democratic concerns. The committee passed an
amendment offered by Lincoln calling for EPA to complete
within five years a study on these sites to determine if
releases are threatening the ground water or human health.
Ranking Democrat Rep. John Dingell (Mich.) warned that
setting a deadline on the study could lead to further court
action, yet did not oppose Lincoln's amendment.

   Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.) expressed the strongest
opposition to the bill, calling for an EPA study completed
within three years, whereupon the agency must take action on
the study's findings. Wastewaters from these sites can have
concentrations of toxins up to 99 times drinking water
standards, thereby necessitating quick action on these risk
reports, he said. "Decharacterized waste containing
hazardous constituents may leak from surface impoundments at
the same levels of concerns as listed waste streams,"
Pallone said.

   Several members opposed the amendment, saying it would
require EPA to depend on old data to meet the three-year
deadline, and would force the agency to spend more time and
resources on waste that does not cause a significant threat
to the environment. Committee members sought to push the
bill through Congress before Jan. 17, the court-issued
deadline for the EPA rules to take affect. Contact: Nandan
Kenkeremath, majority counsel, (202) 226-2424.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

DIOXIN
ASME REPORT FINDS MINIMAL LINKAGE
BETWEEN CHLORINE, DIOXIN EMISSIONS


   No significant correlation is shown between the type or
amount of chlorine in waste burned in hazardous waste
combustors (HMCs) and the concentrations of dioxin and furan
emissions (PCDD/F) measured at the stack, according to a
recent study by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
(ASME).

   ASME analyzed more than 1,900 test results of hazardous,
solid, biomass and medical waste combustors. Limiting the
chlorine content of combustor feedstocks has little or no
effect on the composition or quantity of dioxin emitted,
states the report, The Relationship Between Chlorine in
Waste Streams and Dioxin Emissions from Waste Combustor
Stacks.

   HMCs studied in the report include hazardous waste
incinerators (HWIs), fired boilers and cement kilns. The
concentration of chlorine in the feed stocks for the
generators ranges from less than 0.1 percent for many
biomass combustors up to 80 percent for some HWIs, the study
says. The tests were done at 169 facilities - including 74
hazardous waste combustors - where chlorine and PCDD/F
emissions were measured.

   PCDD/F and chlorine were "simultaneously characterized"
at 107 units in 90 facilities. The data was checked to
identify errors and statistical problems, standardized to
reflect common reference conditions and analyzed to
determine if either the composition of PCDD/F concentrations
or the quantity of those composition changed, ASME states in
the report.

   Tests in 72 waste facilities showed no significant
relationship between chlorine input and PCDD/F measured in
the gas streams. In many of the tests, the combustion units
were "spiked" with larger amounts of chlorinated plastics,
or polyvinyl chloride, to determine if a higher chlorine
content in the waste fuel produced any measure of dioxin,
ASME explains. Cement kilns "displayed no apparent stack gas
PCDD/F concentration increase with increasing chlorine feed
rate," the report states. The result "is not surprising,
since chlorine is frequently added to remove natural alkalis
and produce Portland cement meeting federal and state
construction standards," ASME says.

   The study was not intended to evaluate control systems
performance, generate new data, assess the relationship
between PCDD/F and chlorine in liquid effluents or solid
residues, or to evaluate the removal of particulate-bound
PCDD/F in emission control devices, ASME says.

   "The failure to find simultaneous increases in most
cases, and finding a few inverse relationships, indicates
that whatever effect feed chlorine has on PCDD/F
concentrations in flue gases, it is smaller than the
influence of other causative factors," the society states in
the report. "Any effect chlorine has on PCDD/F
concentrations in commercial scale systems is a factor of
air pollution control system temperature, ash chemistry,
combustion conditions, imprecise measurement and localized
flow stratification." For a copy of the 663-page report,
contact John Varrasi, ASME, (212) 705-8158.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

SUPERFUND
LOVE CANAL AGREEMENT EXEMPLIFIES
NEED FOR QUICKER SETTLEMENTS: CMA


   Some chemical industry analysts hope congressional
reforms to Superfund encourage responsible parties to pay
cleanup costs more swiftly, saying a settlement last month
for remediation costs at the infamous Love Canal Superfund
site in New York typifies the need for quicker action.

   The Occidental Chemical Corp. Dec. 21 agreed to pay $129
million over four years to EPA and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) to cover cleanup costs at the Love
Canal site. Under the settlement, EPA will receive $102
million, and FEMA, which relocated area residents and began
site cleanup, will get $27 million.

   Occidental's corporate predecessor, Hooker Chemicals &
Plastics Corp., buried more than 20,000 tons of chemical
waste from 1942 to 1953. Although a housing development
later was built on the site, hundreds of families were
forced to leave these homes in the late 1970s to allow crews
to remediate the site. The site's cleanup costs eventually
lead to the creation of Superfund in 1980.

   In addition, New York originally sought $630 million in
damages from Occidental, but the company in 1994 agreed to
pay the state $98 million. Occidental's suits with the city
of Niagara Falls and several former residents still are
pending.

   "This reaffirms the definite need to move on legislative
reforms so we don't have these cases hanging around for 11
or 12 years," said Chemical Manufacturers Association
spokesman Matt Weinstock, who doubts the settlement will
spark other large Superfund payback agreements. "I'd like to
think things will continue on a case-by-case basis."

   A key EPA official agreed the Superfund program needs
genuine reform, yet not as stringent as Republican bills
proposed in Congress. "We need to speed cleanups and lower
costs so that more property can be returned to communities
for productive use," said EPA Region 2 Administrator Jeanne
Fox. "The lessons learned at Love Canal have been
successfully applied at hundreds of abandoned waste sites
around the country, where toxic threats to public health
have been removed."

   Claims in GOP reform bills stating 40 percent of taxpayer
funding for Superfund goes to litigation are untrue, Fox
said. "That figure refers to the legal costs to private
parties involved in suits and countersuits, often with their
insurance companies," she added. Contact: Howard Collins,
Occidental, (310) 443-6523.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

INTERNATIONAL MARKETS
BAN ON U.S. IMPORT OF PCBS PROVOKES
CANADIAN COMPANIES TO SUE MINISTRY


   An Ohio company's recent exemption from EPA to import
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from Canada for treatment
led the Canadian government to ban PCB exports from Canada.
Several Canadian companies, in turn, have filed a lawsuit
against Canada's Environment Ministry.

   EPA Nov. 15 granted S.D. Myers, an Ohio-based hazardous
waste treatment firm, a special exemption to import PCBs for
treatment at the firm's Talmadge, Ohio, plant. The next day,
Sheila Copps, Canada's environment minister, issued an
interim ban on the company's exportation of the carcinogenic
chemicals, said Dana Myers, president of S.D. Myers.

   The Environment Ministry bowed to pressure from the
Canadian hazardous waste treatment industry, particularly
Chem-Security, a large Edmonton, Alberta-based firm, Myers
said. Officials from Chem-Security could not be reached for
comment. Prior to the ban, the Canadian government granted
Myers permission to import PCBs with EPA's approval.
"Environment Canada asked EPA to open the borders" to PCBs,
Myers said. "After EPA did, Canada slammed them shut."

   After the Environment Ministry issued the interim ban,
two Canadian firms, General Waste Transport Inc. and the
Quebec Center for the Environment, sued the Environment
Ministry Dec. 19 to lift the ban. The Environment Ministry
issued the ban under the Canadian Environmental Protection
Act. Copps implemented an interim ban from one rule and
applied it to a different rule, which invalidates the ban,
Myers told HWN.

   The companies are bringing Copps and Canadian Attorney
General Allan Rock to court on two separate grounds. First,
Copps did not have the authority to enact the ban because
human health is not threatened with the transport of PCBs
across national borders, said Douglas Hamilton, a partner in
the Toronto firm of Osler & Hoskin, and the attorney
representing General Waste Transport. The ban also would
retain Chem-Security's monopoly of the Canadian PCB
remediation market, thus invalidating the ban, Myers added.
The firms are reviewing Environment Ministry procedures in
implementing the ban to determine if it had the necessary
backing of the Ministry of Health, Hamilton said.
Environment Ministry officials could not be reached for
comment. Contact: Dana Myers, S.D. Myers, (216) 633-2666;
Art Mathis, Chem-Security, (403) 235-8300.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

CIEC BIOSOLIDS TECHNOLOGY CUTS NOX
EMISSIONS IN CALIFORNIA CEMENT KILNS


   The Cement Industry Environmental Consortium (CIEC)
recently unveiled its biosolids injection technology, which
reduces nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions and disposes
wastewater sludge.

   The process uses ammonia in the sludge to convert NOx
into a stable, non-toxic gas, CIEC officials said. The
technology mixes sludge with combustion gases from cement
kilns.

   The consortium now is testing the process at the
Mitsubishi Cement Corp. plant in Cushenbury, Calif., the
state's largest cement plant. Use of biosolids injection has
reduced NOx emissions by 45 percent, while treating 10
percent of Southern California's wastewater sludge, CIEC
said.

   Biosolids injection can help cement kilns meet strict
Clean Air Act standards, CIEC said. Contact: Robert Kahn,
CIEC, (206) 236-7200.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

MILITARY, FHA AWARD VERSAR CONTRACTS
TO CONTROL POLLUTION, STUDY BRIDGES


   Versar recently was awarded a three-year, $7 million
contract by the Naval Facilities Engineering Services Center
to provide pollution control equipment and services.

   Under the contract, Versar will identify, design and
install equipment for the Navy and Marine Corps that
minimizes emissions. The company also will procure the
equipment, write user manuals and provide training.

   In addition, Versar received three contracts worth a
combined $1.5 million to provide infrastructure management
and services. The contracts include a two-year agreement
with the Federal Highway Administration to assess
contamination from lead-based-paint removal on bridges.
Contact: Lawrence White, Versar, (703) 642-6802.


   ADA Technologies, Englewood, Colo., recently was awarded
a contract for the full-scale demonstration of its new flue-
gas conditioning technology. The company will demonstrate
the substance on a hot-side electrostatic precipitator
during three weeks this month to document the effectiveness
of the additive. Contact: John Wuster, ADA, (800) 232-0296.

   American Bar Association (ABA), Washington, Jan. 10-12
will host the Environmental Priorities in Southeast Asian
Nations conference in Bangkok, Thailand. The conference will
focus on environmental protection approaches in Cambodia,
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines,
Thailand and Vietnam. Contact: Barbara Blackwell, ABA, (202)
662-4093.

   GeoSafe Corp., Richland, Wash., last month was granted a
Toxic Substances Control Act permit to treat polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) using the company's in-situ vitrification
technology. The company has demonstrated the technology can
meet EPA's 99.9999 percent destruction and removal
efficiency required for PCB treatment. Contact: James
Hansen, GeoSafe, (509) 375-0710.

   Groundwater Technology Inc. (GTI), Norwood, Mass.,
recently sold 4.4 million of its shares to Fluor Daniel
Inc., equaling a 54.5 percent interest. Fluor Daniel/GTI
will operate as the environmental services arm of Fluor
Daniel Inc. The company will continue to be headquartered in
Norwood, Mass. The firms expect to complete the transaction
in early 1996. Contact: Robert Sliney, GTI, (617) 769-7600.

   Huntsman Chemical Corp., Woodbury, N.J., last month
received a facility-wide permit for polypropylene production
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP). DEP has issued only two other permits of this type,
the company said. Contact: Gregory Lloyd, Environmental
Resources Management Group, (610) 524-3790.

   Membrane Technology and Research Inc. (MTR), Menlo Park,
Calif., recently unveiled its closed-loop membrane system to
recover ethylene and propylene monomer from nitrogen in
plant vent streams. Companies may benefit from ethylene and
propylene recovery because monomer costs can account for up
to 80 percent of polymer production costs, MTR officials
said. The system recently was featured at the Chemical
Process Industries Expo in New York. Contact: Jane Stoner,
MTR, (415) 328-2228.

   National Technical Information Service (NTIS),
Springfield, Va., recently unveiled a new automated waste
classification software. WasteCat is designed to show
generators if their waste stream contains hazardous
substances. Contact: Renee Edwards, NTIS, (703) 487-4778.

   Scaltech Inc., Houston, recently contracted with BP Oil
Co., to manage oily hazardous waste at BP Oil's three major
United States refineries. Contact: Douglas Foote, Scaltech,
(713) 672-8004.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

CHICAGO BROWNFIELDS FORUM RELEASES
MODEL FINANCING GUIDELINES FOR BANKS


   The Chicago Brownfields Forum (CBF), seeking ways to make
brownfield redevelopment more feasible, last month released
model lending guidelines that may spur bankers to invest in
more abandoned industrial properties.

   The model is designed to allow banks and lending
institutions to extend credit to redevelopment projects,
while protecting the bank's collateral interest and loan
repayment, CBF officials said. The model identifies policies
and procedures lending institutions can follow in financing
redevelopment projects.

   The city-organized forum consists of more than 100 public
and private representatives, including real estate
developers, industry representatives, environmentalists,
government agencies and community groups.

   Chapman & Cutler, a Chicago law firm, led the task force
crafting the guidelines. Banks can adopt the model to
existing policy to initiate financing redevelopment
projects, CBF officials said. Brownfield financing has
suffered because lending institutions did not know which
questions to ask developers, so developers did not know what
information to submit, officials said. The package includes
specific requirements developers must satisfy, with forms
and examples.

   CBF developed the policy as an example for other states
with voluntary cleanup plans. Future models will address
financing in states that have no voluntary cleanup program,
CBF officials said. Contact: Bill Trumbull, CBF, (312) 744-
5711.


   COLORADO - The Broomfield City Council last month opposed
a plan to bury hazardous waste at the former Rocky Flats
nuclear weapons plant, near Boulder. In November, the
Department of Energy (DOE) and Kaiser Hill, a DOE
contractor, proposed to expedite cleanup and closure of the
plant. According to the plan, workers would remove the most
hazardous radioactive waste, but low-level waste would be
buried on-site at the plant. Last month, the council passed
a resolution opposing this proposal. The council also sent a
letter to the state officials overseeing the cleanup.
Contact: Patrick Etchart, DOE, (303) 966-5993.

   HAWAII - EPA last month fined the Department of Interior
(DOI), National Parks Service for violating the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by storing hazardous
waste at the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. The facility
stored hazardous waste without a RCRA permit between March
and October. The waste contained acetone, chromium, lead,
xylene, phenol, arsenic and mercury. EPA also cited DOI for
storing waste in rusted, leaking containers. EPA fined the
facility $243,800 and ordered it to develop a hazardous
waste management plan within two months. Contact: Lois
Grunwald, EPA, (415) 744-1588.

   OHIO - EPA last month completed cleanup at the Coshocton
City Landfill Superfund site in Franklin Township. The
remediation activities included construction of a landfill
gas collection and venting system, construction of a
landfill cap, and ground water monitoring. Potentially
responsible parties completed all work, with oversight from
EPA and Ohio state officials. EPA will review the site every
five years as required by law. From 1968-1979, the site was
used as an 80-acre landfill, which accepted various
industrial wastes from several local companies. The site was
added to the National Priorities List in 1983. Contact:
Anthony Rutter, EPA, (312)886-8961.

   MICHIGAN - EPA last month reached agreement with Dow
Chemical Co. for alleged hazardous waste violations at the
company's Midland facility. The agency cited the firm in
September 1993 for failing to meet Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act requirements governing burning hazardous waste
in a boiler. The company failed to develop a written plan to
analyze the hazardous waste burned; failed to determine ash,
chlorine and chloride concentrations in the waste fed to
boilers; and failed to check for leaks in boiler valves, EPA
said. EPA's consent order called for a $167,000 fine and for
Dow to correct the violations. Contact: Michael Cunningham,
EPA, (312) 886-4464.

   WASHINGTON - The Department of Energy (DOE) last month
gave Westinghouse Hanford Co. (WHC) a "good" performance
rating for the six months ending Sept. 30. DOE awarded the
company a grant of more than $1.5 million based on a
detailed department evaluation. This rating was a
significant improvement over the company's last rating of
satisfactory, DOE officials said. DOE cited improved
performance by WHC in tank remediation and facility
stabilization. DOE, however, noted deficiencies in
conducting an operations procedure for radiological control
and in establishing an effective field work procedures plan.
Contact: Guy Schein, (509) 376-7501.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ch10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 2, 1996

ERM CASE STUDY DEMONSTRATES NEED
FOR UNDERSTANDING OF PERMIT PROCESS


   Industrial plants can face overly burdensome water
quality-based effluent limits (WQBELs) without a clear
understanding of how regulating agencies determine these
limits and assess the data on which the limits are based,
according to a paper presented by William Hall, a senior
project manager with Environmental Resources Management
(ERM) Group.

   The paper, presented recently at the annual Water
Environment Federation conference, outlines how the
consulting firm negotiated with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources (DER) to set less-stringent
WQBELs for a client. The new limits should be less costly
than a draft National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit DER originally prepared for an electronic
components manufacturer, states Hall's study, Negotiating
Less Conservative Water Based Effluent Limits: A Case Study.

   The draft included WQBELs for copper and lead, as well as
fluoride limits based on historical performance. After
studying the draft limits, ERM concluded these limits were
too conservative, and the company would struggle to comply
with them, the report states.

   The manufacturer discharged 330,000 gallons per day of
process wastewater into a large fresh water river. The
proposed fluoride limits included average monthly limits,
maximum daily limits and instantaneous maximum concentration
limits. A review of historical data of effluent discharge
showed the facility could not comply with the state's
average monthly limit, the study said.

   The WQBELs for copper and lead affected four discharge
streams in the facility - three process wastewater
discharges and a cooling water discharge. Studies showed the
plant's wastewater treatment operations, with improvements,
could easily handle the limits set for lead. However, the
company determined the draft copper limits were three times
lower than the best treatment technology could provide, the
study says.

   The low draft limits stemmed partially from
misconceptions about mineral hardness, or concentration, in
the river. ERM recorded the river's hardness data per month.
River hardness peaked during the late summer and early fall,
which coincided with low effluent flow from the plant, ERM
concluded. DER, therefore, raised the WQBEL for copper in
the permit.

   Moreover, ERM determined the slope of the receiving
river, or the difference in elevation between two points
along the river, was less steep where effluent enters than
at other sections along the river. A mild slope gives the
effluent less time to travel downstream and a greater chance
to disperse in a smaller area, the report says.

   DER has since raised the WQBEL for copper from 0.18
milligrams per liter (mg/l) to 0.47 mg/l. DER also raised
the lead limit from 0.29 mg/l to 0.43 mg/l, thereby removing
lead as a water quality-based parameter. DER also raised the
company's average monthly limit for fluoride 2.5 times the
normal limit, the study says.

   "What this case study clearly illustrates is that a
regulatory authority is not responsible for establishing
optimum parameters value to maximize effluent limits while
trying to protect the environment," the report says. "That
responsibility lies with the permittee." The paper is free
from ERM by contacting Dorothy Condon, (610) 524-3657.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>