
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-26</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh58.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020231 text/html 38113
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMT
Content-length: 37926
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh58.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
APRIL 24, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>JCAHO Issues Second Call For Indicators</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(342 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Medicare Pay System Boosts Satisfaction</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(516 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NCQA Drafts Behavioral Health Norms</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(639 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Vaccine Rate Up Due to Fed Effort</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(480 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Satisfaction Poll Marks HMO Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(324 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Drug Company Promotes QI Tools</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>AIDS Evolution Means QM Changes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Developments In Brief</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(729 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

JCAHO Issues Second Call For Indicators


The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) has
launched the second phase of its attempt to create a comprehensive catalogue
of performance measures - the National Library of Healthcare Indicators
(NLHI).

On April 16, JCAHO announced a Request for Indicators (RFI) for ambulatory
care, behavioral health care, home care, or long term care indicators, to
serve as a resource to organizations interested in measuring performance.
JCAHO sent information to more than 1,200 health care organizations for
comments, which will be accepted until May 10.  JCAHO expects indicators for
these settings to be selected by the end of the year and available for use in
the spring of 1997.

"This RFI gives us a major opportunity to enrich the Library to include
measures that cover the full mainstream of the delivery system," says Dennis
O'Leary, MD, JCAHO president.  "This will substantially enhance our abilities
to support quality improvement in health care organizations while also setting
the stage for using performance measures in the accreditation process."

The call for these measures specifies that indicators be classified into one
of four broad categories:  administrative/financial (coordination and
integration of functions); clinical performance (care processes and outcomes
for specific conditions and procedures); health status (functional well-being
of populations); and satisfaction (how well patient, purchaser, and
practitioner needs are met).  After May 10, the Joint Commission will assemble
expert panels to select indicators based on importance and usefulness for each
of the four areas.

Last March, the Joint Commission began the first phase of its Library effort
when it solicited measures applicable to health plans and networks.  The 900
suggested indicators have been whittled to about 200, and these will be
available for use this summer (QMU, 3/20/96).  JCAHO also is planning to issue
a call for acute measures sometime next year.  Eventually, indicators will be
included as part of accreditation surveys, although JCAHO has not specified
when this will take effect.

For more information on the RFI and the Library project, call JCAHO's Sharon
Sprenger at 708/916-5968.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Medicare Pay System Boosts Satisfaction


Recently-published research indicates that patient satisfaction increased
after implementation of the 1992 Medicare Fee Schedule (MFS) despite fears
that the new payment approach would compromise quality.

Between 1991 and 1993, Medicare beneficiaries' satisfaction with quality,
availability, accessibility, and costs of care significantly increased.  The
area with the greatest rise (costs) was a direct result of the relative
value-based fee schedule, write the authors of the research.  The information
appears in the Winter 1996 Health Care Financing Review, published on April 5
by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which runs the Medicare
program.

"With the implementation of the MFS, access, use, and satisfaction have not
deteriorated during the 3-year period included in this study," write the
authors.  "Indeed, we have shown that Medicare beneficiaries are reporting
increased satisfaction with many aspects of their health care .  .  .
suggesting that the program has become 'more equitable' over time."

Despite the improved satisfaction, the study is lacking, says Uwe Reinhardt,
professor of political economy at the Woodrow Wilson School in Princeton NJ.
"The real distinction to make is between the chronically ill and the healthy,"
he says, adding that 90 percent of the elderly are relatively healthy and not
heavy users of health services.  "I'd like to see a breakdown of satisfaction
scores by level of functioning."

The article bases its findings on HCFA surveys conducted from 1991-93 of 7,651
continuously-enrolled Medicare beneficiaries (6,337 elderly and 1,314 disabled
nonelderly).  Researchers exclude any results for beneficiaries who died from
1991-1994.  Enrollees in managed care programs and fee-for-service plans are
combined.

Of the four parameters measured, satisfaction with quality of care was
highest, while satisfaction with costs was lowest.  However, satisfaction with
costs between 1991 and 1993 rose most sharply, from 71.0 to 83.5 (scale 0 to
100).  For each of the four categories, scores for the disabled are lower than
those for the elderly (see chart).

Higher satisfaction was reported for persons with the fewest limitations on
activities of daily living, whites, the high-income population, persons in
areas with the highest number of physicians per capita, and persons with
insurance supplementary to Medicare.

One interesting finding was the reduction from 1991 to 1993 in mammography (40
percent to 32 percent) and Pap smears (49 percent to 32 percent).  Medicare
introduced new benefits for both of these preventive services in late 1990.
However, the decreases may reflect women screened in 1991 who would not be
rescreened until after 1993; Medicare officials recommend mammographies every
two years and Pap smears every three years.

In a second study in the same issue of the journal, HCFA official Margo
Rosenbach found that within the disabled Medicare population, those with
mental disabilities are less satisfied with their care than those with
nonmental disorders.  The disabled are most satisfied with their care after an
initial treatment or operation (score of 89) and least satisfied with
out-of-pocket costs of medical care (60).

Single copies of the issue of the Health Care Financing Review may be
purchased for $19 by calling HCFA at 410/786-6572.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

NCQA Drafts Behavioral Health Norms


The first national accreditation standards designed for managed behavioral
healthcare organizations (MBHOs) moved one step closer to reality when the
National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) announced the completion of a
draft set of standards.

On April 10, NCQA held a news conference to discuss the proposed standards,
which are being circulated to more than 1,000 organizations for comments over
the next 45 days.  After pilot testing the standards in the fall, NCQA hopes
to begin review of MBHOs, separate from its standard review of HMOs, early
next year.  To date, no MBHO has received accreditation from NCQA using HMO
standards.

NCQA President Margaret E.  O'Kane acknowledges concerns about the lack of
information related to MBHO quality and says, "these standards fill that void
and provide assurance that NCQA will be scrutinizing the quality of behavioral
health plans every bit as closely as we do that of HMOs."  Others see the
standards as playing a broader role; Harvard Pilgrim Health Plan's John Ludden
believes that the new standards will promote "integration of managed
behavioral health care to other care, which can lead to a whole series of
improvement in quality and cost."

The draft standards are an outgrowth of the rapid expansion of MBHOs, whose
ranks number more than 300 and cover 100 million Americans.  Payers turned to
MBHOs in the past decade to control behavioral health expenses; however, these
cost-containment methods have caused widespread public concern that enrollees
are being denied necessary services, shortchanging quality to save money.  No
national set of accreditation standards exists to ensure that MBHOs' practices
are acceptable.

In 1995, NCQA convened a 22-member Behavioral Health Task Force to draft new
standards, recognizing that services covered by MBHOs were distinct from those
covered by HMOs.  The Task Force initially framed its work in terms of
standards developed by several large employers.  The draft emulated NCQA's HMO
standards to promote coordination between primary care and behavioral health.
In fact, the seven categories of behavioral health standards are quite similar
to the HMO version:

1.  Quality Management and Improvement.  The most comprehensive of the seven
categories, it covers the structure, process, and outcomes of the MBHO quality
management program.

2.  Accessibility, Availability, Referral, and Triage.  This section includes
specific standards for telephone access, geographic distance, and travel times
for appointments.

3.  Utilization Management.  NCQA requires MBHOs to have written protocols
"based on reasonable scientific evidence" for authorizing members to use
services.

4.  Credentialing and Recredentialing.  NCQA mandates MBHOs to exercise "due
diligence" in ensuring that its participating providers maintain proper
credentials.

5.  Members' Rights and Responsibilities.  Each accredited MBHO must have a
grievance procedure that will be scrutinized by NCQA for the opportunity to
appeal MBHO decisions on coverage.

6.  Preventive Behavioral Health Care Services.  MBHOs must have programs to
decrease incidence, prevalence, and residual effects of behavioral health
disorders among its enrollees.

7.  Clinical Evaluation and Treatment Records.  MBHO records must be current,
comprehensive, detailed, and organized.

"The standards are not perfect, but solid," says Leslie Scallet, executive
director of the Mental Health Policy Research Center in Washington and a
member of the task force.  She also believes the standards will promote
quality and appropriate practices due to the support of managed care
organizations, "which were stung by bad press and are committed to seeing the
standards work."

Managed care organizations with behavioral health programs will be given the
option of NCQA reviewing their behavioral health component under the
established HMO standards or the new behavioral health-specific standards.
Eventually, MBHO survey scores will be released to the public, says NCQA
spokesperson Barry Scholl.

For more information or for a copy of the draft standards, call NCQA at
202/955-3577 or use NCQA's site on the World Wide Web (www.ncqa.org).





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Vaccine Rate Up Due to Fed Effort


Children receiving all recommended immunizations by age two rose from 55
percent to 75 percent in the last four years, according to figures released
April 10 by Dept.  of Health & Human Services (HHS) Secretary Donna E.
Shalala.

Shalala credits the improved vaccination record to a variety of federal
government initiatives.  "Just two months after he was sworn into office,
President Clinton personally committed his Administration to an historic,
comprehensive strategy to immunize our youngest and most vulnerable children,"
says Shalala in remarks delivered to the 30th National Immunization Conference
sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC).  "And
together, we are making good on that promise."

Ten infectious diseases - polio, measles, diphtheria, mumps, whooping cough,
German measles, tetanus, spinal meningitis, chicken pox, and hepatitis-B - can
be prevented through childhood vaccines.  Experts recommend that children
receive 12 to 16 doses of the various vaccines by age two, accounting for 80
percent of all recommended childhood immunizations.

Noncompliance with vaccination requirements stems from inadequate numbers of
accessible services, including public clinics; lack of parental awareness of
the need to immunize children by age two; and the increasing cost of vaccines.
HHS estimates that the full series of immunizations costs $313 per child, up
from $27 in 1983.

One of President Clinton's initial pledges was a government buyout of all
vaccines, to be distributed from a warehouse in New Jersey.  Congress failed
to pass Clinton's plan, but the federal government made other moves in the
past three years to improve vaccination rates.

For example, CDC funding for immunization programs has doubled to about $1
billion, and HHS has approved and funded a number of demonstration projects by
state governments to improve immunization rates.  Also a number of states now
require childhood immunizations as a condition for receiving benefits under
Aid for Families with Dependent Children and Women and Infant Children
programs.

Climbing immunization rates can also be linked to the emergence of HMOs, with
their traditional focus on preventive health services.  Last year, 21 large
HMOs released 1993 data showing that 79 percent of enrolled children had been
fully immunized by age two, a figure higher than the national rate (QMU,
3/1/95).  The goal set by the U.S.  Public Health Service for the year 2000 is
90 percent.

It continues to be debated whether or not cost is a major obstacle to children
receiving immunizations.  Despite the defeat of its plan to distribute all
vaccines, the Clinton Administration expanded the Vaccines for Children
program to all 50 states.  The program offers free vaccines to about 60
percent of U.S.  children, including the uninsured, Medicaid-eligible, and
American Indians/Alaska natives.

Despite the improved rates of immunization, considerable variation between
geographic areas remains.  For example, the compliance rate in Boston is 87
percent, but only 52 percent in Detroit.  v





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Satisfaction Poll Marks HMO Guide


The first national survey of consumer satisfaction using measures specified by
the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is a prominent new
addition to a guide on health plans, physicians, hospitals, and health
systems.

The survey, launched earlier this month, will include all patient satisfaction
questions from the NCQA Annual Member Health Care Survey, a poll of more than
170,000 U.S.  households (see chart p.4).  When the data are released in June,
users will be able to compare results for their geographic area - zip code,
county, state, etc.  - with national averages or benchmarks/best practices.
Data will be contained in the sixth edition of the Healthcare Market Guide, a
product of National Research Corp.  (NRC) of Lincoln NE, a company
specializing in health care performance assessment.

NRC touts its database as the first national measurement of all satisfaction
questions from the NCQA Annual Member Health Care Survey, finalized over a
year ago.  To date, use of these questions has been left to the discretion of
each managed care plan.  The survey is likely to be a component of NCQA's
report card prototype Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS)
3.0, due to be presented in draft form this summer.

The Guide encompasses 16 major categories, including quality attributes such
as best-reputed hospitals and doctors, most personalized care, best community
health programs, best image, and lowest costs.  To date, NRC has published the
guide every two years, but now will publish an annual volume.  National
information in the Guide is contained on a computer diskette, says Kris
Benson, NRC director of marketing.  She says that plans, hospitals, and
physician groups, in releasing their data, will often compare it to industry
averages and benchmarks found in the Guide; NRC requests that it review data
before public dissemination.

For more information about the Guide, call Benson at 800/388-4264.  Costs of
the product vary according to the data requested.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Drug Company Promotes QI Tools


Pfizer Inc.  has formed a subsidiary that will link up with providers to
introduce new quality management products.

The April 15 announcement of Pfizer Health Solutions Inc.  (PHS), based in New
York, represents a venture into an area in which pharmaceutical companies have
historically had little involvement.  "While Pfizer's innovative
pharmaceuticals have long been recognized for their contributions to treating
disease, I am confident that PHS will help strengthen our partnerships with
our customers .  .  .  and position Pfizer at the forefront of new solutions
for improving patient care, whatever the setting," says Karen Katen, president
of the Pfizer U.S.  Pharmaceuticals Group.

PHS has kicked off its agenda by selecting three pilot projects, each testing
a different product with a client provider.  The first pilot is the Clinical
Management System (CMS), a clinical guideline instrument customized to local
practices.  The CMS analyzes physician examination and laboratory test
results, lists possible treatment options, and produces reports for providers
on effects of care.

Value Health Sciences of Avon CT, which specializes in developing guidelines
and software, helped Pfizer create this tool.  The new system is being tested
in diagnosing and treating depression and benign prostatic hypertrophy at the
Lahey Hitchcock Clinic in Burlington MA.

The second product being tested by PHS is a wireless, handheld computer that
allows practitioners to access any part of the medical record instantaneously.
This product, developed with WiSE Medical Systems Inc.  of Los Gatos CA (a
company that creates mobile information systems for physicians), is expected
to enhance physician decisionmaking.  It is being demonstrated at several
sites, including Santa Cruz (CA) Medical Center.

The third tool tested by PHS is making clinical information available via
telephone around the clock.  The information is maintained through a series of
"medical call centers" made up of specially-trained nurses using algorithms to
answer patients' questions.  National Health Enhancement Systems, Inc.  of
Phoenix AZ developed the system; test sites have not yet been selected.

For more information on PHS and its related products, call Bob Fauteux at
Pfizer at 212/573-3079.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

AIDS Evolution Means QM Changes


The Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) epidemic presents a stiff and
growing challenge to quality managers trying to assess and improve processes
in AIDS care.  In the March 20 issue, QMU looked at examples of AIDS QM in
hospitals, home care organizations, and regulatory agencies.  HMOs, employers,
and researchers are also trying their hand at improving the state of the art.

NONPROVIDERS EVALUATE AIDS CARE

A variety of research projects evaluating the care given to HIV-positive
patients are now under way, including one by the Columbia University School of
Public Health in New York.  The School contracts with the city's health
department to evaluate AIDS programs funded under the federal Ryan White law,
says Peter Masseri, associate clinical professor at Columbia.  Masseri and
other staff are conducting interviews with 650 HIV-positive New Yorkers to
evaluate how well services are being rendered and what the outcomes of these
services are.  These verbal interviews take more than two hours each and are
conducted every six months.

Masseri says initial results of the study will not be ready until the summer.
However, he and other researchers will look at utilization of services (at all
levels) and evaluate changes in health status, compared to the patients'
needs.  The SF-36 tool, which measures patient self-reported health status,
will be used:  "We find the tool to be quite reliable," says Masseri.  In
addition, other measures of health status, such as CD-4 cell count, will be
included in the analysis.

HMOS LOOK TO COORDINATED CARE

Although hospitals are extending AIDS care beyond just the acute level, it is
managed care organizations (MCOs) that portray themselves as providers of
coordinated care across all levels.  Despite this stated purpose, there is
much controversy over how MCOs handle AIDS treatment as more and more AIDS
patients (especially Medicaid recipients) enroll in MCOs.

The Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) in New York City reports that a recent
survey finds 95 percent of HMOs unable to refer callers to primary care
physicians experienced in AIDS treatment.  GMHC Senior Policy Associate Susan
Dooha says this lack of expertise lowers the use of prophylactic therapy
needed by many patients infected with HIV.  Other aspects of medical care are
affected by practitioner inexperience.  A 1995 study published in the Journal
of the American Medical Assn.  found that of 134 general practitioners and
family physicians (not just HMO physicians), only 25.8 percent correctly
diagnosed Kaposi's sarcoma, and 22.7 percent diagnosed oral hairy leukoplakia,
conditions common in the AIDS population.

GMHC also says they believe there is a lack of specific standards for AIDS
care, particularly newer therapies, and HMOs do not monitor care to
HIV-positive patients.  Most plan-based report cards, including the Health
Plan Employer Data & Information Set (HEDIS), do not include indicators
specifically addressed to AIDS patients.

Possibly the hottest quality-related issue surrounding AIDS patients in HMOs
is financial incentives.  Because many HMOs pay providers on a capitated
basis, the incentive to not provide unnecessary services exists.  The practice
of HMOs denying what they consider "unneeded" treatments in order to hold down
costs has the AIDS community in an uproar.  With a lack of standards for
treatment, especially newer therapies, and with the cost of care escalating,
the furor is not likely to end any time soon.

One HMO that has addressed this issue by revamping its quality management
program is the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound of Seattle WA.  Founded
in 1947, this group-model HMO covers more than 500,000 lives in the Pacific
Northwest.  It functions as a cooperative governed by consumers.

Group Health recognizes the special needs of AIDS patients.  "TQM [total
quality management] for HIV-positive patients is not the same as that for
other diseases," says Wayne Dodge, MD, HIV/AIDS program director at Group
Health.  A more activist patient group plus a bevy of expensive treatments
available before effectiveness is proven creates "a challenge for all
providers," he says.

The HMO has a specific TQM structure for AIDS treatment, focused around three
groups committed to a team approach, says Dodge:

1.  The core committee, which meets twice a month, serves as the operating
committee for AIDS TQM activities.  It is multidisciplinary, consisting of
Dodge, the nursing HIV coordinator, a social worker, systems analyst,
administrator, and liaison with the local AIDS foundation.

2.  The steering committee is also a multidisciplinary panel providing general
direction and strategic planning to AIDS quality activities.  It meets
quarterly.

3.  The prevention subcommittee meets quarterly and specifically supports
preventive activities related to care of AIDS patients.

Puget Sound's focus on prevention has guided some of its decisions on AIDS
quality management.  The core committee reviewed the administration of Pap
smears and recommended this test be performed for all HIV-positive women
enrolled in the HMO, says Dodge.  In addition, prophylactic treatment is now
given to all HIV-positive patients with CD4 cell counts below 200 or less than
14 percent of white blood cells (the clinical definition of full-blown AIDS)
in order to prevent pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), which is common in
the AIDS population.

Another Group Health initiative, on physician expertise and AIDS, is contained
in an article published in the March 13 New England Journal of Medicine.  Mari
Kitahara, MD, the study's principal investigator, reported that men who were
the first-ever AIDS patient seen by a physician lived 14 months with
full-blown AIDS, compared with 26 months for men who consulted physicians that
had treated at least five cases of the disease previously.  Kitihara
calculated that patients treated by doctors more experienced in AIDS care had
a 43 percent lower risk of death after adjustment for CD-4 cell count.

Group Health has also developed a Clinical Roadmap, or a set of priorities for
HIV care.  "We have sent out flow sheets and pathways to caregivers," says
Dodge, adding that later in 1996 the HMO will evaluate how successful these
interventions are.

The problem of how to handle new treatments for AIDS is a difficult one, says
Dodge.  "We've got no real answer," he says, although several principles guide
the HMO.  No treatments considered experimental are covered by Group Health,
says Dodge, but other new treatments are placed on a "Code 29" list.  This
designation means that a drug is not automatically covered by the HMO, but if
the treating physician consults with a designated peer at Group Health, it may
be covered if deemed best for the patient.  Dodge says the new protease
inhibitors are on the Code 29 list.

Dodge says that his HMO has a huge advantage in analyzing processes and
improvements in AIDS care.  "We're a totally computerized system that includes
all levels of care," he says.  "I can't see how you can do good quality
management any other way."

Another managed care organization with an innovative approach to AIDS
treatment is the Community Medical Alliance (CMA) of Boston.  The Alliance is
an HMO founded in 1989 that manages only the care of AIDS patients and
chronically-ill populations with special needs.  Its current enrollment of
more than 300 includes 18 percent of Boston's Medicaid recipients that are
HIV-positive.  The state pays CMA a flat, capitated fee of $4,337.54 per
enrollee per month to manage the needs of Medicaid patients with AIDS.

CMA's QM structure for AIDS patients revolves around a committee that sets the
goals of the program, says Priscilla Meriot, QI director at the Alliance.
Goals are developed in conjunction with the Massachusetts Division of Medical
Assistance (Medicaid agency).  "We have a number of multidisciplinary teams
that have developed protocols," she says, including:

* prophylactic therapy for PCP; * pain management; * screening/treatment for
Cytomegalovirus retinitis; * screening for tuberculosis; and * Pap smear
screening for cervical cancer.

"We don't have any critical paths yet," says Meriot, acknowledging that the
complexity of treating AIDS patients often makes use of paths somewhat
difficult.  CMA has done some benchmarking using information from the medical
literature as a standard and will be doing more outcomes studies, frequently
using functional status as a measure of outcomes, she adds.

What have been the major enhancements in the quality of care managed by CMA?
Meriot first mentions that more patients live at home instead of in
institutions, which is a byproduct of coordinated care and early intervention.
CMA Medical Director Robert Master, MD, estimates that about 40 percent of
costs now go to hospital-based care, down from 60 percent to 75 percent when
the program started.

A second improvement is a more satisfied population with a better quality of
life, which Meriot attributes to CMA's educational activities.  In August
1995, Master stated there was "virtually no disenrollment from CMA due to
dissatisfaction" with the program.  Education of both patients and physicians
makes satisfaction rates higher and hospitalizations lower, he says.  "You
don't need as much specialty care if you have an educated, empowered patient
and a well-skilled and responsive primary care provider."

Better prevention of AIDS-related illnesses is a third area of achievement by
CMA.  "We're seeing fewer infections and a more delayed onset of certain
diseases," says Meriot.

In one example of this type of improvement, the 1992-93 rate of PCP episodes
was 17.2 per 100 patient years, down from 58.7 prior to enrollment in CMA.  Of
the 113 patients studied, 82 (73 percent) received prophylactic (preventive)
care under the management of CMA.  The drugs trimetheprim/sulfamethexazol,
aerosolized pentamidine, and dapsone were used in treatment for all but one of
the 82 patients.  The data appear in an article by Master in the Winter 1996
Journal of Ambulatory Care Management.

Meriot says the organization doesn't pay for experimental AIDS treatment, but
monitors the progress of patients already enrolled in clinical trials.  No
category of drug therapy is automatically paid for; all drug decisions must be
reviewed by the QI committee on a case-by-case basis.  Patients or physicians
have the right to appeal any decisions to an ethics advisory committee,
although such appeals "are rare," says Meriot.

A major thrust started by CMA last year is a redesign of the medical record
and a bolstering of the computer system to help the organization more
effectively manage patient care.

AN EMPLOYER TAKES A ROLE

Although a portion of the bill for treating HIV-positive patients is borne by
employers, corporations are not usually involved in quality standard setting
and monitoring.  One exception is the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) of
Maynard MA, which formed an HIV/AIDS program in 1988.

"It was really a partnership with HMOs," says Paul Ross, worldwide manager of
the program.  He says that since 1988, the proportion of DEC employees
choosing an HMO has increased.  Currently, most employees are covered by one
of 85 HMOs.

Ross says that DEC took several steps to manage quality of care given to
HIV-positive employees.  First, it hired Clinical Partners, a San
Francisco-based case management firm with considerable experience in AIDS
treatment, to better coordinate care.

Second, the company developed standards about five years ago for HIV/AIDS
treatment in conjunction with the 85 HMOs.  DEC mandates that HMOs comply with
these standards as part of the contract with the company.  Ross says that the
standards cover patient care, education, and reporting procedures, and "are
broad enough to accommodate the rapid upgrades in HIV/AIDS treatment."

DEC is currently working on an evaluation of what effects the standards have
had on care of its employees.  Although results aren't available yet, Ross
expects to see improvements in the continuum of care and education of the
staff, increased AIDS testing of at-risk workers, and a greater proportion of
physicians with AIDS expertise treating patients.

CAN AIDS CARE BE IMPROVED?

Most experts agree that while improving AIDS care is possible, it is
difficult.  The most desirable outcome - decreased mortality - is still
elusive.

GMHC's Dooha says there have been a number of improvements in recent years.
"There is definitely better coordination of care," she says, citing a greater
number of knowledgeable physicians who are more accessible to the public.  She
also lists the survival of patients with AIDS-related pneumonia and fewer,
less expensive hospitalizations as other improvements.

Statistics seem to back up Dooha's contentions that care is being better
coordinated and requiring fewer hospital stays.  The number and rate of
discharges continue to grow, which represents the rising number of
HIV-positive Americans in the population.  However, the average length of
stay, which was 17.1 days in 1985, dropped to 11.4 days in 1993, the latest
year for which data are available.  For the first time, days of care fell
between 1990-92, before rising again in 1993.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Developments In Brief


Conference on NCQA.  "Surviving NCQA:  Lessons Learned from Health Plans" is
the theme of a May 13-15 conference held by the American Assn.  of Health
Plans (AAHP) in San Antonio TX.  Participants will hear from health plans that
recently underwent accreditation surveys from the National Committee for
Quality Assurance.  For more information, contact AAHP at 202/778-3269.

PRO Contractor Sues Feds.  Following the termination of its contract as the
Peer Review Organization (PRO) for Maine and Rhode Island, Medical Synergy is
suing the Medicare program.  The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)
cited "significant weaknesses" in the company's proposal to renew the
contracts, which expire June 30.  Medical Synergy President Edward Lynch told
Faulkner & Gray's Medicine & Health that he believes philosophical differences
lie behind the decision - HCFA perceives the company as too tough on
providers.

NY Hospitals Receive Funds To Improve Home Care.  Nine New York City hospitals
have received grants totaling $500,000 to devise enhanced ways to help
patients manage their care at home after a hospital stay or outpatient
surgery.  Issues such as recognizing danger signs, coordinating medication
schedules, obtaining answers to medical questions, and finding psychological
support are examples of subjects to be researched by the hospitals.  The April
12 grant is part of the Discharge Preparation Initiative of New York's United
Hospital Fund.

HCFA Expands Centers for Excellence Program.  As many as 100 hospitals in 10
states will receive the "Participating Centers of Excellence" designation for
cardiovascular and orthopedic services from HCFA.  Such a designation is seen
as prestigious for hospitals, which must meet HCFA volume and quality
standards and are paid by Medicare through a "package price" for episodes of
care.  The initial two services in the program cover coronary artery bypass
graft surgery and outpatient cataract procedures.  Ten states are eligible
(AZ, CA, HI, IL, IN, MI, MN, NV, OH, and WI).  Call HCFA's Office of Research
and Demonstrations (410/786-7800) for more information.

New HSQB Director Appointed.  Richard W.  Besdine, MD, is the new director of
the federal Health Standards & Quality Bureau (HSQB), the agency responsible
for enforcing Medicare and Medicaid quality standards.  The April 9
announcement by Bruce C.  Vladeck, administrator of the HCFA (to whom Besdine
will report), notes his extensive academic experience at the University of
Connecticut and Harvard Medical School.  Besdine takes over for Barbara Gagel,
who resigned late last year.

Healthcare Forum Recognizes Young Leaders.  At its 1996 Healthier Communities
Summit in San Francisco on April 22, the Healthcare Forum recognized four
winners of the International Emerging Leaders in Healthcare award.  The award,
given to health care leaders under age 40 who have made achievements in
improving community health (national or local), went to Todd Linden of
Grinnell (IA) Regional Medical Center; Joanne Marqusee of Beth Israel Hospital
in Boston; Arthur Southam, MD, of CareAmerica in Woodland Hills CA; and Paul
Zucarelli of Partners Health Plan in Tucson AZ.  For more information about
the award, call Sally Mudd at the Healthcare Forum (415/356-4312).

CA Regulators Accused of Weak Oversight.  A California consumer group has
issued a report asserting that state regulators have not adequately evaluated
consumer complaints and overall quality of care by HMOs.  The April 11 report
by Consumers Union is critical of the state Dept.  of Corporations' ability to
keep up with the fast pace of HMO growth in California.  It recommends that
the state review HMOs every year instead of every three years and make review
standards available to the public.

Pocket Guides on LOS, Costs Available.  Three pocket guides giving the number
of 1992 hospital discharges, average LOS, and average charges for all
diagnosis and procedure groups were recently issued by the Agency for Health
Care Policy & Research (AHCPR).  The three guides are aggregated by 260
principal diagnosis categories, 230 procedure categories, and 492 Diagnosis
Related Groups.  For free copies, call AHCPR at 301/594-1410 and ask for the
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP-3) pocket guides.

Seattle Groups Team Up for QM Effort.  A think tank, the Peer Review
Organization, and a business coalition in the Seattle area have combined to
form the Quality Measurement Advisory Service.  The Service, funded by the
John A.  Hartford Foundation, will hold national and local meetings, assist
local groups in QM projects, and operate an information clearinghouse.  For
more information, call Richard Rubin at 206/682-2811.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>