
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B046-297</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033158 text/html 46146
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:30:02 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:58 GMT
Content-length: 45959
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la19.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 26, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>End Of An Era&nbsp;SOFTWARE WARS ARE OVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(711 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Change In Plans&nbsp;COMPUSERVE TO OFFER PARENTAL/USER CONTROL&nbsp;IN LIEU OF GERMAN BLOCK OUT OF NEWSGROUPS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Don't Post That Crypto&nbsp;THE ZIMMERMANN IRONY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(842 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Lemon Into Lemonade&nbsp;PHONE HOME, PROCD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(970 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Photo Wars&nbsp;COPYRIGHT REGS ON PHOTO REGISTRATION&nbsp;HAS PHOTOGRAPHERS, FINISHERS AT ODDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(590 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Learning To Live Together&nbsp;PRETTY GOOD GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1494 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>No Secrets&nbsp;UNDAUNTED BY CRYPTO LITIGATION, CYLINK PLANS IPO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>NO COMMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(266 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Inquiring Minds Want To Know:&nbsp;THE 200 NEWS GROUPS YOU CAN'T READ ON COMPUSERVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ONE YEAR AGO IN INFORMATION LAW ALERT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

End Of An Era
SOFTWARE WARS ARE OVER

Supreme Court's tie vote in Borland
moves debate over software to other arenas

The Supreme Court brought to a close, earlier this month, a
decade-long search in court for the proper and best way to
protect software.  The 4-4 tie in the Lotus v.  Borland case
will likely encourage parties to look to other forums,
particularly legislative bodies, for guidance and relief.

Most lawyers interviewed for this story say that there aren't
many cases percolating down below that are likely bait for
Supreme Court justices to nibble on.  "The age of the big cases
is over," said Jonathan Band, a partner in Morrison & Foerster's
D.C. office and coauthor of Interfaces on Trial, a book that
relives the great court fights involving software in the 1980s
and 1990s, Computer Associates v.  Altai, Apple v.  Microsoft,
Sega v.  Accolade, among many others.  "I don't see a case that
will capture the imagination of the Supreme Court and the
industry."

The Supreme Court's tie vote affirmed the First Circuit's
decision that Borland's copying the menu tree from Lotus's 1-2-3
spreadsheet program was not a copyright violation.  But the
unwritten decision has no precedential value and will give scant
guidance on what aspects of software are copyrightable
expression and what are uncopyrightable methods of operation.

                          HOPES DASHED

Most observers were surprised the court took the case in the
first place.  Once it did, there was widespread hope that the
justices would finally clear the air between the protectionists,
represented by Lotus and its new parent, IBM, and the
interoperable folks who brought the world Borland's Quattro Pro
and other products that have had depended upon their ability to
work with their competitors' products.

With the court so divided, it may be a long time before the
justices step into software waters anytime soon.  Justice John
Paul Stevens did not participate.

Even before the Supreme Court's ruling, there was already plenty
of action out of court to take care of what that might otherwise
take place inside the courtroom.

There is a multiyear effort, for example, to revise the Uniform
Commercial Code in an effort to give more muscle to shrink-wrap
licenses.  Companies have had limited success in court enforcing
software licenses because the buyer is unable to bargain over
terms and because some courts have found that the contracts are
an impermissible endrun of the copyright act (See related story
in this issue.)

Many companies are putting greater emphasis on protecting their
products through patents rather than or as a complement to
copyright.  This shift recognizes that courts have been
loosening restrictions over patents, while tightening the
requirements for copyright, and that patents have a greater
certainty than copyright.  (It's generally easier to interpret a
patent claim than to agree on copyright's coverage in software.)

Finally, Congress may be getting into the act.  There's nothing
like lawmakers on the loose today to divert attention from court
decisions tomorrow.  The Administration has proposed a series of
copyright changes in response to the threat and opportunity
presented by digital technology.

While parts of the legislative package are benign, it contains
proposals that have already divided the computer and software
industry.  In some respects, the Administration attempts to
accomplish in Congress what the software industry's
protectionist forces failed to do in court in issues involving
interoperability, reverse engineering, and fair use.

Over the next year, the time, energy, and money spent on
lobbying Congress on these issues will likely dwarf whatever is
devoted to similar court fights.

                             STASIS

Perhaps there isn't a blockbuster software case around the
corner because of a general comfort with the state of flux in
the law.  The sky has not fallen on the ultraprotectionists,
despite rulings such as the 9th Circuit's Sega v.  Accolade
decision that allows reverse engineering under limited
circumstances.  And neither has software become a giant visible
grab bag, into which competitors can dip and choose the best and
brightest features of their competitors' products.  The 2nd
Circuit's Computer Associates v.  Altai case lays out a broad
methodology other circuits are adopting to discover what is and
is not protected.  It's a confusing murkiness that the industry
seems to be learning to live with.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Change In Plans
COMPUSERVE TO OFFER PARENTAL/USER CONTROL
IN LIEU OF GERMAN BLOCK OUT OF NEWSGROUPS

Online provider does not want to face country-by-country
censorship decisions

CompuServe is close to lifting its global ban on about 200
Usenet groups that a German prosecutor said may violate
antipornography laws and will put in place controls that will
allow all its users--not just those in Germany--to block access
to
objectionable material.

CompuServe originally planned to block access to those groups to
only German subscribers but has backed away from that approach
in favor of so-called parental controls.

"We're really hesitant to become the Baskin & Robins of online
service providers, providing a different flavor [of content] in
different countries and cities," said Kent Stuckey, CompuServe's
business development manager and former general counsel.

At the end of 1995, CompuServe blocked all its customers from
accessing the newsgroups, many dealing with sexually explicit
topics and containing digital images of nasty stuff.  The
company said that it faced potential prosecution in Munich for
carrying the newsgroup.  Because CompuServe could not
technically block access to those groups to German customers at
that time, it put a global ban in place.

Earlier this month, CompuServe announced that it was developing
the technical ability to institute a ban limited only to
Germany.  But Stuckey says that, upon reflection, that approach
won't work either technically or administratively.

German users, for example, could access the system from a node
outside of Germany.  Moreover, it could force CompuServe to
configure the content that flows through its system to the
national, regional, and local standards wherever it does
business.

Stuckey says it makes more sense to put controls in the hands of
the end-user.  The controls will allow users to block material
that comes from within the CompuServe system and also from
outside the service, such as the Internet's multimedia
component, the World Wide Web, and the Usenet discussion group
network.  The blocking feature will be the digital equivalent of
brown paper wrappers that cover the "adult" magazines at
newsstands.

Stuckey says "we have reason to believe" that the controls will
satisfy the Munich prosecutor who was investigating the online
pornography.  CompuServe has about 250,000 customers in Germany.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Don't Post That Crypto
THE ZIMMERMANN IRONY

Gov't may be more likely to prosecute future cases
in wake of its decision to leave PGP author alone

Nearly five years after his popular encryption program Pretty
Good Privacy was posted on the Internet, Phil Zimmermann has
discovered he won't be prosecuted for conspiring to export a
munition.

Ironically, the three-year investigation into Zimmermann may
actually increase the odds of a prosecution if strong
cryptography is posted to an Internet site.  The international
publicity that has attended the Zimmermann investigation would
make it far harder for someone else to claim he or she was
unfamiliar with the government's concerns about the export of
cryptography.  "I think it would be easier to bring a case" if
the posting occurred in 1996, said Ken Bass, a partner in the
D.C. office of Venable, Baetjer.

Moreover, in 1991, when PGP was posted to computer sites, there
was not nearly the awareness of the global reach of the
Internet.

Today, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology distributes a
noncommercial version of PGP under a screening system that
limits access to U.S. citizens.

On January 11, William Keane, the federal prosecutor overseeing
the investigation, told Zimmermann's lead lawyer, Phil Dubois,
that his client would not be prosecuted.

Many individuals and computer companies believed the export
laws under which Zimmermann might have been prosecuted should be
relaxed to permit the free flow of strong cryptography.  They
believe cryptography enables free speech and that the
restrictions hurt the U.S. software companies that must dumb
down their products for export.

Like Bass, Dubois cautions that the decision not to prosecute
Zimmermann, a folk here for many in the online and computer
fields, should not be interpreted as a license to upload
tamper-proof crypto.

"Every year that goes by it strangely becomes more likely that
there could be a prosecution" because of the growing awareness
of the issues of cryptography, national security, and export, he
said.

If the government prosecuted Zimmermann, it would have been
forced to argue that the mere posting of PGP on a domestic
computer site qualifies as an export because it was
available--and found its way--overseas.  Prosecutors would also
have to show that Zimmermann, a security consultant who lives in
Boulder, Colorado, was acting in concert with the person who
posted the program.  Zimmermann himself says he did not post the
software.

                         UNKNOWN CLIENT

A California resident has taken credit for posting
the software in 1991 as a way to thwart legislation in Congress
that could have limited the availability of strong cryptography.
In various postings and articles, Jim Warren, a California
computer activist, journalist, and entrepreneur, has described
this person's activities in uploading the software.

Upon hearing that he would not be prosecuted, Zimmermann posted
a note to an Internet mailing list for cryptographers.  He
thanked his legal team and also "Joe Burton, counsel for the
codefendant."

Burton presumably represented this person during the
investigation, a
presumption Burton and Zimmermann's lawyers won't confirm.

In a later message, Dubois also cited the help Burton, who is
based in San Francisco, provided.  "He represented another
person who was under investigation.  To have made this other
person publicly known would have been an invasion of his
privacy, so we didn't.  We still won't, but we can finally
acknowledge Mr. Burton's enormous contribution.  .  .  .  Mr.
Burton labored quietly on behalf of his client.  He took the
case pro bono and did an extraordinary job."

                              NEXT

The government isn't commenting on why it declined to prosecute
Zimmermann.  One theory is that the government did not want a
trial to serve as a springboard for a public debate on export
controls and cryptography.  Another is that officials did not
want to put the export control regime at risk in litigation.
Zimmermann's lawyers would have argued that the law
unconstitutionally restricts speech.

These issues are not going away.  Bass, one of Zimmermann's
lawyers, is also representing Phil Karn, a engineer from
Southern California, who has waged a challenge to export
controls on free-speech grounds.  The case involves Karn's
desire to export a diskette that contains cryptographic source
code.  Although the government has permitted the export of a
book containing the same code, it won't permit the disk to leave
these shores.  Judge Charles Richey of D.C. Circuit Court is
likely to issue a ruling on the government's motion to dismiss
the case or for summary judgment in the next few months.

Separately, the Electronic Frontier Foundation is financing a
challenge of the export control laws on behalf of a University
of Chicago mathematics professor.  The suit challenges a section
of the Arms Export Control Act and its implementing regulation.
Daniel Bernstein filed suit after the State Department
determined that he would have to register as an arms dealer and
obtain a license in order to publish a scientific paper about
and the source code for a cryptographic program, which is
considered a munition.  The parties are awaiting the judge's
ruling on dismissal.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Lemon Into Lemonade
PHONE HOME, PROCD

Wisconsin judge rules that university student did not violate
shrinkwrap license by placing phone directory on the Internet

There's already a front runner for the 1996 award for, depending
upon your mood, either turning lemons into lemonade or uncanny
timing.

ProCD of Danvers, Massachusetts, is almost a lock to win the
award for either its quick response to a court loss or its
prescient timing.

The company last week announced that it would place 95 million
phone listings, which it sells as a CD-ROM product, on America
OnLine for customers to access.  "The main motivation for going
online is to expose the product to more people," a ProCD
spokesman.  "It's a brand-building project for us."

What ProCD neglected to mention was that two weeks earlier
federal judge Barbara Crabb of Madison, Wisconsin, had ruled
that the company could not stop a university student from
placing those listings on the Internet.  ProCD had sued Matthew
Zeidenberg, a University of Wisconsin computer science Ph.D.
candidate, who had placed listings from ProCD's SelectPhone
CD-ROM program on his Internet site.

The company sued Zeidenberg for copyright infringement.  In the
complaint, ProCD briefly claimed that he had violated ProCD's
copyright in the listings themselves (a claim clearly at odds
with the Supreme Court's 1991 Feist decision), but devoted most
of its effort trying to show infringement of the software
allowing users to access the listings.

ProCD also claimed Zeidenberg violated the terms of the
shrinkwrap license.

Despite having issued a preliminary injunction against
Zeidenberg late last year, judge Crabb concluded that copyright
law actually protected Zeidenberg's actions.

ProCD will appeal the ruling and has asked that the dissolution
of the injunction be stayed.  Zeidenberg, meanwhile, is
preparing to resume his online phone directory.  His site was
getting 20,000 "hits" a day before the court-ordered shutdown.

Coming so closely on the heels of the court decision, ProCD's
alignment with America OnLine looks like a way to manage the
adverse decision.

Not so, says Rob Levinson, the ProCD spokesman.  He says that
the America OnLine deal was in the works long before the court
ruling and that the two events are wholly unrelated.  Indeed,
many companies have found that the Internet and online services
provide an opportunity for potential users to sample
slimmed-down versions of their product for free.

                           SLAM DUNK

For example, America OnLine users can search the ProCD database
only by name, while licensed holders of the software can conduct
much more robust, granular searches.

Users can identify, for example, neighbors of a particular
person, or search the entire database by street name, a useful
feature if a voice-mail message is garbled.

Nonetheless, Crabb's ruling is hardly welcome, if unsurprising,
news for ProCD, for it permits licensed users of ProCD's product
to extract all the names and addresses in the database, despite
the shrinkwrap license, which forbids such a practice.

On each key point, she ruled in favor of Zeidenberg.

She dispensed with ProCD's copyright claim in the underlying
data in short order by citing the Feist decision, a case
informed by "a nearly identical context."

Nonetheless, Crabb displayed some ambivalence about this
outcome.  She said there was "substantial equitable appeal" to
ProCD's argument that "it is unfair and commercially destructive
to allow defendants to take the information plaintiff had
assembled with a significant investment of time, effort and
money."

ProCD argued that Zeidenberg should not have copied the software
onto his hard drive since that was not an "essential" step.  The
judge disagreed:  "This conclusion conflicts with both basic
patterns of computer use in the 1990s" and copyright law, which
allows copies if they are an "essential step" in the use of the
program.

ProCD also argued that Zeidenberg should be bound by the
shrinkwrap license, which says "you will not make the Software
or the Listings in whole or in part available to any other user
in any networked or time-shared environment, or transfer the
Listings in whole or in part to any computer other than the
computer used to access the Listings."

Crabb rejected that argument because Zeidenberg "did not receive
the opportunity to inspect or consider those terms" at the time
of the sale.  It didn't matter, the judge ruled, that Zeidenberg
eventually bought a second and third copy of the program since
"software companies are free to change the terms of their
shrinkwrap licenses between initial and later versions of their
products."

Even if Zeidenberg had assented to the contract, it is preempted
by copyright law, Crabb ruled.

The contract's "prohibition on the distribution of public
information cannot be squared with the purposes of copyright law
or with plaintiff's own compilation of data," she wrote, making
a special point of saying that ProCD is trying to close off
opportunities to others that it once took advantage of.

                             IRONY

"Had each of the compilers of the 3,000 directories that
plaintiff used to put together its database attached a set of
terms prohibiting further distribution of the information
included in its directories, plaintiff would not have been able
to create SelectPhone without negotiating with and compensating
each compiler for use of its data.  The Supreme Court's decision
in Feist allowed plaintiff to avoid these problems and create
its database without any fear of copyright infringement.  It is
ironic that after plaintiff has attained the benefits of
copyright law, it wants to prevent others from receiving that
same protection."

Coda:  The case was a maiden court voyage for David Austin,
Zeidenberg's lawyer.  He had been admitted to the bar the day to
original complaint was filed.

For the appeal, Zeidenberg will be relying on Austin and
another lawyer, Keith Napolitano, who is now in business school.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Photo Wars
COPYRIGHT REGS ON PHOTO REGISTRATION
HAS PHOTOGRAPHERS, FINISHERS AT ODDS

Deposit-less registration proposal is running into opposition

A proposed Copyright Office regulation allowing photographers
to register photographs depositing copies of them.  The proposal
is intended to encourage the registration of photographs but is
causing anxiety among photofinishers, who fear that they will
suddenly be liable for statutory damages and attorney's fees if
they reproduce a registered photo.

"I believe in the principle of copyright law.  No one should
take the work of an artist, in this case, a photographic artist,
an make an income from it without compensating the maker.  But,
if grandma wants to have a copy made of a photograph she has of
her grandchild for her own personal use, should this be a
prosecutable offense?  I don't think so," wrote Henry Oles,
president of EPS Photographic of San Marcos, Texas, in comments
to the office.

Representatives of the photo industry say that photofinishers
are blowing the proposal out of proportion.  They say the
proposed regulations, which they urged upon the office, are a
realistic way to give photographers the advantages of
registration without undue burden.  Few photographs are
currently registered, often because the photographer does not
know which of thousands of images may eventually be published.
It would also be expensive to register the photos individually.

Even though the proposed regulations would make it easier for
photographers to win statutory damages and attorneys' fees,
those awards are unlikely except in case of misconduct, argues
Charles Ossola of Lowe Price LeBlanc & Becker, counsel for the
American Society of Media Photographers.  "There is no basis for
anyone who acts in good faith to worry about statutory damages,"
Ossola said.

Ossola notes that the photo industry had strongly supported
efforts in the last Congress to relax registration requirements.

Under the proposal, a photographer can register a group of
photos taken within a year under a single title, provided he or
she provides basic identifying information about the photos.
The Library of Congress may request to view 50 to 100 of the
registered photos and select five to ten images from each group
registration.  The photos comprising the group don't necessarily
have to be of the same subject material.

Photofinishers feel they have been double-crossed.  This summer,
the industry published voluntary guidelines on copyright
protection that were meant to discourage litigation and protect
innocent infringers from damages.  The proposed regs, they say,
undercuts the guidelines.  "Many in the industry felt this was a
landmark agreement we could work with.  Now before this
agreement has been tried, the Copyright Office is proposing to
give photographers new incentives to sue," wrote John Heafield,
president of Photofast One Hour Photo in Birmingham, Michigan.

Comments on the proposal are due at the Copyright Office
February 9.  The deadline was pushed back twice.  At press time,
most of the nearly two dozen comments received opposed the
change, but Ossola's group and the other trade associations
representing photographers had yet to weigh in.

Ossola played down the possibility that photographers would try
to abuse the relaxed registration requirements.  "If you go to
court and commit perjury, you get in trouble," he said.

In the Federal Register, the Copyright Office said photographers
"need relief now."  An official at the Copyright Office declined
to speculate on when a decision on whether to issue the
regulation may be made.  The proposed regs originally were
supposed to be issued as "interim" regs, meaning they would take
effect immediately, but photofinishers were able to change that
at the last minute.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Learning To Live Together
PRETTY GOOD GUIDELINES

The photo industry's copyright guidelines provide useful
insights for online community

Editor's note:  Over the summer, after protracted negotiation,
the photo industry released voluntary guidelines on the
protection of copyright.  They set out responsibilities that
photographers and photo finishers agreed to assume in order to
protect the livelihood of photographers and minimize the risk of
litigation for photo finishers.

The guidelines are remarkably adaptable to the online industry,
which is struggling with similar issues.  The roles of online
service providers and photo finishers, for example, are closely
joined.  Thousands of copyrighted works pass through the portals
of providers and finishers each day.  There often is little or
no opportunity to check that the customers are the rightful
owners of the works.

A useful exercise is to replace the phrase "photo finisher" and
"photo processor" with "online service provider" and
"photograph" with the more general "content" in the guidelines,
reprinted below.

The Board of Directors of the American Society of Media
Photographers, the Professional Photographers of America, Photo
Marketing Association International, the Association of
Professional Color Laboratories, the Professional School
Photographers Association International, and the Coalition for
Consumers' Picture Rights, adopt the following guidelines
concerning copyright practice for members of the photo industry.

All members of the Photo Industry should:

1.  Recognize the photographer or studio as the owner of
copyright in his or her photographs in most circumstances,
particularly in the case of professional portraits.

2.  Encourage greater enjoyment of photography through the use
of photographs, made in compliance with applicable laws.

3.  Encourage all members of the photo industry to educate and
inform their customers and employees of the requirements of the
copyright laws and the need for adherence to and support of
those laws.  This should include working to educate the public
that the purchaser of a photograph does not automatically obtain
the right to make copies.

4.  Provide reasonable notice to customers that the permission
of the photographer is necessary under federal copyright law in
most circumstances for copying or other manipulation of a
photograph.

5.  Support and work together to obtain amendment of the
Copyright Act to eliminate copyright registration as a
precondition for statutory damages and attorneys' fees in cases
involving photographs, provided, however, that the amendments
also bar any award of statutory damages or attorneys' fees for
innocent infringement.  The parties will work together and with
Congress to make clear the meaning of "innocent infringement."

6.  Recognize that when infringement occurs that's not innocent,
statutory damages and attorneys' fees may be awarded.
Substantial awards should be made in cases of willful
infringement, or repeat infringement after notice.  Where
infringement is innocent, no statutory damages or attorneys'
fees should be awarded.

7.  Endorse the development of a voluntary identification system
for copyrighted photos so that labs and other users may properly
locate, seek permission from, and compensate copyright owners
for their copyrighted work.

8.  Work together to promote the growth of the industry and
ensure that new imaging technologies are used in responsible
ways consistent with the rights of all concerned.

In addition, photographers should:

1.  Prior to completion of the sales process, provide notice to
customers of the photographer's ownership of copyright, in an
effort to avoid confusion about the rights of the photographer.

2.  Provide customers with the information necessary to obtain
additional copies of the photographs.

3.  Where reasonably possible, identify and mark their
photographs sufficiently to permit others to know whom to
contact to obtain permission to copy, electronically or
otherwise manipulate, or prepare other derivative uses of the
photo.

4.  Respond promptly to requests for permission to copy,
electronically or otherwise manipulate, or prepare other
derivative uses of the photo, although there is no obligation to
grant such permission.

5.  Give written notice to the photo processor when a
photographer believes his or her copyright has been infringed,
in an effort to prevent further infringement, to determine the
cause of the alleged infringement, and to permit possible
resolution of the matter without the need for litigation.

In addition, photo processors should:

1.  Notify customers that the photo processor does not copy or
manipulate photos bearing a copyright notice without the
permission of the copyright owner named in the notice.

2.  Provide notice to customers, where practicable, that
copyrighted photographs will not be accepted without the
permission of the photographer (e.g., "No Copyrighted Photos"),
when photo processors use promotional techniques, such as mail
order and drop boxes that are within their control.  Where the
promotional techniques are not within the control of the photo
processor, the person in control should be requested to provide
such notice.

3.  Educate and inform responsible employees about their
responsibilities under copyright law and established policies
and practices.

4.  Inspect the front and back of photographs submitted for
copying to determine if a copyright notice or other notice that
the work is professional (such as a studio name or logo) is
present or appears to have been removed.  In either event, the
photo processor should decline to copy or manipulate the
photograph unless the customer reasonably establishes that
copying is permissible.

5.  Inspect the front and back of an unmarked image submitted
for copying to determine if it is reasonably recognizable as a
professional photograph.  Questionable cases should be separated
from routine orders and brought to management's attention.
Reasonable efforts should be made to determine whether the image
is a professional image.

6.  Utilize the following guidelines in evaluating a request to
copy photographs which the photo processor has reason to believe
may be professional.

a.  It is generally reasonable for a photo processor to rely on
a written consent to copying or other manipulation from the
photographer or studio named in a copyright notice or other
marking.

b.  Where the image is identified as a professional photograph
by a mark, or it reasonably appears that a mark has been altered
or removed, it generally is not reasonable to rely solely on
statements by customers claiming a right to copy the photograph.

c.  Where there is no marking identifying a photograph as a
professional photograph, but there is a question about whether
the photograph is professional, it is generally reasonable for a
photo processor to rely on a written statement by the customer
that the customer understands that copies must be authorized by
the photographer and that he or she is the photographer, or has
received such authorization.

d.  Circumstances such as prior written warnings from a
photographer or prior dealings with a customer may indicate that
further confirmation is necessary.

e.  Copying or restoring a photograph for the personal use of a
customer may be reasonable in cases where the age of the
photograph or the circumstances are such that the photographer
or studio is unlikely to object to copying and all reasonable
efforts have been made to obtain permission from the
photographer.  The industry will work together to develop
further guidelines for such copying.

7.  Document a claim of "fair use" in writing by an identified
customer, with a description of a legitimate fair use, and the
copy or manipulation should be appropriate and limited to the
fair use purpose which is claimed.  The industry will work
together to develop further guidelines for such copying.  These
guidelines are not intended to strengthen or weaken the doctrine
of fair use as incorporated in the Copyright Act and as
developed by the courts.

General:

These guidelines only deal with activities by industry members
and are not intended to excuse or mitigate customer infringement
liability under current copyright law.  While the customers'
knowledge and application of copyright law and practices may
have a significant impact on the industry, guidelines for the
customers' behavior are not provided.  An industry member's
efforts to follow these guidelines should be viewed on their own
merits.

The Photo Industry agrees to work together to develop further
guidelines and practices relating to:

1.  Practical and effective means of identifying photographs as
professional photographs.

2.  Standardized copyright warnings.

3.  "Fair use" copying.

4.  Restoration and copying of photographs where the age of the
photograph or the circumstances are such that the photographer
or studio is unlikely to object to copying.

5.  Processing of undeveloped customer film on automated
equipment, where determination of the content of the latent
images and the detection of infringement may not be possible.

THESE GUIDELINES ARE PREMISED ON THE BELIEF THAT LITIGATION IS
DETRIMENTAL TO THE PHOTO INDUSTRY, AND FOLLOWING THE GUIDELINES
WILL HELP AVOID IT.  THE GUIDELINES RECOMMEND TO THE COURTS THAT
IN CASES WHERE AN INFRINGEMENT HAS BEEN FOUND TO HAVE OCCURRED,
THE EXTENT OF THE GOOD FAITH EFFORTS BY THE PARTIES TO FOLLOW
THESE GUIDELINES SHOULD BE CONSIDERED IN DETERMINING WHETHER THE
INFRINGEMENT IS INNOCENT, NEGLIGENT OR WILLFUL.Photo Wars




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

No Secrets
UNDAUNTED BY CRYPTO LITIGATION, CYLINK PLANS IPO

Despite a 1 1/2-year-old court battle with onetime partner RSA
Data Security that gets topsier and turvier by the month, Cylink
Corp. is planning to go public.

The Sunnyvale, California, company bares all about its fight
with RSA in documents now on file with the Securities and
Exchange Commission.  RSA and Cylink are fighting over the
breakup of their patent pool that once controlled all the key
patents teaching public key cryptography, a bedrock upon which
electronic commerce will be built, if it is to be built at all.

 They are at odds in four suits and an arbitration, all
involving the validity of licensing of patents.  Cylink plays
down a negative outcome in any of the disputes, except one
involving the so-called Schnorr patent that RSA, a sublicensee,
claims covers the U.S. government's digital signature standard.
Cylink is seeking a ruling that a license for the patent is not
needed to build DSS equipment but acknowledges that its business
could be "materially and adversely affected" by a loss in that
case.

Cylink, which reported sales of $26 million during the first
nine months of 1995, hopes to raise nearly $50 million through
the sale of 5 million shares, or about 18 percent of the
company.  RSA has also reportedly considered a public offering.

It's no wonder.  The market for information security products
has never been hotter, now that the Internet is starting to show
its potential of becoming a commercial marketplace.  Lemon Into




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

NO COMMENT

The following letters were received recently by Simba
Information, Inc., a newsletter publisher, from Microsoft Corp.

"Microsoft currently subscribes to your publication entitled:
Electronic Education Report (the "Publication").  Because your
publication resides in our library at Microsoft we may receive
requests from employees for copies of particular articles from
the Publication.  The Microsoft Library would like to include
this Publication in its list of approved publications for
article reproduction.  We request that you sign this letter and
consent to Microsoft reproducing copies of articles from the
Publication obtained from any source and in any format, whether
print or electronic, for distribution solely to employees of
Microsoft for internal use only.  If you have any questions
regarding this matter, please feel free to contact me.  Please
return the signed letter to my attention in the enclosed
envelope.  If we do not hear from you we will assume your
approval of this agreement."

After Simba denied Microsoft, it received the following letter:

".  .  .It has come to my attention that due to an error in the
generation of the report from our serials tracking database,
your publication was mistakenly selected as one requiring
contact for possible permission.  The report erroneously
generated the letter you received.

"Noting the error, I have confirmed that we did indeed receive a
response from your company denying our request for copyright
license and that your response is on file.  We do honor your
instruction as the copyright holder and include proper notation
in both our library catalog and with the shelved copies in our
collection.  .  ."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Inquiring Minds Want To Know:
THE 200 NEWS GROUPS YOU CAN'T READ ON COMPUSERVE

alt.binaires.pictures.erotica.teen
alt.binaries.erotic.senior-citizens
alt.binaries.multimedia.erotica
alt.binaries.pictures.black.erotic.females
alt.binaries.pictures.erotic.anime
alt.binaries.pictures.erotic.centerfolds
alt.binaries.pictures.erotic.senior-citizens
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.amateur.d
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.amateur.female
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.amateur.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.animals
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.anime
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.art.pin-up
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.balls
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.bears
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.bestiality
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.black.females
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.black.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.blondes
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.bondage
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.breasts
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.butts
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.cartoons
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.cheerleaders
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.d
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.disney
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.female
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.female.anal
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.feet
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.hair
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.latex
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.leather
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.furry
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.gaymen
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.latina
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.male.anal
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.midgets
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.oral
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.orientals
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.plushies
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pornstar
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pornstars
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pre-teen
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pregnant
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.redheads
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.spanking
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.tasteless
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.d
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.female
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.fuck
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.terry.agar
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.transvestites
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.uncut
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.urine
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.voyeurism
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.young
alt.binaries.pictures.groupsex
alt.binaries.pictures.lesbians
alt.binaries.pictures.lolita.misc
alt.binaries.pictures.nude.celebrities
alt.binaries.sounds.erotica
alt.homosexual
alt.magick.sex
alt.magick.sex.angst
alt.motss.bisexua-l
alt.politics.sex
alt.recovery.addiction.sexual
alt.recovery.sexual-addiction
alt.religion.sexuality
alt.sex
alt.sex.aliens
alt.sex.anal
alt.sex.animals
alt.sex.asphyx
alt.sex.balls
alt.sex.bears
alt.sex.bestiality
alt.sex.bestiality.barney
alt.sex.bestiality.hamster.duct-tape
alt.sex.bondage
alt.sex.bondage.furtoonia
alt.sex.bondage.sco.unix
alt.sex.boredom
alt.sex.boys
alt.sex.breast
alt.sex.brothels
alt.sex.carasso
alt.sex.children
alt.sex.cthulhu
alt.sex.disney
alt.sex.doom.with-sound
alt.sex.dylan
alt.sex.enemas
alt.sex.erotica.market.place
alt.sex.erotica.marketplace
alt.sex.escorts.ads
alt.sex.escorts.ads.d
alt.sex.exhibitionism
alt.sex.extropians
alt.sex.fat
alt.sex.femdom
alt.sex.fencing
alt.sex.fetish.amputee
alt.sex.fetish.diapers
alt.sex.fetish.drew-barrymore
alt.sex.fetish.fa
alt.sex.fetish.fashion
alt.sex.fetish.feet
alt.sex.fetish.hair
alt.sex.fetish.jello
alt.sex.fetish.motorcycles
alt.sex.fetish.orientals
alt.sex.fetish.peterds.momma
alt.sex.fetish.power-rangers.kimberly.tight-spandex
alt.sex.fetish.robots
alt.sex.fetish.scat
alt.sex.fetish.size
alt.sex.fetish.smoking
alt.sex.fetish.sportswear
alt.sex.fetish.startrek
alt.sex.fetish.the-bob
alt.sex.fetish.tickling
alt.sex.fetish.tinygirls
alt.sex.fetish.trent-reznor
alt.sex.fetish.waifs
alt.sex.fetish.watersports
alt.sex.fetish.wet-and-messy
alt.sex.fetish.white-mommas
alt.sex.fetish.wrestling
alt.sex.first-time
alt.sex.fish
alt.sex.furry
alt.sex.gangbang
alt.sex.girl.watchers
alt.sex.girls
alt.sex.guns
alt.sex.hello-kitty
alt.sex.historical
alt.sex.homosexual
alt.sex.incest
alt.sex.intergen
alt.sex.jesus
alt.sex.jp
alt.sex.magazines
alt.sex.marsha-clark
alt.sex.masturbation
alt.sex.midgets
alt.sex.modem-kamikaze
alt.sex.motss
alt.sex.movies
alt.sex.necrophilia
alt.sex.nudels.me.too
alt.sex.oral
alt.sex.orgy
alt.sex.pedophilia
alt.sex.pedophilia.boys
alt.sex.pedophilia.girls
alt.sex.pedophilia.pictures
alt.sex.pedophilia.swaps
alt.sex.pictures
alt.sex.pictures.d
alt.sex.pictures.female
alt.sex.pictures.male
alt.sex.plushies
alt.sex.pre-teens
alt.sex.prostitution
alt.sex.reptiles
alt.sex.safe
alt.sex.services
alt.sex.sgml
alt.sex.sm.fig
alt.sex.snakes
alt.sex.sounds
alt.sex.spanking
alt.sex.stories
alt.sex.stories.d
alt.sex.stories.gay
alt.sex.stories.hetero
alt.sex.stories.moderated
alt.sex.stories.tg
alt.sex.strip-clubs
alt.sex.super-size
alt.sex.swingers
alt.sex.tasteless
alt.sex.telephone
alt.sex.toons
alt.sex.trans
alt.sex.ugly
alt.sex.uncut
alt.sex.video-swap
alt.sex.voxmeet
alt.sex.voyeurism
alt.sex.wanted
alt.sex.wanted.escorts.ads
alt.sex.watersports
alt.sex.weight-gain
alt.sex.wizards
alt.sex.young
alt.sex.zoophile
alt.sexy.bald.captains
alt.stories.erotic
alt.support.disabled.sexuality
alt.tv.tiny-toon.sex
clari.news.crime.sex
clari.news.gays
clari.news.sex aus.sex de.talk.sex es.
alt.sexo fido.ger.sexfido.sex-ger
fido7.ru-sex fido7.ru-sex.adv
fido7.russian-sexfinet.sex
fido7.other.russian.sex
fido7.ru.sex
gay-net.behinderte
gay-net.btx-ecke
gay-net.coming-out
gay-net.dfue
gay-net.erotic-stories
gay-net.gruppen.general
gay-net.guide.bundesweit
gay-net.guide.weltweit
gay-net.haush
altgay-net.international
gay-net.kontakte
gay-net.labern
gay-net.lederecke
gay-net.spiele
gay-net.test
rec.arts.erotica
shamash.gayjews
slo.sex
soc.support.youth.gay-lesbian-bit-netz.sex
t-netz.sex-stories
ucb.erotica.sensual
uw.alt.sex.beastiality
uw.alt.sex.bestiality
uw.alt.sex.bondage
uw.alt.sex.stories
uw.alt.sex.stories.d zer.t-netz.sex
zer.t-netz.sex




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

ONE YEAR AGO IN INFORMATION LAW ALERT

Unisys Corp.'s demands for royalties on a popular method of
compressing data was causing anxiety and anger in those sections
of the online community unaccustomed to concerning themselves
with patents.  (Unisys has quietly been signing licensees,
including America OnLine, Prodigy, Software Publishing Corp.,
Symantec, Sierra Semiconductor, Goldstar, and 3Com Corp.)

The International Trademark Association formed a task force to
identify and examine the difficulties in protecting corporate
identities on the Internet.  Several recent cases had exposed
the conflicts between trademark law, which is based on a
first-to-use basis, and the registration of Internet addresses,
which occurs on a first-applied, first-registered basis without
regard to trademark rights.  (InterNIC, the government-funded
entity registry of Internet addresses, has revised its policy of
assigning names, but the changes provided cold comfort to
trademark owners.)

Lawyers for Phil Zimmermann, the inventor of PGP, met with the
U.S. Attorney's office in San Jose in an attempt to ward off an
indictment.  The government is investigating how PGP, a powerful
encryption program, made its way overseas in violation of
federal law prohibiting the export of such programs without
proper licenses.  (See related story, this issue.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>