
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B036-129</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te73.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045242 text/html 38804
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:50:41 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:57 GMT
Content-length: 38617
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te73.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>INTERNET ACCESS: NEW WORLD WIDE WEB INTERFACE SOFTWARE FROM CUADRA SPURS&nbsp;"INTRANET" USE; STAR/WEB FROM CUADRA SUPPORTS GROWING TREND AMONG FORTUNE&nbsp;1000 COMPANIES OF USING WEB TECHNOLOGY FOR INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(716 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>NEW NETWORK: CONSTRUCTION UNDER WAY ON NEW FIBER-OPTIC NETWORK FOR NEW&nbsp;ENGLAND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(512 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ACQUISITION: AT&T ACQUIRES PHILIPS' PUBLIC NETWORK ASSETS IN EUROPE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(518 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>ACQUISITION: PHILIPS ELECTRONICS NORTH AMERICA CORP. ACQUIRES ALAMAR;&nbsp;ALAMAR TO OPERATE AS INDEPENDENT SUBSIDIARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(259 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NEW SATELLITE: ECHOSTAR-I LIFT-OFF SUCCESSFUL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(295 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>LOCAL COMPETITION: TIME WARNER COMMUNICATIONS ASKS PUCO TO INTERVENE IN&nbsp;NEGOTIATIONS WITH AMERITECH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(411 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ATM: CASCADE ANNOUNCES SHIPMENT OF THE CASCADE 500 ATM SWITCH; ON-TIME&nbsp;DELIVERY FROM THE WORLD LEADER IN FRAME RELAY WAN SWITCHING DELIVERS&nbsp;UNMATCHED ATM SCALABILITY & GUARANTEED END-TO-END QUALITY OF SERVICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(893 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>VOICE PROCESSING: ENHANCED SYSTEMS INC., A WHOLLY OWNED SUBSIDIARY OF&nbsp;VODAVI TECHNOLOGY INC., IN VOICE ACTIVATED DIALING AGREEMENT WITH GTE&nbsp;MOBILNET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(391 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>EXECUTIVE SUITE: R. MICHAEL FRANZ TO JOIN SPRINT AS PRESIDENT OF&nbsp;DIVERSIFIED BRANDS GROUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(342 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>FINANCIAL: V BAND REPORTS FINANCIAL RESULTS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(544 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INTERNET ACCESS: NEW WORLD WIDE WEB INTERFACE SOFTWARE FROM CUADRA SPURS
"INTRANET" USE; STAR/WEB FROM CUADRA SUPPORTS GROWING TREND AMONG FORTUNE
1000 COMPANIES OF USING WEB TECHNOLOGY FOR INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS

New technology originally designed for use with the Internet World Wide
Web, the global network of publicly accessible computers, is increasingly
being used by Fortune 1000 companies for strictly private use on their
internal networks for in-house communications and information storage and
retrieval.

And STAR/Web, a software product by Cuadra Associates, a leading software
developer based in Los Angeles, is helping them do it.

The use of Web concepts and technology in internal networks is being
widely referred to as "Intranet." One of the major attractions is that it
lets companies give their staff members better access to internal
information resources, regardless of whether they use PCs, Macs,
X-terminals, RISC workstations, or any combination of these.  It also
allows them to store data on a number of different systems, yet access the
data through a common user interface.  Any desktop workstation for which
there is a Web browser can be used to access corporate data easily through
the company's Intranet.

Early adopters of Web technology for in-house information, such as Pacific
Bell and Amdahl Corp., claim that their investments in the Intranet
approach and STAR/Web are already paying off handsomely.  STAR/Web is a
common gateway interface (cgi) program that connects STAR, Cuadra's
powerful information management and retrieval software, to any standard or
commercial Web server so it can be used to provide sophisticated,
interactive information retrieval to large corporate databases.

"Our purchase of STAR/Web has allowed Amdahl to move swiftly towards our
goal of creating a Web window into vast amounts of corporate data which
has previously been locked up on individual machines or on specific
platforms," says Christel Casjens, information specialist at Amdahl Corp.,
a leading data communications supplier.  "It has enabled us to capitalize
on our prior investment of creating a corporate `Intranet', as well as
employee familiarity with the Internet and Web browsers.  All of these
factors make us confident that the tools being built using STAR/Web will
facilitate the flow of timely information to all employees, which can only
lead to greater corporate responsiveness to the changing market
environment."

At Pacific Bell, the incorporation of the Intranet model has changed the
way that the company views and uses information resources.  Pacific Bell
is standardizing desktop tools throughout the company and using STAR/Web
for internal access to the information in its Corporate Intelligence
Center.  "We have been actively exploring ways to exploit other sources of
information," says Ralph Miller, director of the center.  "Departments
within Pacific Bell have developed Web sites to disseminate information to
other departments, so we're experiencing increased awareness and usage of
internal information sources horizontally across the corporation."

Pacific Bell and Amdahl are typical of organizations that have created and
collected a great deal of valuable data -- their "corporate memory" --
stored on a number of different computers using more than one software
package.  Getting access to such data has typically been very difficult to
do, particularly since it involves learning multiple interfaces or search
systems.

Now, with standard Web software and facilitating software such as
STAR/Web, the distributed information model popularized on the Internet
provides an easy solution.  If the search software follows the common
gateway interface standard and the data includes hypertext links, staff
members can use Netscape, Mosaic, and other Web browsers already familiar
to them to search and retrieve information of almost any type or length.
When users find relevant information, they can "click" on hypertext links
and find other, related information, no matter on which computer on the
internal network the data is stored.

The role of STAR/Web in the Intranet model is to support the searching of
large databases, with sophisticated, interactive, assisted searching.
Unlike the typical clicking through menus to find a succession of
"screens," STAR/Web users enjoy a full array of high-performance
interactive information retrieval capabilities appropriate for large
databases representing paper, electronic, and image files.

For more information, contact Cuadra at 310/478-0066, 800/366-1390, fax
310/477-1078, or e-mail to hq@cuadra.com.

Amdahl is  a worldwide supplier of large-scale System/390 compatible
processors, UNIX systems software and servers, data storage subsystems,
data communications products, applications development software, and a
variety of educational and consulting services.  Amdahl products are sold
in more than 30 countries for use across all types of computing
environments.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW NETWORK: CONSTRUCTION UNDER WAY ON NEW FIBER-OPTIC NETWORK FOR NEW
ENGLAND

Construction of a new fiber-optic communications network for New England
has begun, FiveCom Inc., of Waltham, Mass., announced today.

"The NEON light is on, and we're moving," said FiveCom president Victor
Colantonio, referring to FiveCom's New England Optical Network
communications project.

"We're installing NEON's 36-mile link between Hartford and Springfield,"
Colantonio said.  "That moves us toward our first-phase goal of a 410-mile
network backbone linking most cities in three New England states by the
end of 1997.  The fiber-optic system will offer high-capacity transmission
of voice, video and data.  We expect to build continuously from that
backbone to serve the entire New England region, and possibly eastern
Canada as well."

The first phase of NEON is being built in the areas of Connecticut,
Massachusetts and New Hampshire served by the operating companies of
Hartford-based Northeast Utilities.  FiveCom has long-term agreements
allowing it to install fiber-optic cable throughout the utility's service
area.

FiveCom will seek to negotiate similar agreements with other New England
utility companies to expand its reach.  It has secured a letter of intent
from Central Maine Power Co., Maine's largest electric utility.

Construction costs for the first phase of NEON could exceed $30 million,
including tasks such as installing specially manufactured 96-fiber cable.

FiveCom is offering leases of fiber-optic capacity to major carriers that
will be less costly than new construction by the carriers themselves.
"Piggybacking fiber on utility property is a win-win move," Colantonio
said.  "It adds value to an existing asset for the utilities, and offers
carriers a fast and economical option for adding extremely reliable
capacity to their systems."

FiveCom shareholders recently voted to sell a controlling interest in the
privately held company to MaineCom Services, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Central Maine Power Co.  Besides stock, MaineCom gains seats on FiveCom's
board and contracts for the continued services of FiveCom principals.
Legal and financial details of the transaction were not disclosed.

"This a terrific opportunity for Central Maine Power and MaineCom
Services," said Gerald C. Poulin, chairman of MaineCom's board and a CMP
vice president.  "The technology is proven, the potential market is big,
and FiveCom's position in the market is impressive."

Poulin added, "The relationships we're building by this investment could
lead to new utility partners, joint ventures and strategic alliances that
could promote FiveCom's expansion."

MaineCom Services began operations earlier this year after the Maine
Public Utilities Commission approved CMP's request for permission to
undertake limited diversification into new lines of business in New
England and eastern Canada.  "We've done fee-for-service work and
consulting," said MaineCom president Mark E. Curtis, "but this acquisition
is a critical step toward our business objective."

Curtis said the combination of FiveCom's technical and marketing savvy and
its current facilities agreement make it a very valuable acquisition.
"FiveCom is a young company," he said, "but they've very quickly seized a
commanding position to compete in the carrier market.  We will fully
support their plans to build on that foundation and become a market leader
in the Northeast."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACQUISITION: AT&T ACQUIRES PHILIPS' PUBLIC NETWORK ASSETS IN EUROPE

AT&T Network Systems and Philips Electronics N.V. have signed the final
purchase agreement under which AT&T has acquired a portion of the public
network assets held by the Philips Communication Systems division.
Financial terms and conditions of the transaction were not disclosed.  The
final agreement follows the memorandum of understanding the two companies
signed July 27.

Under the terms of the contract, AT&T Network Systems has purchased the
assets related to four Philips Communications Systems units:  Cellular
Infrastructure Systems; Managed Transport Networks; Microwave Transmission
and Access; and Transmission.  These assets are currently held by
Telecommunications Radioelectriques et Telephoniques (TRT) of Paris,
France, and Philips Kommunikations Industrie (PKI) of Nuremberg, Germany.

The contract provides for AT&T Network Systems to purchase from Philips
Electronics the legal entity of TRT, and assets of PKI associated with the
acquired business units.  Both TRT and PKI are subsidiaries of Philips.
AT&T Network Systems assumes the TRT legal entity, name and brand while
Philips retains the PKI legal entity and name.

For AT&T Network Systems, the acquisition signals a strengthened
commitment to offer customers worldwide the industry's most robust and
competitive wireless and transmission infrastructure solutions.

Philips' public network communications systems businesses include its
Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) base station equipment; rural
telephony solutions; point-to-point microwave transmission equipment;
wireless local network access using the Digital European Cordless
Telecommunications (DECT) standard; high-speed transmission systems based
on the Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) standard; and other public
network systems.

By the end of 1996 -- following the completion of AT&T's restructuring
into three separate companies -- AT&T Network Systems will become an
integral part of a new publicly-traded systems and technology company. The
company will retain the technological expertise and innovation of Bell
Laboratories.

AT&T and Philips will complete the transfer of ownership to AT&T Network
Systems in early 1996.

AT&T Network Systems will assume a global workforce of approximately 3,500
employees from PKI and TRT comprising managers, development staff and
engineers, factory workers and marketing and sales personnel.  The
purchase agreement covers PKI and TRT sales organizations in 25 countries
worldwide.

The acquired assets also include specified commercial, manufacturing and
R&D resources in Nuremberg, Germany, and Paris, Rouen and Lannion, France.
Philips intends to integrate the remaining activities of PKI into Philips
GmbH in Germany, and the remaining TRT activities into the Philips
organization in France.

In line with its Personal Communications strategy, Philips will retain
such products as cellular, corded and cordless telephones; facsimiles and
pagers; and its private network business units in Business Communication
Systems; Data Communications; Private Mobile Radio; and Smart Cards and
Systems.

Philips Electronics of the Netherlands is one of the world's largest
electronics companies, with sales of $33.7 billion in 1994, and some
265,000 employees worldwide.  Its products include lighting, consumer
electronics, recorded music, components, semiconductors, communication
systems, medical systems, industrial electronics, and domestic appliances
and personal care products.

AT&T Network Systems is one of the world's largest providers of
telecommunications equipment, software and end-to-end solutions used by
network service and information providers around the world.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACQUISITION: PHILIPS ELECTRONICS NORTH AMERICA CORP. ACQUIRES ALAMAR;
ALAMAR TO OPERATE AS INDEPENDENT SUBSIDIARY

Philips Electronics North America Corp. has completed its acquisition of
Alamar Electronics USA, Inc., a leading producer and installer of
broadcast, cable and satellite television automation systems. Purchase
price was not disclosed.

Alamar becomes part of Philips' Business Electronics which includes
extensive holdings in broadcast television equipment, systems and
services.  "Philips plans to help Alamar continue its fast growth as a
natural extension of our television broadcasting activities," said Stephen
C. Tumminello, president, Philips Electronics North America Corp.

Alamar has become the dominant provider of software-based solutions in the
market.  Broadcast, cable and satellite system automation is rapidly
expanding, noted Douglas A. Hurrell, Alamar's founder and president.  "We
are experiencing increases in demand from virtually all global media
outlets.  These trends make our affiliation with Philips very timely and
exciting."

Alamar will continue to operate within its existing management structure.
For example, the BTS Broadcast Television Systems unit of Philips now
offers Alamar products and services to customers in the studio operations
field.  This acquisition allows Philips to offer turnkey broadcast signal
management systems complete with automation solutions.

Since its formation 13 years ago, Alamar, based in Campbell, Calif., has
installed more than 400 automation systems in broadcast, cable and
satellite facilities throughout the world.

Philips Electronics North America Corp. is a major manufacturer and
exporter in the United States, with more than 30,000 employees and annual
sales of $7 billion.  Philips Electronics N.V. is among the world's
largest electronics companies, with more than 250,000 employees worldwide
and annual sales of $34 billion.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW SATELLITE: ECHOSTAR-I LIFT-OFF SUCCESSFUL

EchoStar Communications Corporation ("EchoStar"), announced the successful
lift-off Thursday morning of its first direct broadcast satellite (DBS),
EchoStar-I, from China Great Wall Industry Corporation's Xichang, China
launch facility.

The Lockheed Martin Series 7000 satellite was launched atop an LM-2E
launch vehicle.  It will provide programming from its final location at
119" west longitude for EchoStar's DISH Television Network beginning early
next year.

"EchoStar-I was successfully launched into low-earth orbit at 4:51 a.m.
(MST) today.  This is great news, but it is only the first step," stated
EchoStar Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Charles Ergen from the
launch site in Xichang, China.

"We have confirmation that we have successful firing of the third stage,
which will place the satellite in its transfer orbit," commented Carl
Vogel, President of EchoStar Satellite Corporation. "We expect
confirmation of final spacecraft separation and achievement of geotransfer
orbit by 2:00 p.m. (MST) Thursday."

Headquartered in Englewood, Colorado, EchoStar Communications Corporation
is a leading manufacturer and distributor of satellite television systems
worldwide.  EchoStar is developing a state-of-the- art DBS system, the
DISH (Digital Sky Highway) Network, expected to be operational early next
year with programming transmitted from EchoStar-I.  A total of over 200
channels of digital video, audio and data services are expected to be
delivered to homes throughout the continental United States with the
launch of EchoStar-II in mid-1996. EchoStar Communications Corporation and
its subsidiaries deliver direct-to-home (DTH) satellite television
products and services to customers worldwide.  The Company is a single,
convenient source for equipment distribution, sales, installation, and
service; consumer financing; and programming distribution; and is widely
recognized in the industry for its research and development activities.
EchoStar's international operations include sales and service locations in
Holland, Spain, Singapore, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia and India.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

LOCAL COMPETITION: TIME WARNER COMMUNICATIONS ASKS PUCO TO INTERVENE IN
NEGOTIATIONS WITH AMERITECH

After a year of negotiations, Time Warner Communications says Ameritech is
either unable or unwilling to reach an agreement to interconnect its
network and it is time for the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO)
to get involved.

The company said that an agreement with Ameritech "must be concluded by
the parties, with commission intervention or by commission directive, by
mid-January 1996 or the promise of local telephone competition in Ohio
will be even further delayed."

Time Warner Communications made the request for PUCO intervention in its
second 60-day report to the commission on the status of interconnection
negotiations with Ameritech and other monopoly telephone companies.

Time Warner Communications has been negotiating with Ameritech since
December 1994.  "While the parties have clearly reached agreements on all
technical issues necessary for interconnection, the same cannot be said
with respect to the economic aspects of interconnection," the company said
in its letter to PUCO Chairman Craig Glazer.

Although the details of the negotiations are subject to a confidentiality
agreement, Time Warner Communications said that charges proposed by
Ameritech for some key services are excessive and that no cost
justification has been provided by Ameritech.  In addition, "Time Warner
Communications believes that it is not negotiating directly with those
individuals in Ameritech who can finally explain, modify and conclude
interconnection agreements," the report said.

It further stated that negotiations with Ameritech are most critical
because Time Warner Communications plans to begin offering competitive
local telephone service in Ameritech's area first.

The company said it has had only preliminary discussions with Cincinnati
Bell and recently began negotiations with GTE-North. Talks also are
underway with United Telephone of Ohio.

Time Warner Communications was granted a provisional certificate to
provide local telephone service in 37 Ohio counties by the PUCO in August.
Before it can compete with existing telephone companies, it must reach
interconnection agreements with them so customers can make calls to
anyone, regardless of which phone company they use. The PUCO also must
approve certain rules under which telephone companies will compete before
Time Warner enters the market.

Time Warner Communications is a division of Time Warner Cable that is
leading the company's entry into the telephone business.  It currently
provides local telephone service in Rochester, NY and competitive access
service in 15 locations across the country.  Time Warner Cable has four
operating divisions in Ohio serving more than 732,000 customers and
passing 1.2 million homes.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ATM: CASCADE ANNOUNCES SHIPMENT OF THE CASCADE 500 ATM SWITCH; ON-TIME
DELIVERY FROM THE WORLD LEADER IN FRAME RELAY WAN SWITCHING DELIVERS
UNMATCHED ATM SCALABILITY & GUARANTEED END-TO-END QUALITY OF SERVICE

Leveraging its leadership and proven expertise in providing powerful
connection-oriented Frame Relay wide area network (WAN) switches, Cascade
Communications Corp. Thursday announced that it has attained a
breakthrough engineering achievement through rapid market delivery of the
functionally-rich, high-capacity Cascade 500 Asynchronous Transfer Mode
(ATM) switch.

With delivery timing as planned, the Cascade 500 has shipped to four
organizations for beta testing, including PSINet Inc. and LDDS WorldCom.
This marks the third delivery of a major system platform from Cascade in
the last three years.

Building upon Cascade's expertise in designing large Frame Relay networks,
the Cascade 500 delivers the industry's highest scalability and
reliability, critical requirements as the number of users on the Internet
and other wide area networks continues to explode and higher-speed
applications are deployed.  Featuring the industry's only quad-plane
architecture and quality-of-service- capable routing software (via
Cascade's Virtual Network Navigator), the Cascade 500 delivers end-to-end
ATM quality of service, guaranteeing simultaneous network transport of
data and multimedia applications.  Seamlessly integrated with Cascade's
standards- compliant B-STDX multiservice switches and fully manageable by
CascadeView, the only standards-compliant WAN network management system,
the Cascade 500 provides a complete solution for cost-efficient and
easy-to- administer high-capacity networks.

"We are pleased that major organizations have not only recognized the
robust ATM capabilities of the Cascade 500, but also its strategic
system-level capabilities within their overall communications initiative,"
said Daniel E. Smith, president and CEO for Cascade.  "With the Cascade
500, we continue to deliver timely, best-of-breed products that meet
real-world customer requirements with complete integration with existing
network systems."

One organization testing the Cascade 500 is Internet giant PSINet Inc.
"With Cascade's B-STDX Frame Relay switches, we have experienced
tremendous success in meeting explosive demand for our Internet services
worldwide," said Martin L. Schoffstall, senior vice president and CTO of
PSINet.  "With availability of the Cascade 500 ATM switch, we will build
upon that success, leveraging the Cascade 500's unique quality of service
and scalability features for the introduction of exciting new
Internet-hosted multimedia applications, such as on-demand interactive
video and voice, and real-time multi-player, multimedia gaming."

"Furthermore, the Cascade 500 and the B-STDX's tight integration and
strict adherence to standards will provide significant service and
management benefits," added Schoffstall.  "From a service standpoint, the
B-STDX's Frame Relay-to-ATM Interworking functions will allow our
customers to seamlessly migrate to ATM without having to incur the cost of
globally upgrading to ATM.  From a management perspective, because both
the B-STDX Frame Relay switch and the Cascade 500 ATM are SNMP-manageable
by CascadeView, we will be able to add this next-generation technology to
our network environment with minimal training and deployment."

Designed as a 16-slot chassis system, the Cascade 500 is a non-blocking
ATM switch with a flexible 2.5, 5 and 10 Gbps capacity. It supports
next-generation speeds of 45, 155 and 622 Mbps and the industry's highest
port density on a single platform, supporting 56 OC-3c/STM-1, 112 DS-3/E3
and 14 OC-12/STM-4 ports.

"Our timely delivery of the Cascade 500 to four robust network
environments for beta testing proves the singular relevance of Frame Relay
expertise to ATM networks," said Chris Baldwin, Cascade's senior product
manager for ATM.  "Beyond the simple mechanics of hardware-based cell
switching, ATM is all connection-management software.  Frame Relay and ATM
share the connection-oriented paradigm.  Cascade's proven leadership in
Frame Relay connection management has given it a leapfrog position in ATM
system design, proven now by our Cascade 500 engineering-delivery
success."

PRICING/AVAILABILITY
With general availability in Q1 `96, the Cascade 500 is priced based on
system configuration, with entry-level pricing starting at $25,000 and
typical systems averaging around $150,000 to $200,000. For more
information, customers should call Cascade at 1-800-647-6926.  European
customers should contact Cascade Communications Limited at
44-0-784-434377.  Cascade's World Wide Web address is http://www.cscc.com.

PSINet is a leading provider of Internet access and services to both
organizations and individuals throughout the U.S. and abroad. The
Company's PSINet network offers access to the Internet from more than 200
points-of-presence (POPs) in North America and abroad. Internet access
options range from modem dial-up and ISDN for telecommuters and small
office LANs to dedicated high-speed circuits for corporate connectivity.

PSINet has defined industry standards and is a leader in technological
innovation and new service development.  The company has its headquarters
in Herndon, VA, with sales and field service offices across the U.S., and
subsidiary offices in Cambridge, England, and Tokyo, Japan.  Further
product, availability and pricing information can be obtained by calling
+1.703.904.4100; through PSINet's Web site at http://www.psi.net/; or by
sending an e-mail request to infopsi.com.

One of the world's fastest growing data communications companies and
price/performance leader in Frame Relay, Cascade Communications of
Westford, Mass. is a global provider of wide area networking products for
the enterprise and public carrier network markets.  The pioneer of
multiservice WAN switches, Cascade delivers enterprise-ready switches and
network management solutions that enable customers to seamlessly integrate
existing technologies with ATM for cost-effective network expansion and
investment protection. Cascade's STDX and B-STDX multiservice switches and
the recently introduced Cascade 500 ATM switch offer the highest
scalability and network capacity in the industry.  Worldwide, private and
public networks such as BellSouth, Bridge Information Systems, GTE,
Pacific Bell, US West, LDDS WorldCom, and British Telecom rely on Cascade
products for unparalleled quality of service and high-performance WAN
services.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VOICE PROCESSING: ENHANCED SYSTEMS INC., A WHOLLY OWNED SUBSIDIARY OF
VODAVI TECHNOLOGY INC., IN VOICE ACTIVATED DIALING AGREEMENT WITH GTE
MOBILNET

Enhanced Systems Inc. (ESI) has been selected as the vendor of choice to
provide Voice Activated Dialing (VAD) systems to GTE Mobilnet.

Michael Mittel, president of ESI, said, "We have been working closely with
GTE Mobilnet on VAD for the past 18 months and of course we are quite
pleased with their decision.  We have built a user interface that we
believe is second to none.  Also, our in-market experience has given us a
unique understanding of the nuances needed to successfully implement voice
recognition technology in a cellular environment.

"We look forward to continuing our close working relationship with GTE to
support their existing VAD systems and to provide systems they may
purchase in the future.  We have also begun development of next generation
systems which will offer a whole new range of features and service
offerings."

GTE made its decision after a thorough analysis from the leading vendors
in the voice recognition industry.  Dave Wasby, product manager for GTE
Mobilnet, said, "Over the past two years we were able to narrow the field
of players in the voice recognition arena to just a few 'best in class'
vendors.  Enhanced Systems was judged to be the best after extensive
in-market testing.  We are pleased to be partnering with a firm as
proactive and technically advanced as Enhanced Systems."

VAD allows cellular customers to use voice commands in order to dial,
simply by recording, then saying the name of the person (or speaking their
phone number).  The product also lets customers control their cellular
voice mailboxes simply by speaking work commands such as play, save,
delete, etc.  Enhanced Systems is one of the first manufacturers to enable
other vendors' voice mail systems with speaker-independent voice
recognition capabilities.

Enhanced Systems Inc., based in Norcross, designs, develops, markets and
supports a line of voice processing and interactive voice response
software products.  The company is a wholly owned subsidiary of Vodavi
Technology Inc. (NASDAQ:VTEK) (VTI) headquartered in Scottsdale, Ariz. and
is traded on the NASDAQ under the symbol VTEK.

GTE Mobilnet, headquartered in Atlanta, is a leading mobile cellular
operator in the United States, with the potential of serving some 72
million cellular and personal communication service customers.  The
company is a wholly owned subsidiary of GTE Corp., one of the world's
largest providers of telecommunications services.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EXECUTIVE SUITE: R. MICHAEL FRANZ TO JOIN SPRINT AS PRESIDENT OF
DIVERSIFIED BRANDS GROUP

Sprint announced that R. Michael Franz, currently president and chief
executive officer of Murata Business Systems, Inc., will become president
of the Diversified Brands Group in the company's Long Distance Division,
effective Jan. 8, 1996.

"We are pleased to have attracted an executive with the talent and
experience of Mike Franz," said Gary Forsee, president and chief operating
officer of Sprint's Long Distance Division.  "He is a proven leader and is
credited with pioneering the consumer fax industry, in which Murata is one
of the world's top performers.  Innovation and passion for building market
share are hallmarks of his 19 years in the telecommunications industry.
His experience in developing sales and marketing distribution channels and
creating alternative distribution systems should be a major benefit to
Sprint."

As president of the Diversified Brands Group, Franz will direct the
present and future agreements and sales efforts with companies which
resell telecommunications services to businesses and consumers.  He will
report to Forsee and be based in Kansas City.

"While it will be difficult to leave Murata after 13 years, the dynamic
environment and opportunities within Sprint are extremely attractive,"
said Franz.  "I'm especially pleased to be part of Sprint's team and look
forward to participating in the company's success in the years ahead."

Franz, 42, joined Murata Business Systems in 1982 as vice president and
general manager.  Two years later he became president and added the
additional responsibility of CEO in 1986.  Prior to joining Murata, Franz
held a variety of management positions with the Imaging Systems Division
of Burroughs Corporation.

Franz holds both a B.A. degree and MBA from Santa Clara University.

Sprint is a global communications company -- at the forefront of
integrating long distance, local and wireless communications services, and
the world's largest carrier of Internet traffic.  Sprint built and
operates the United States' only nationwide all-digital, fiber-optic
network and is the leader in advanced data communications services. Sprint
has $12.6 billion in annual revenues and serves more than 15 million
business and residential customers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FINANCIAL: V BAND REPORTS FINANCIAL RESULTS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1995

V Band Corporation (NASDAQ/NML: VBAN) reports sales for the fiscal year
ended Oct. 31, 1995 of $29.4 million, a 6% decrease from sales for fiscal
1994.

Equipment sales decrease 12% from $26.9 million in 1994 to $23.6 million
in 1995.  Service sales increased 41% to $5.8 million in 1995 from $4.1
million in 1994 as the number of customer installations serviced by the
company has increased.  Fourth quarter sales were $7.6 million, a 23%
decrease from the fourth quarter 1994 sales of $9.9 million.

The company reports a net loss for 1995 of $11.6 million, or $2.18 per
share, including a $5.1 million charge for certain non-recurring items and
inventory reserves.  This compares to a net income for 1994 of $1.9
million, or $.35 per share, which included a cumulative income effect of
$1.2 million, or $.23 per share, for the accounting for income taxes
related to adoption of Financial Accounting Standard No. 109.  The net
loss for the fourth quarter of 1995 was $7.0 million, or $1.32 per share.
This compares to net income for the fourth quarter of 1994 of $1.3
million, or $.24 per share, after giving effect to the adoption of FAS No.
109, described above.  The net loss in the fourth quarter of 1995 includes
$5.1 million of non-recurring charges related to a write-off of certain
intangible assets, restructuring charges related to a company-wide
reduction in personnel and increases in inventory reserves related to
older product lines.

Management believes that the restructuring of the company's operations
combined with new product introductions during the year has positioned the
company to achieve profitability in the years ahead.  During the year the
company installed a new management team, reduced total personnel 25% to
the current level of 216, substantially reduced its manufacturing expenses
by out-sourcing production and implemented a new management information
system.

V Band is a leading supplier of instant access voice communication
systems.  These systems include sophisticated communications workstations,
switching equipment, peripheral products, project management, technical
services and WAN solutions. V Band products and services are used
worldwide by financial services organizations for the trading of stocks,
bonds and other financial instruments.  Other industries served include
the mission critical communication requirements of the electric power
industry and emergency service providers.

                               Financial Summary
                     (In thousands, except per share data)
Quarter Ended Oct. 31,               1995        1994

Sales
 Equipment                        $ 5,847      $ 8,270
 Service                            1,723        1,592
   Total sales                      7,570        9,862
Net income (loss) before cumulative
 effect of accounting change       (7,001)         28
Cumulative effect of accounting
 change for income taxes               --       1,242
Net income (loss)                  (7,001)      1,270
Average shares outstanding          5,323       5,324
Per share data:
Income (loss) before effect of
 accounting change                  (1.32)        .01
Cumulative effect of accounting
 change for income taxes               --         .23
Net income (loss)                   (1.32)        .24

Twelve Months Ended Oct. 31,        1995        1994

Sales
 Equipment                        $23,591     $26,944
 Service                            5,760       4,134
   Total sales                     29,351      31,078
Net income (loss) before cumulative
 effect of accounting change      (11,594)        627
Cumulative effect of accounting
 change for income taxes               --       1,242
Net income (loss)                 (11,594)      1,869
Average shares outstanding          5,322       5,311
Per share data:
Income (loss) before effect of
 accounting change                  (2.18)        .12
Cumulative effect of accounting
 change for income taxes               --         .23
Net income (loss)                   (2.18)        .35




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>