
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B36-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B009-399</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev61.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000816 text/html 87879
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:06:05 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:43 GMT
Content-length: 87690
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev61.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CONVERGENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>GUIDANCE LIKELY IN THE SPRING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(352 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONFERENCE REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>VENDORS & WASTE PRODUCERS AT RISK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(769 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NEW MEMBERS WANT TOUGHER STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2044 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE ACCESSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1033 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>EMERGING FROM SOVIET RULE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(460 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>WASTE OFFENCES BRING NEW LAW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>PARLIAMENT RATIFIES BASEL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>BC PUBLISHES THIRD SITE DRAFT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(413 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>REPORT HOLDS OMAI LIABLE FOR DAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(456 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>PARLIAMENT PRESSES FOR LIABILITY DIRECTIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(391 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>4TH INTERNATIONAL ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(414 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>EEA HIGHLIGHTS SOIL & GROUNDWATER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(409 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>EEA INTERNET SITE LAUNCHED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>REFINERY FINED RECORD S$150,000</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(281 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>NEW EPA AUDITING/SELF-REPORTING POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1018 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>ACCOUNTING FORUM ADVISES ON REPORTING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(796 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS POSTPONED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(592 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>ISO PUBLISHES SUPERFUND REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(472 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>SPATE OF OIL/CHEMICAL SPILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1070 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>WASTE TREATMENT DISPUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CONVERGENCE

A senior official of the Austrian Environment Ministry raised an
intriguing question at the end of last year (this issue p5): will the
presence of the three new member states of the European Union, Austria,
Finland and Sweden, lead to future ecological criteria comparable to
the convergence criteria set as pre-conditions for economic and
monetary union (EMU)?  From one point of view, the notion of an
environmental equivalent to the EMU convergence criteria would be seen
by some Euro-sceptics as just another potty idea from Europhiles who
have lost contact with reality.  After all, the member states are
having enough difficulty getting their economies into line for EMU at
the moment, to the point where even Germany seems to be waivering on
the timetable.

On the other hand, the mere stating of such a thought tells us
something about the changing balance of power within the EU on
environmental policy.  The three new states which joined in 1995 have
added an important new block of votes within EU Council meetings on the
side of environmental rigour.  Their decisions to join the Union were
hard fought internally and were predicated upon a determination to
retain their own higher-than-EU environmental standards and an
understanding that other like-minded member states would help them to
raise the whole EU regulatory framework into line.  Each had to
overcome considerable doubts about the commitment of the EU to
environmental protection before they could persuade their populations
to support accession.

For a variety of reasons, including high disposable income, exposure to
imported pollution by air or water, vulnerable and highly prized
natural assets, and cultures insured in a certain brand of civic
responsibility, these countries had already gone beyond the existing EU
standards in a number of environmental fields.  There were others where
they had done less, but those received rather less publicity and, in
any case, the public in these countries does appear overall to be more
willing than their colleagues in some other EU states to support public
spending on environmental objectives.

In the course of the negotiations about their joining the EU, the three
new members secured a deal which allowed them to keep environmental
standards which exceeded EU requirements for up to four years while the
European Commission attempted to persuade the rest of the Union to
revise the common rules upwards.  The EU gave no binding commitment to
such upward revisions at the end of the four-year transition period;
what it agreed to was to try to achieve that and to convene a full
review of the standards at issue at the end of the period, giving the
new members a chance to participate in the review on an equal footing
with those which had arrived before but also obliging them to come into
line with whatever emerges.  The open-ended nature of this agreement
seems to have been somewhat glossed over within the three countries,
where the public has been assured that there is absolutely no way the
EU is going to force them to back down on their tight standards.

The governments involved, which had stuck their necks out politically
to support EU entry, have limited room for manoeuvre on this, because
the anti-EU campaigns made great play of the argument that their proud
national environmental standards would be undermined by EU membership.
Having now gone in, it is therefore imperative to prove them wrong by
showing that there has been no back-tracking and that, on the contrary,
the new members have helped to raise the level of protection throughout
the Union.

Because there is still some way to go before the transition period
expires, differing perceptions about what has been agreed can be safely
left alone for the time being, in the knowledge that, on some of the
critical issues, the previous member states had already accepted that
existing regulations were out of date.  Nevertheless, as the Inter-
Governmental Conference (IGC) to decide the next steps towards
integration of the EU approaches, environmental policy seems set to
play a greater part in the proceedings than ever before.  Some
observers even think that it could become a serious obstacle to further
progress, both among the existing fifteen members and in relation to
accepting new countries from central and east Europe (CEE).

Both the new entrants and several longer-standing members have an
agenda for the IGC meetings in Turin which amounts to a clear stepping
up of environmental regulation, including greater use of qualified
majority voting within Environment Council meetings and less recourse
to the principle of subsidiarity.  That principle, the same Austrian
official said, " should be interpreted restrictively and not in the
sense of impeding environmental policies at Community level .... In any
case," she went on "we should avoid a narrow-minded interpretation of
this important principle."

Although some items on these countries' agenda will be agreed all
round, other objectives on their lists will set them directly at odds
with less enthusiastic member states which either think that regulation
has gone far enough in a certain field or believe that it should be
left to national governments.  Perhaps more importantly, since the EU
is well accustomed to such internal struggles, the new strengthening of
the environmental harmonisation voice also risks worsening a potential
collision between existing EU members and the countries which hope to
be the next in line.  In particular, the countries of central and east
Europe (CEE) have high expectations of early EU accession and such
hopes are only increased by signs of political instability in Russia.
And yet, the task of approximating their environmental laws and
standards in a wide range of fields to those of the EU remains a
daunting one (this issue p7).

Estimates of the cost of this approximation process vary widely, with
figures like ECU100bn (US$78.6bn) or even ECU300bn quoted for the
region as a whole.  At the same time, the enormous environmental
problems faced by these countries remain somewhat side-lined by urgent
economic objectives, presenting the governments concerned with endless
reasons for postponing painful and expensive environmental reforms and
for restraining environmental enforcement.  Real progress is
undoubtedly being made and there is no shortage of people at all levels
who are determined to push through such reforms.  The problem is that
this is very difficult and there is no shortage of momentum for plenty
of other crying needs as well.

Amid this potentially awkward conflict between member states insisting
on an upward revision of EU standards and politically sensitive
aspiring members who have a huge task ahead just to get close to the
pre-conditions for entry, EU policy-makers are working hard to inject
more realism into the debate.  In doing so, they have to take on board
on both the ecological imperatives of countries like Austria, Sweden,
Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands, and the need for practical ways
forward in the CEE countries.

One fear is that this could all lead inexorably towards a split or even
a series of splits into two- or three-speed Europes, the implications
of which are distinctly uncomfortable for many people.  The danger is
that failure to reconcile these ill-matched goals could bring progress
towards CEE accessions to a halt and that such a setback would
undermine hard-won understandings among existing EU members.  In some
ways, it is hard to believe that environmental issues could play a
critical part in such weighty historical developments and, indeed, when
the crunch comes, they may be swept aside.  For the moment, however,
they seem likely to command a lot of attention.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GUIDANCE LIKELY IN THE SPRING

The guidance document due to elaborate on key contaminated land and
liability provisions in the Environment Act 1995 now seems likely to
emerge in draft for public comment around April (ELR028/3, 026/5, 025/3
et al).  No formal announcement has been made, but ELR understands that
a pre-publication draft is due to be circulated to selected experts and
interested groups in mid-February.  A meeting with a core group of
people has been arranged by the Department of the Environment (DoE) for
22 February, apparently to garner initial responses to that draft.  A
similar meeting was held in April 1995 at an earlier stage in the
policy debate to give the same people early warning of the Government's
then plans for guidance and amendments as the Environment Bill was
entering the House of Commons (ELR020/6).

Until recently, the main target date for the DoE has been to get the
package of guidance and regulations ready for submission to Parliament
before its summer recess.  Although ELR can only speculate at this
stage, it looks now as though that date could be hard to meet.  If a
public draft is put out for comment in April, there could be a
consultation period of about six to eight weeks, after which the
submissions will have to be digested and revisions made where
appropriate.  The DoE apparently kept open the option of seeking
further advice once the public responses were received from the
contractors it used at the end of last year (ELR026/5), although it may
not exercise that option.  The most likely date for a revised draft now
seems to be late-summer, early-autumn, perhaps October.  Hopefully,
that will go straight to Parliament for approval in a procedure that
can not take less than three weeks.  Some observers have suggested that
there might be a need for a further brief period for comment before
final submission to Parliament if substantial changes have been made in
the light of the responses in the spring.  The DoE will be hoping to
avoid that and, provided it does, the whole regime could come into
force around the beginning of 1997.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VENDORS & WASTE PRODUCERS AT RISK

The possible implications of the UK Government's new contaminated land
regime continue to be pored over in advance of the guidance documents
and regulations due out soon in draft to clarify important points in
Part II of the Environment Act 1995 (this issue above).  At a seminar
in London in January, convened by the Contaminated Land Working Party
of the UK Environmental Law Association, Richard Burnett-Hall, of
Bristows Cooke & Carpmael, London, warned that people selling
contaminated sites could be at risk of liability later on if the
purchaser or subsequent owners decided to change the site's use.  He
also argued that, although the UK Act does not name waste producers or
generators as primary responsible parties in the way that the US
Superfund law does, waste producers could nevertheless find themselves
drawn into the liability net as polluters.

Mr Burnett-Hall observed that a vendor who had warranted that a site
was clean for the purposes of a planned future use such as a car park
and had agreed a sale price with a purchaser under those conditions
might find that a subsequent change of use at the site re-opened the
question of responsibility for the remaining contaminants.  Under the
new regime, a site could be approved as satisfactory by the authorities
for the purposes of a specific intended use while a considerable amount
of residual contamination remained underground, contained against
further dispersion but neither removed nor eliminated.  That is the
core of the Government's "suitable for use" clean-up strategy, intended
to encourage the return to productive use of old industrial sites by
avoiding the excessive costs which would be incurred if all sites had
to be returned to a pristine condition.

Such partially cleaned sites would, however, be granted approval only
for restricted uses.  A plan to change their use to, say, a residential
development might cause them to be re-classified as contaminated and
trigger a whole new round of official remediation procedures.  At that
point, Mr Burnett-Hall told ELR, the regulator might deem the original
vendor an "appropriate person" for a remediation order or cost recovery
action on the grounds that he or she "caused" the offending substances
to be "in, on or under" the relevant land.  Unless the forthcoming
official guidance were specifically designed to avoid vendors being put
back on the hook once they had done what was required for the
originally intended use, he said, vendors would be well advised to seek
an indemnity from the purchaser covering all the contamination
remaining at the site.  Otherwise, the vendor's liability exposure
could remain open long after the site had passed out of his or her
control.

In relation to waste producers, Mr Burnett-Hall said that much would
depend on the meaning of "cause".  At present, there must be some
concern, he suggested, that a waste producer operating under the duty
of care imposed by the Environmental Protection Act 1990 might follow
his wastes all the way to a disposal site and even require that they be
deposited at a certain location within the site, remaining to check
that this was carried out, and then find later that the regulator
deemed such control to amount to causing contaminating substances to be
present in, on or under the land.  Again, Mr Burnett-Hall said that he
would like to see the guidance address this directly, specifying that
waste producers in such circumstances were not "appropriate persons".

Among other things, Mr Burnett-Hall also predicted that the forthcoming
guidance under the Act would be "seriously useful" compared with what
had existed hitherto and that the new land regime would be far more
effective in making things actually happen.  He said that it remained
open to question, however, how far local authorities would be competent
and willing to carry out the provisions, especially in relation people
operating in their areas.  He expected voluntary clean ups, where
operators chose to agree a plan with the regulators, often to go beyond
statutory requirements and not stop at just enough remedial action for
the next site use.  He also expressed concern about  the procedure for
apportioning liability, arguing that it would be difficult to define a
clear hierarchy of "appropriate persons" even in the guidance and that
one option would be to give local authorities discretion over whom to
name.  If that were adopted, he said, either there would be room for
appeal on the grounds that someone else should have been named as
responsible, in which case there was a risk of Superfund-style
litigation, or appeals would not be allowed and the process would be
seen as very unfair.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW MEMBERS WANT TOUGHER STANDARDS

With the approach of the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC) to
decide the next steps towards integration of the European Union, no one
should be in any doubt that the arrival as EU members of Austria,
Finland and Sweden in 1995 has increased the pressure for tight
environmental regulation. Speakers from all three countries at a
conference in Vienna in November* emphasised the importance placed on
this by a broad cross-section of opinion in each and the overall effect
of this on the European Commission was confirmed by representatives of
the Commission's environment directorate general (DGXI).  To some
extent, this process has passed unnoticed in the rest of the EU up to
now, perhaps because of the low key role so far played by the new
members.

The IGC process may turn out to be the first widely visible platform
for this new pro-environment block, which is likely to support moves,
already backed by some existing member states, for more stringent
standards and greater use of qualified majority voting, rather than
unanimity, within the Council of Ministers on environmental matters.
Another opportunity will arise when an initial four-year transition
period for the new member states comes to an end.  During that period,
the accession treaty allows the new states to maintain standards which
are stricter than those within the rest of the EU and commits the
European Commission to conducting a review of EU standards in the hope
of raising them to the levels prevailing in the new states.  At the end
of the period, the intention is to have settled common standards across
all 15 member states, with the aim of setting them at the highest
possible level.

The new states clearly expect that to accommodate their own or higher
standards and are stating that, if such agreement has not been reached
by then, they will be very reluctant to reduce their standards into
line with those of less strict members.  The Commission, on the other
hand, is insisting that the accession treaty and the joint declarations
which went with it commit the EU only to a process of revision and not
to any definite result.  The new states will therefore have the chance
to press their case as full participants in an EU-wide discussion, but
the outcome can not be guaranteed.

Jose MartAEnez Aragon, of DGXI, told the conference nevertheless that
the arrival of the new member states had given new impetus to the EU's
environmental policy.  Among other things, it had allowed the EU to
take a more assertive position in international negotiations, such as
the Berlin climate change conference and the third meeting of the Basel
Convention (ELR025/8).  In an accompanying paper, Margaret Brusasco-
MacKenzie, the head of DGXI's international affairs unit, said that it
was already clear from the new states' role in recent environment
council meetings that their arrival, with a background of high
standards and high public awareness of environmental issues, would
"produce a Union with a far more ambitious approach".  When it comes to
the review under the transition arrangements, she said, "the question is
not whether the Union of fifteen can go hand-by- hand towards higher
standards, but rather the speed at which this is to be done."

Austria

Speakers at the conference* from Austria all stressed that
environmental concerns had figured high on the list of priorities
during the debate about joining the EU, with a majority of Austrians
concerned about any possible dilution of the country's stringent
regulations.  The agreement, known as the "horizontal solution", in the
accession treaty allowing Austria to maintain its own environmental
standards even where those exceed the EU equivalents, throughout the
four-year transition period, was seen as a key result of the
negotiations leading up to accession.  It is clear that the Austrian
Government, recently re-elected with a similar political complexion,
will fight hard at the end of that period to prevent any loosening of
standards and will lobby strongly for support in other member states .

Ingrid Thomasitz, of the Federal Environment Ministry, said that, in
the current review of the EU's Fifth Environmental Action Programme
(this issue p12), the Austrian Government would support a more robust
application of sustainability as a real test of policies in fields such
as transport, energy, agriculture and tourism, a restrictive
interpretation of subsidiarity so that it does not impede environmental
policies at EU level, and a further strengthening of the precautionary
and polluter pays principles, together with the integration of
environmental costs into the prices of goods and services.

At the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC), she said that Austria
would advocate: an obligation on the Commission to consider the
environmental effects or "ecological consequences", as well as the
budgetary ones, of every legislative proposal; simplification and
revision of the safeguard clause in Article 100(a)(4) of the Treaty to
make it a real "environmental guarantee", allowing member states "to
introduce stricter national standards as well as apply the existing
ones"; wider support for qualified majority voting and the joint
decision-making procedure under Art 189(b) of the Treaty, to enable
measures such as energy taxes to be imposed, although with limits in
relation to certain policy fields; other reforms to strengthen the role
of the European Parliament in EU decision-making; and greater
transparency in decision-making to aid public involvement.

Overall, Ms Thomasitz speculated that the presence of the three new
member states might at some stage lead to ecological criteria
comparable to the convergence criteria for economic and monetary union.
 Klemens Fischer, of Austria's Permanent Representation to the EU in
Brussels, told the conference that the acknowledgment given in Joint
Declarations 6 and 7 of Act of Accession to the new member states'
attachment to their existing environmental standards had been very
important to the voting within Austria on joining the EU.  He warned
that, if the Union had not reached common standards equivalent to those
prevailing in Austria by the end of the four-year transition period,
Austria would see no alternative to exercising its right to impose
national standards under Art 100(a)(4)  and, he said, the political
stakes would be too high for the European Commission to prevent that.

Frank Ceska, General Secretary of the Federation of Austrian
Industrialists, observed that an important part of the case presented
by opponents of joining the EU had been that it would deprive Austria
of its ability to pursue an independent, and stricter, environmental
regime.  He made clear that Austrian industry had rejected that view
and was gratified that the critics had been proved wrong, since none of
the country's stricter regulations had been changed since EU entry.  He
also drew attention to a pledge given by EU Environment Commissioner
Ritt Bjerregaard at a Council meeting in March 1995, that she did not
intend that any of the new member countries should be forced to change
their standards after the end of the transition period.

Given Austria's commitment to tight environmental rules, Mr Ceska
reported that industry favoured accelerated harmonisation of stricter
rules throughout the EU, rather than development of new rules in
Austria alone. In particular, he called for postponement of current
Justice Ministry proposals for a new environmental liability act in
Austria, based on the Council of Europe convention on civil liability
for damage resulting from activities that are dangerous to the
environment (the "Lugano" Convention).  This, he argued, would cause
"an enormous burden for industry and an unbearable distortion of
competition".  It would be much better, he said, to await forthcoming
European Commission proposals for an EU directive in this field.

Paul Luiki, of Heller, Lober, Bahn & Partners, Vienna, explained that
Austria had good reasons for sensitivity to environmental damage: it is
a small, land-locked country bordering on eight other countries, which
imports over 90% of its air pollution and a good deal of water
pollution through rivers such as the Danube, depends on groundwater for
99% of its drinking water, has an important tourist industry which
requires a clean environment and also poses risks to it, and has a
particular problem with ground-level ozone, with substantially higher
concentrations than elsewhere in Europe.  As a result, he said,
according to a 1991 OECD study Austria devoted a higher percentage of
its GDP to environmental protection, at 1.94%, than most other
industrialised countries, including Germany (1.74%), the Netherlands
(1.46%) and the US (1.36%).

Mr Luiki cautioned that comparisons of Austrian and EU environmental
standards could be over-simplified, since in some cases these were not
defined in comparable ways, and like Mr Ceska, he pointed to some areas
where EU membership had led Austria to introduce new rules, such as
environmental impact assessment and access to environmental
information.  He also noted that, in some fields such as wastewater
discharges, implementation of stricter Austrian standards left room for
improvement.  On the other hand, he said that Austria had given greater
priority than the EU to groundwater quality within its drinking water
policy.  A regulation under the country's Water Act, he told the
conference, required provincial governors to declare a groundwater
action area and to implement clean-up action where quality criteria
were exceeded.  He reported that the first such action was still
awaited, but he did not think it would be long before one occurred.  He
also pointed to associated regulations on storage of hazardous
materials, including one covering chlorinated solvents which involved
stringent emission and monitoring standards and for which there was as
yet no EU equivalent.

Ernst Brandl, of Schonherr Barfuss Torggler & Partner, Vienna,
highlighted the heavy reliance under Austrian law on "command and
control" mechanisms, at both federal and provincial levels.  Lengthy
permitting procedures, he said, usually allow everyone who might be
affected by a proposed development to participate and to appeal, with
the result that, for example, 12,000 people were involved in the
certification process of a garbage incineration plant in Vienna.  Most
provinces also have an "attorney for the environment" who has standing
in all provincial proceedings concerning activities which might have an
impact on the environment.

Finland/Sweden

Satu Nurmi, of the Finnish Permanent Representation to the EU, told the
conference* that Finland's geography presented special environmental
risks, with one-third of its territory above the Arctic Circle, a harsh
northern climate and natural resources which were vulnerable to
chemical precipitation.  "Even a small input of a hazardous substance,"
he said, "may cause impacts that are difficult if not impossible to
remedy simply because the natural renovation capacity of ecosystems is
very slow in northern latitudes."  He then listed a series of subjects
on which Finland had obtained special declarations and transitional
arrangements during the EU accession process, where it considered
present EU regulations insufficiently strict.  These included
transitional measures covering: pentachlorophenols (PCPs), fertilisers,
pesticides, sulphur content of liquid fuels and plant protection
products.

Like the Austrian speakers (this issue above), Mr Nurmi emphasised that
such environmental issues were given a high priority by the Finnish
public.  That was also echoed by Prof Hans Stenberg, of Advokatfirman
Lindahl, Stockholm, who said that this was one area in which the
Swedish Government could find common ground with a large part of the
Swedish population, the political parties and non-governmental
organisations (NGOs).  He reported that the Government had specified as
priorities in its approach to the EU's environmental agenda: measures
to combat acidification and climate change, resource management and
product recycling, conservation of biological diversity, more stringent
chemical control, international co-operation and more specific measures
including: environmental impact assessments, cleaner industrial
processes, waste disposal, environmental management and audits, trade,
energy-related taxes and land and water resource management.

More generally, Prof Stenberg said that the Swedish Government attached
much importance to implementation of rules once they were agreed.  That
went further than the basic question of correct implementation of
directives under member state law, he said; it also included allocation
of enough economic resources to the responsible bodies to ensure that
the rules are effectively observed.

* "European Environmental Harmonisation, Liability and Enforcement: The
Impact of Accession of New EU Member States", 5th Annual Seminar of the
European Environmental Law Subcommittee (F1) of the International Bar
Association's Section on Business Law, 271 Regent Street, London W1R
7PA. Tel: +44 (0)171-629 1206; Fax: +44 (0)171-409 0456.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE ACCESSION

Environmental issues could become a major obstacle to accession to the
European Union for the first time as the countries of central and east
Europe (CEE) prepare for this step following agreement on a broad pre-
accession strategy at the Essen European Council in December 1994.
Despite much rhetoric and optimism up to now, they still have a very
long way to go before they fulfil the environmental policy conditions
required for entry, according to a representative of the European
Commission.  Speaking at a conference in Vienna in November(this issue
above), Julian Wilson, of the PHARE Programme staff in DGIA, said that
while the Commission was working hard to support the countries' efforts
towards accession, there were some unrealistic expectations within the
CEE region, particularly in relation to the environmental conditions.
Among the problems experienced so far, he reported, were that the
dialogue with the EU on the issues involved was relatively superficial,
basic information and statistics were lacking, as were comprehensive
country strategies, financing plans and schedules did not exist,
legislation was being passed but not monitored or enforced, and the
environment was generally of secondary importance compared with
economic growth.

He warned that existing member states would not allow new entrants
unless the statutory targets on matters such as emissions were met and
the CEE region was mostly still a long way off that.  The European
Commission's environmental policy representatives were often seen as an
irritating obstacle by CEE government ministries, such as finance and
industry, he said, some of whom had to be convinced that environmental
requirements were unavoidable.  Mr Wilson described the progress which
had been made since the publication last summer of a White Paper on
preparation for integration into the internal market (COM(95) 163
final), on matters such as harmonisation of regulations, monitoring and
enforcement, municipalities, and past environmental damage and the
greening of industry.  He emphasised that the funds available through
the PHARE Programme and other international financial institutions
would amount to only a small proportion of the money required by the
CEE countries for approximation to EU environmental standards.

Mr Wilson made a number of forecasts on how things would develop in the
next few years, including that: CEE industry would remain uncontrolled
and very "ungreen" during the accession period; municipalities would
meet environmental conditions faster; the environment overall would
become a block to creation of a free market and to eventual accession;
the central part of the region had a head start, although the Baltic
states were catching up fast; the countries which costed the
environment fully, enforced more strongly and asked for acceptable
dispensations would accede first; and the present timeframes were
completely crazy.  The idea being promoted by some that the countries
would meet the objectives within five years was nonsense, he said;
progress could be made, however, if governments were prepared to
discuss specific derogations and enforcement matters.  The whole debate
in the environmental field, he argued, needed to be much more
structured, operational and realistic.  He also warned that this
process presented real dangers if it was not taken sufficiently
seriously, because a failure to achieve the EU's objectives in relation
to CEE countries could rebound on what had been achieved within the
existing EU membership.

Tim Murphy, head of the environmental appraisal unit at the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), London, also urged
sober assessment of the amounts of money needed to achieve
harmonisation with EU standards, pointing out that one estimate for all
six accession countries and three Baltic states was ECU100bn, or 3.6%
of gross domestic product (GDP) a year.  Another estimate given earlier
at the conference, of ECU300bn, would represent some 11% of GDP on
environmental affairs, he pointed out, which was clearly unrealistic.
He stressed that most of the finance for achieving environmentally
sustainable development would have to come from the countries
themselves and much of it from the private or municipal sectors.

Among the challenges facing the CEE countries, Mr Murphy said, were a
need to realise that they had to internalise environmental costs, a
need to embrace principles such as cleaner production and waste
minimisation, and the importance of environmental product standards.
He argued that it was particularly important to the EBRD that the
countries did not divide into two, with an advanced minority having
prospects of early accession and a less advanced majority falling
behind.  He also said that the investment cycle currently offered a
window of opportunity which had to be seized by the countries
themselves.

Gyula Bandi, of University Eotvos Lorand, Budapest, said that the
environment was still not a high priority issue for the Hungarian
Government, although he hoped that the introduction of Hungary's new
Environmental Protection Act (in force from December 1995) (ELR023/5,
020/7) might push it up the priority list.  Even the Act, he argued,
tended to allow economic considerations to override environmental
requirements, with concepts such as "if the present economic situation
allows" and a general lack of acceptance that there would be costs to
industry.  A key problem, he said, was there was still no core
programme or strategy, within which to order priorities and, in
addition, a recent resolution to restructure government
responsibilities had created uncertainty about who the competent
authorities for various environmental matters would be.

Stanislaw Wajda, an adviser to the Polish Environment Minister,
reported that the Polish Government was working on a framework law
which was launched in June last year, was due to be completed by June
1996 and should be sent to the country's Parliament by the end of 1997.
 He said that Poland faced problems such as a lack of legal expertise
and of analytical materials on EU laws, and was missing working
relations with EU experts and direct insight into the legislative
process within the EU.  He felt that observer status would be helpful
and he drew attention to a refusal of such status which had occurred in
1994 when Poland approached the EU's network of enforcement officials,
known as the Chester or IMPEL Network (ELR006/15, 005/15, 001/9). At
the time, the response had been that the request was premature, but he
argued that that ought to be re-considered.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EMERGING FROM SOVIET RULE

An important feature of the development of environmental law in the
Baltic states is that, unlike the countries of central Europe, they are
emerging from 50 years within the Soviet Union.  They have therefore
had to develop a whole framework of national law, as well as rules for
a market economy, since they obtained independence in 1991.  They
reached approximation agreements with the EU in 1995, so are very much
at the beginning of the process of adjusting their environmental laws
and regulations, the conference (this issue p7) was told by Gretta
Goldenman, of Oppenheimer Wolff & Donnelly, Brussels.

In Lithuania, she reported, a unit has been set up within the Ministry
of Environmental Protection to deal with the approximation process, but
the Ministry has access to very little expertise in environmental law
and would benefit greatly from closer contact with experts in more
advanced countries.  For that reason, she said, the Lithuanian
Government has recently been exploring close working ties with one or
more EU member states, to learn from their experience.  In the
meantime, a substantial amount of legislation is in draft, covering
subjects like environmental impact assessment and waste management, and
a framework law on environmental protection was passed in 1992.  An
environmental strategy was also recently prepared for submission to the
Sofia Environment for Europe conference last October (ELR025/6).

Legislators were having to struggle in this field, Ms Goldenman said,
with a background of Soviet regulations on subjects like ambient air
and water quality, which were so strict that they were virtually
unachievable.  The result in the past, she said, was that statutory
"maximum allowable pollution values" were routinely supplemented by
"temporary allowable pollution limits" issued by the authorities to
reflect what was actually being released by a plant.  Charges and
penalties for pollution were consequently very low, leaving almost no
incentive at all for enterprises to invest in pollution reduction.

One of the anomalies in Lithuania, and also in Latvia and Estonia, has
been that the privatisation process has up to now involved selling
enterprises separately from the land on which they stand, Ms Goldenman
told ELR.  This is because the country's Constitution limits ownership
of land to citizens of Lithuania and foreign embassies.  In order to
become members of the EU this has to be changed, she said, and a
Constitutional amendment partially removing that obstacle was being
debated in the Lithuanian Parliament in December.  An inter-ministerial
working group set up in April 1995, with some outside representation
from the business community, she reported, also produced
recommendations in September concerning liability issues in the
privatisation process, focussing particularly on damage which occurred
prior to privatisation, when the assets were under state ownership.
The Environmental Protection Ministry is currently considering those
recommendations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WASTE OFFENCES BRING NEW LAW

A series of breaches of waste management authorisations recently
uncovered by environmental inspectors have persuaded the Slovak
Environment Ministry (MZPSR) to introduce new measures to tighten up
regulation in this field. The Ministry is currently preparing a new Law
on Wastes, part of which will include provisions to make it much more
difficult to "skirt round" the laws and regulations, according to a
statement from Environment Minister Josef Zlocha in January.  There
will also be encouragement for waste incineration as preferable to some
other forms of waste disposal.  Mr Zlocha emphasised that the danger
from wastes should not be under-estimated, because in the future they
could become an "ecological time bomb".

Two cases were cited by the Slovak News Agency in January.  The first
concerned a company called EHS, part of Slovnaft as, which had assumed
responsibility for handling certain hazardous wastes.  Instead of
disposing of them in the approved manner, the Ministry discovered
17,000 tonnes (t) of the waste in a brickworks yard in Lucenec, near
the Hungarian border, and 7,000t at a municipal waste site in Trencin,
north east of Bratislava. The second case involved Tellus Tellumo, in
Bratislava, which is alleged to have discharged used mineral oil
without due regard to its effects on groundwater and to have been
storing used batteries on site, with possible sulphuric acid leaks.
The company had a licence only to transport, rather than store, such
materials.  Local and national inspection officials were reported to
have exercised the appropriate sanctions in both cases.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PARLIAMENT RATIFIES BASEL

Bulgaria was added to the list of countries which have ratified the
Basel Convention on trans-boundary movements of hazardous wastes and
their disposal, following a vote in its Parliament on 18 January.  In
supporting the vote, the Government observed that Bulgarian law in
recent years had been brought into line with the provisions of the
Convention.  The Environmental Protection Act passed in 1991 and
amended in 1992 regulates import and trans-shipment of waste, and is
backed up by foreign trade rules and agreements with the European
Union.  Bulgaria has also instituted an internal system for licensing
hazardous waste disposal.  The Environment Ministry reported that
Bulgarian industry generated 14,300 tonnes of hazardous waste in 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BC PUBLISHES THIRD SITE DRAFT

Draft no 3 of the Contaminated Sites Regulation for the Canadian
province of British Columbia (BC) was finally published on 4 December.
This Regulation is required in order to implement a new contaminated
site regime under the Waste Management Amendment Act, 1993 (also known
as Bill 26), which was passed in June 1993 (ELR001/6).  The regime
involves strict, joint and several, and retroactive liability,
compulsory remediation orders, with exemptions for certain parties,
limited liability provisions for minor contributors and those
volunteering to conduct clean ups, allocation panels to assist in
apportioning liability, a public registry of site information and site
profile requirements at the time of specified transactions.  The system
has been criticised by some business groups, but has also been subject
to prolonged consultation.  The BC Government's view is that the new
provisions clarify issues which were left unresolved under previous
legislation and in so doing provide more defences and exemptions for
the parties likely to be involved.

Draft no 2 of the Regulation was circulated for comment in September
1994, following a consultation exercise, originally with the intention
that it should be the final draft prior to implementation and therefore
subject only to minor changes.  By October 1994, however, further
consultation had been extended indefinitely following pressure from
municipal authorities and subsequently other groups concerning clean-up
standards, municipal liability and liability exposures for parties such
as lenders, trustees, developers and the mining industry (ELR014/6,
012/4).  The third draft appeared to be imminent in July 1995
(ELR024/5, 022/6), but has ultimately taken until December to come out.
 This time comments were requested within seven weeks (by 22 January)
and the BC Government appeared to be resolved finally to push the
Regulation through.  The target date for its coming into force was
given as spring 1996.

The Regulation now contains some 17 Divisions (chapters) covering
subjects such as site profiles, site registry, fees, contaminated site
definition and determination, remediation standards, liability,
contaminated soil relocation, remediation plan approval and completion,
and orphan sites.  Most of the changes reflect the concerns which were
expressed about the second draft by various interested groups, so that
municipalities in particular get a series of clarifications or
concessions reducing their liability exposures, new exemptions are
provided for trustees, executors, administrators and other fiduciaries,
a lower standard of care for receivers and a new system of soil
standard setting is introduced containing four different types of
standards which are intended to allow more flexibility in the
remediation process.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

REPORT HOLDS OMAI LIABLE FOR DAM

An inquiry report produced by a commission of the Guyanese Government
has suggested that the mine operators, Omai Gold Mines Ltd, should be
held liable for the damage which resulted from the failure of a
tailings dam at Guyana's largest gold mine in August last year
(ELR025/9, 024/19). The report concluded that the company had a legal
obligation to ensure that the cyanide-contaminated water in the
tailings pond did not escape and would be liable, irrespective of the
quality of their work in securing it, if the contaminants were allowed
to escape.  On the other hand, the report decided that the
contamination of the Omai and Essequibo rivers caused by the incident
did not give rise to a serious threat to life and that the natural
bacteriological and biochemical systems in the water courses did not
seem to have been severely affected.

In the underlying event, some 3m cubic metres of cyanide-contaminated
waste escaped from the tailings pond at Omai mine, first into the local
Omai river, but thereafter into Guyana's largest river, the Essequibo.
Initial concerns included possible threats to loggers, native Indians,
fish and wildlife along the river, which is much used for drinking
water and fishing.  Some neighbouring Caribbean countries at one stage
imposed bans on Guyana's fish and shrimp catch.  By mid-September,
however, the Guyanese Health Ministry had declared the Essequibo safe,
following international inspections.  Local inhabitants, nevertheless,
are reported to have complained of skin irritations and a coalition
group critical of the commission's report has been considering a class
action lawsuit, according to the Montreal Gazette.

Omai Gold Mines Ltd is 65% owned by Cambior Inc, Montreal, 30% by
Golden Star Resources Ltd, Edmonton (part of a Colorado-based US group)
and 5% by the Guyanese Government.  The mine is reportedly the largest
open pit gold mine in South America.  At the beginning of January,
Finance Minister Bharrat Jagdeo reported that the country's gold export
earnings were US$27m short of their $135m target in 1995 because of the
Omai mine's closure following the spill.  A separate estimate put
Omai's losses, in terms of expenses and lost revenue, at C$25m
(US$18.2m).  Cambior's share price also fell substantially following
the incident, with investors noting that the Omai mine had been due to
account for a sizeable part of the company's gold production in 1995.

The commission called for independent geo-technical scrutiny of a new
impoundment under construction at the mine, to confirm its structural
integrity.  It suggested that the spill was caused by faulty
construction of an embankment dam holding the liquid waste, resulting
in progressive cavities or tunnels in the core of the embankment which
ended in catastrophic failure.  Its report did not attempt to apportion
blame for the faults.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PARLIAMENT PRESSES FOR LIABILITY DIRECTIVE

Just when some observers thought that DGXI's efforts to get a draft
directive on environmental liability on to the books in 1996 were
running into difficulty (ELR028/9), the European Parliament has stepped
in to add a potentially important voice to the calls for such a
proposal.  At its plenary meeting in December, the Parliament approved
a resolution on the Commission's work programme for 1996 which includes
a demand that "a proposal for a directive concerning rules on damage to
the environment" be added to the programme.  When the 1996 work
programme was published in November, there was no mention of such an
initiative despite several indications during 1995 that DGXI hoped to
achieve this, if possible, in the early months of this year.

Efforts by DGXI to get approval for such a step from the College of
Commissioners, the forum which brings together all the European
Commissioners, at one of their meetings in December, were abandoned by
the middle of that month, apparently because the Environment
Commissioner, Ritt Bjerregaard, felt that the prospects of winning
agreement from her fellow Commissioners would be better after the
results were in from the two research projects into aspects of
environmental liability which are due for completion soon (ELR024/9,
022/8 et al).

What gives the Parliament's resolution some bite is that it draws
attention to its own previous resolution in April 1994 (ELR00/), which
called upon the Commission to bring forward proposals in this field,
and to the fact that the earlier resolution was passed by the
Parliament under Article 138b of the Treaty, which gives the Parliament
the power to initiate measures, rather than simply respond to the
Council and the Commission.  A separate clause in the December
resolution stresses that "the legislative programme should include
European Parliament initiatives adopted pursuant to Article 138b of the
EC Treaty".  The issue of environmental liability, whatever its
political complications, has therefore become embroiled in the
Parliament's battle to implement the enhanced powers it obtained under
the Maastricht treaty.  Other environmental measures mentioned in the
Parliament's December resolution included a proposal for "a directive
on soil protection laying down strict provisions on protection against
pollution and sustainable management of the soil (land use, erosion,
compaction)" and a "White Paper on the monitoring and application of
Community legislation on the environment, including the imposition of
penalties".



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

4TH INTERNATIONAL ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCE

The fourth in an increasingly important series of international
conferences on environmental compliance and enforcement will take place
on 22-26 April in Chiang Mai, Thailand.  Over 200 participants have
registered for this event, representing some 80 countries and
international organisations.  The previous conference was held in
Oaxaca, Mexico, in April 1994, attracting 175 people from 70 countries
(ELR012/8-11, 011/14, 006/15), and before that the first two in the
series took place in Utrecht, in May 1990, and Budapest, in September
1992 (ELR001/10).  Those two brought together representatives from 13
and 40 countries, respectively.  The series has been supported
throughout by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
Dutch Environment Ministry (VROM), together latterly with the UN
Environment Programme (UNEP), local agencies in the countries visited
and other groups.  There has been a deliberate attempt to spread the
activity geographically by convening each conference in a new region to
attract greater participation from that part of the world.

What distinguishes these mega-events from some other conferences is
that participation is confined for the most part to active national and
local officials with enforcement responsibilities, with a minority from
international agencies and non-governmental organisations (NGOs).  The
flavour of the get-together is therefore very much about action and
building enforcement capabilities by sharing experience and extending
support across national boundaries.  In that sense, within Europe it is
parallelled by the, also increasingly important, Chester or IMPEL
Network, which brings together enforcement officials throughout the EU
on a regular basis (ELR006/15, 005/15, 001/9).

The conference programme in Chiang Mai includes workshop sessions with
subjects which give an indication of some of the current priorities.
They include, among others: establishing international co-operation and
regional networks, automation and enforcement, strategic targeting,
compliance monitoring, promoting voluntary compliance, measures of
success, public role in enforcement, criminal enforcement (Interpol
etc), economic instruments, take-back laws, transboundary illegal
shipments of hazardous waste (tricks of the trade) and collaborative
international targeting. While much of the work will focus on
institutional, technical and policy issues, it is worth noting that
involving the public in helping to enforce environmental regulations
remains very much on the agenda.  Workshop sessions on this public role
will include issues such as the role of citizens in identifying
violators, their role in pursuing enforcement actions or forcing
governments to pursue violators and the need for public disclosure of
compliance information.  Alongside this, considerable effort will be
put into assisting countries with less advanced environmental
regulatory capacities to increase their effectiveness.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EEA HIGHLIGHTS SOIL & GROUNDWATER

Soil and groundwater problems were among the topics highlighted by the
European Environment Agency (EEA) in a report published in November as
part of the European Commission's review of its Fifth Environmental
Action Programme.  The report was published just before the EEA
celebrated its second anniversary at its Copenhagen headquarters, an
occasion marked by a ceremony attended by 140 people, including the
Commission President Jacques Santer, Environment Commissioner Ritt
Bjerregaard and senior representatives from all 15 EU member states.

The EEA report concluded that EU environmental policy needed to be
"accelerated" in order to meet its own environmental objectives.
Although progress had been made in reducing some pressures on the
environment, these were not enough, it said, to improve the general
quality of the environment, even less to achieve sustainability.
Successes in recent years had been mainly in dealing with point (ie
stationary) sources of pollution, especially in the industrial sector.
Policies aimed at diffuse sources, such as products, consumers and
transport, it argued, had been much less effective.

The report recommended that further attention be given at European
level to climate change, acidification, urban air quality, water
abstraction and groundwater quality, habitat destruction and
fragmentation, and waste management.  It also identified as other
issues which had not been comprehensively tackled at European level the
degradation of soil quality (described as an important natural
resource), coastal management and chemicals in the environment.  Within
the 151-page report, the EEA suggested that more attention should be
given to the efficiency of environmental policies and called for a
particular focus on the transport sector, where it foresaw exceptional
pressures on the environment as a result of growth trends in freight
and passenger road transport.

Mr Santer told the Agency's anniversary gathering that he wanted the
Commission to be "at the leading edge of environmental policies" and
that he saw the EEA's work in developing accurate data on environmental
trends as part of a drive to change attitudes across Europe.  Ms
Bjerregaard said that the issues identified in the EEA report would be
taken up in the Commission's own proposals for advancing the 5th Action
Programme.  She drew attention to the fact that moves towards greater
use of economic instruments in this field were being hampered by the
requirement for unanimity at the Council of Ministers on policies with
fiscal provisions and she observed that the unanimity requirement might
be reconsidered during the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC)
(this issue p4).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EEA INTERNET SITE LAUNCHED

A European Environment Agency (EEA) Internet site was launched by
European Commission President Jacques Santer at the Agency's second
anniversary celebrations on 13 November.  The World Wide Web site, at
http://www.eea.dk/, is intended to play a key role in making EEA
information available to the general public.  The initial contents will
be relatively limited, but there are plans to add more publications and
many EEA databases, with the newest items advertised at the main home
page of the site.  Within the first month after its launch, the EEA
reported that there had been 1,800 accesses to the home page and a
total of over 30,000 file retrievals from the whole site.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

REFINERY FINED RECORD S$150,000

A S$150,000 (US$105,783) fine imposed by the Port of Singapore
Authority against the Singapore Refinery Co in connection with an oil
spill at its Pulau Merlimau refinery last August is the highest so far
imposed in Singapore for an oil spill.  The penalty was imposed under
the Prevention of Pollution at Sea Act, which provides for fines up to
S$500,000 and prison terms of up to two years.  Previously, the highest
fine for this kind of incident had been S$30,000.

The August spill is reported to have resulted from a pipeline valve
being accidentally left open following maintenance activities.  Some
300 tonnes of oil subsequently leaked into the sea when pumping
restarted.  The oil apparently leaked into an adjoining drain and
thence into the storm water system and the sea.  It then spread over an
area of approximately 60 sq km and is said to have cost S$1.7m to clean
up.  A further S$6,000 in fines had previously been levied under the
Trade Effluents Regulations.

The company, a joint venture involving Caltex, BP and Singapore
Petroleum Ltd, had sought a lesser penalty on the grounds that it had
co-operated fully once the leak was detected and had done its utmost to
clean up the damage.  Since the incident, it told The Straits Times, it
had revised operating procedures, improved storm water inspection
before it enters the sea, installed guard basins and oil detection
devices, provided additional training for staff, and reviewed emergency
response systems, organising an external audit to verify the
improvements.  A spokesman told the paper that the company was ISO
certified and had worked quickly to implement all the recommendations
of the inquiries conducted after the spill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW EPA AUDITING/SELF-REPORTING POLICY

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued a new policy
concerning environmental auditing and reporting of statutory
violations, which offers some incentives to companies to report
themselves when they discover such infractions, but also leaves
question marks about the advisability of doing so.  The policy
statement, "Incentives for Self- Policing: Discovery, Disclosure,
Correction and Prevention of Violations", was published in the Federal
Register on 22 December and came into effect on 22 January.  It is the
culmination of a period of consultation about this subject which began
in the summer of 1994 (ELR020/11, 013/11).

Hitherto, official guidance has been based on a series of policy
statements issued by the EPA and the Department of Justice from 1986
onwards, which stated that the regulators would not routinely seek
companies' audit reports in the course of their enforcement work and
that activities such as self-auditing and voluntary disclosure would be
taken into account in decisions about prosecutions and penalties.  The
underlying policy, however, reserved for the authorities the discretion
to demand such reports when they deemed it appropriate and was the
subject of much corporate concern because of the uncertainty which this
caused.

In recent years, business groups have been arguing in favour of a new
form of legal privilege to protect such internal review documents,
widely known as the "self-evaluative" privilege.  Several US states
have introduced such a concept at state level and there is case law
supporting it in private civil actions relating to fields such as
medical malpractice, but it is not recognised so far in the federal, or
many of the state, courts in the context of environmental actions.  The
EPA announced in March 1995 that it would not support a new statutory
audit privilege in this field, for fear that that could "promote
secrecy, expand litigation and compromise enforcement actions".  During
the consultation process, environmental groups had lobbied the Agency
for total transparency of the audit process, with public participation
and disclosure throughout.  Companies, in contrast, tend to feel that
more is achieved in terms of environmental protection if audit reports
remain internal.

What the EPA decided to offer instead was a policy of reduced civil
penalties and waiving of criminal proceedings where organisations
disclosed their own violations and promptly corrected them.  The
discretion to ask for audit material would remain, but would only be
exercised where there was independent evidence of a potential
violation.  The incentive system now coming into effect specifies
conditions under which the "gravity-based" component of a civil penalty
can be reduced by either 100% or 75%.  Such civil penalties are
assessed in two parts: first, in terms of the net economic benefit
which the company concerned is deemed to have gained as a result of
violating certain regulations and, second, a "gravity-based" element
intended to reflect the degree of seriousness involved.  The first will
continue to be imposed in full under the new policy, but the second may
be reduced or eliminated where companies meet specified standards.

A recent briefing put out by the Washington DC office of lawyers
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, gives a good summary of the new policy's
provisions.  To secure a 100% reduction of the gravity-based penalty,
nine conditions have to be met: the violation must be discovered
through an environmental audit or "due diligence" compliance programme;
it must be identified voluntarily; it must be fully disclosed to the
EPA within 10 days of discovery; it must be discovered and disclosed
independent of any government, third party or "whistleblower" action;
it must be corrected within 60 days, or longer with EPA agreement, with
correction certified to the EPA; the company must agree to take steps
to prevent a recurrence; the violation must not be a repeat of a
previous violation; it must not have caused "serious actual harm" nor
presented "an imminent and substantial endangerment" nor violated the
terms of a previous order or consent decree; and the company must co-
operate with the EPA's investigation of the matter.  Morgan, Lewis &
Bockius point out that this will allow companies to benefit from the
penalty reduction even where the violation is of a kind that is subject
to mandatory reporting.

The policy then gives a detailed definition of environmental due
diligence sufficient to achieve the reduction, based on the company's
systematic efforts, appropriate to the size of the business, to
prevent, detect and correct violations through all of a six-point list
of measures.  It also offers more limited 75% reductions where the
company does not have an audit or due diligence programme meeting the
EPA criteria, but fulfils all the other conditions on the nine-point
list.

Alex Karlin, of Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, told ELR that the EPA was
effectively offering companies a carrot to encourage voluntary
disclosure where no mandatory duty to disclose existed.  He cautioned,
however, that companies would have to look carefully at each case and
decide whether it was better to come forward and accept a high
probability of a penalty, albeit reduced, or not to report in the
knowledge that no one might ever find out or, if they did some years in
the future, the problem would already have been fixed.  Under the
latter circumstances, he said, the only thing missing would have been a
voluntary report to the authorities, who might by that time take the
view that it was not worth re-opening penalty proceedings.  The
decision, he suggested, would be fact-specific, based on the nature of
the violation and the likelihood of it coming out anyway.

The most important pre-requisite, Mr Karlin emphasised, was to fix the
problem immediately or as soon as possible.  Having done that, he
argued, the self-reporting question would become a smaller issue.  He
noted, nevertheless, that the "gravity-based" element in a penalty
assessed by the EPA could be as large as $1.4m or $2m, so the
reductions on offer could not be dismissed.  He also said that existing
company audit or compliance programmes ought now to be checked against
the new EPA definitions to make sure that they would qualify for
reductions under the scheme.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACCOUNTING FORUM ADVISES ON REPORTING

Pressure for fuller reporting of environmental factors by companies
received a further boost in December, when a potentially influential
advisory document on the best ways to treat environmental expenditures
and liabilities in company accounts and annual reports within the
European Union was produced by an expert body known as the Accounting
Advisory Forum.  The Forum comprises individual experts selected on a
personal basis to advise the European Commission on accountancy
matters.  It is not a standard-setting body.  The document, entitled
"Environmental Issues in Financial Reporting", is therefore intended to
stimulate discussion on the issues among "standard-setters, preparers,
users and auditors of accounts" in member states.

The subject was raised in the Commission's Fifth Environmental Action
Programme, "Towards Sustainability", published in 1992, and the Forum
was asked by the Commission to give an opinion on how to improve
reporting in this field, "so that a better insight is provided into the
company's attitude towards the environment and the impact of
environmental risks and liabilities on its financial position."  The
document is not concerned with separate environmental reports produced
by companies, except insofar as it recommends that the existence of
these should be referred to in accounts and annual reports as a source
of further information.

Using the framework of general provisions in the 4th and 7th Company
Law Directives on annual and consolidated accounts (78/660/EEC and
83/349/EEC), the document acknowledges that environmental liabilities
and risks entail special uncertainties relating to factors such as
changes in clean-up technologies, future legislation and the extent or
nature of the clean up required.  Nevertheless, it argues that such
liabilities and risks qualify for recognition as a provision in the
balance sheet if the company has a legal or contractual obligation to
prevent, reduce or repair environmental damage, or if its management is
committed to such action through things like statements of policy or
intention, industry practice or public expectations, or communication
of such a decision either internally or externally.

The amount of a provision, it suggests, should be based on reasonable
estimates of the loss, if necessary within a range, with a contingent
liability note where it is possible that the loss will be greater than
expected.  If no reasonable estimate can be made, which the document
describes as "rare circumstances", "the company should at least
disclose the nature of the contingent liability as well as the
circumstances and risks involved in the notes to the accounts."  The
amount recorded as a company's expected future environmental
expenditures should, the document says, be sufficient "to cover the
full costs of the damage to the environment for which the company is
responsible, irrespective of the date at which the activity is ceased."

Except where long-term de-commissioning costs for such facilities as
drilling platforms or nuclear power stations can be clearly
distinguished from other liability provisions, the Forum interprets the
4th Directive as requiring that the full charge should be included in
the profit and loss account as soon as it arises, and not spread over
several years.  This is despite the fact that the Forum recognises that
new legislation or discovery of unexpected liabilities may involve
accumulated expenditures which are so large that they distort the
company's accounts in that year, making it difficult to interpret its
underlying economic performance.

The document defines criteria for capitalising environmental
expenditures and it recommends more generally that gross liabilities
and expected recoveries, through counter-claims, insurance cover or
similar agreements, be shown separately in the balance sheet, rather
than presenting liabilities in net form.  In terms of disclosure, the
document says that environmental issues should only be disclosed in
accounts and annual reports "to the extent that they are material to
the financial performance or financial position of the undertaking",
with exemptions where member states have introduced them for small and
medium-size companies.

It suggests that the notes on the accounts should include the amount
capitalised and analysis of the amount charged to the profit and loss
account "in a manner appropriate to the nature and size of business
and/or the types of environmental issues relevant to the enterprise",
including factors as prevention, reduction and repair of environmental
damage.  The notes should also, it states, cover costs incurred as
fines or penalties for non-compliance and compensation to third parties
for loss or injury (which the Forum excludes from its "narrow"
definition of environmental expenditures).  In the annual report, the
Forum argues, information could include a description of the issues
which are relevant to the financial position and the undertaking's
response to them, the enterprise's environmental policy, improvements
that have been made in key areas, available government incentives, the
extent of measures which are in the process of implementation and a
reference to any other information provided in a separate environmental
report.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS POSTPONED

A Decree issued at the beginning of January has postponed the deadlines
previously set for operators of certain high risk installations in
France to obtain financial guarantees to cover factors such as accident
and pollution response measures, site restoration after closure and
site monitoring and security.  The deadline for such guarantees had
been 13 December 1995, but the French Environment Ministry announced
shortly before that that implementation would be delayed.  Under Decree
no 96-18 of 5 January 1996, the guarantee requirements are still
brought into effect from 14 December 1995 for all new waste storage
facilities and mining operations (ie, those whose initial authorisation
is after that date), but the deadline for such sites which were already
in operation is postponed until 14 June 1999.  New industrial
facilities will have until 14 December 1997 to obtain such guarantees,
while it appears that no date has been set for existing industrial
facilities.

These provisions come under Article 23 of the 1976 Classified
Installations Law, as amended by Decree no 94-848 of 9 June 1994
(ELR011/3).  The 1994 Decree specified elements of the different
categories of installation which had to be covered, required all
guarantees to be renewed at least three months before their expiry and
tied them to particular operators, so that any change of ownership or
control would require a new guarantee.  Patrick Thieffry, of Thieffry &
Associes, Paris, told a conference in Vienna in November (this issue
p7) that the reason for delay was that qualifying financial securities
were generally not available in France as yet from banks or insurers
and no alternative fund had been established, as permitted under the
law.  A few such guarantees had been issued, he said, but only on a
case-by-case basis and at a local level.

Mr Thieffry placed all this in the context of increasingly tight
policing of the so-called classified installations, which include a
large number of relatively high risk plants in France.  He referred to
case law under the 1976 Law which showed that French courts will uphold
orders against current operators requiring them to restore a site to
"such a condition that it presents none of the hazards or
inconveniences" which the law seeks to eliminate.  He observed that
this responsibility was irrespective of whether the operator was in
charge of the site at the time that the relevant pollution occurred and
that the requirement extended to events occurring before 1976, with the
Conseil d'Etat linking it to a prior 1917 Law on Classified
Installations.

Mr Thieffry cited as an example the case of a Marrion Merrel Dow site
in Yvelines, where the company was having to conduct a major clean-up
operation even though it only acquired the site in 1981 while the toxic
chemicals involved had been dumped between 1965 and 1969.  In that
case, over 80 tonnes of various toxic chemicals, 300 tonnes of acetic
acid and 650 tonnes of alcohol had been deposited in a basin, from
which it had leaked into chalky soil and spread, with a vulnerable
water course nearby. ELR understands that the pollution only came to
light when Marrion Merrel Dow was in the process of selling the site to
a new owner in 1992 and resulted in the contaminated part of the site
having to be withdrawn from the sale, pending satisfactory clean up.
The operation is expected to last seven years and to include 15
drilling operations to divert the flow of pollutants away from the
perimeter and removal of some 2,500 tonnes of contaminated soil, Mr
Thieffry said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ISO PUBLISHES SUPERFUND REPORT

The US Insurance Services Office (ISO), New York, an industry body
serving the property/casualty insurance industry, has published a
report* on the Superfund hazardous substance clean-up law, which is
currently subject to Congressional attempts at reform (ELR027/3, 026/1
& 3, et al).  The report, entitled "Superfund and the Insurance Issues
Surrounding Abandoned Hazardous Waste Sites" was published on 29
December.  It gives a range of estimates for the long-term costs to
insurers from such waste sites, based on previous studies, of between
$25bn and $608bn, although it notes that most recent estimates are at
the low end of the range and that discounting for net present value
would substantially reduce the numbers.  It places these figures
alongside the total US property/casualty insurance industry's statutory
surplus at the end of 1994 of $191bn, but it notes that a small number
of large writers of commercial liability insurance are likely to bear
most of the cost.  The combined surplus of the 35 most exposed to these
losses stood at $85bn.

The report highlights as prime insurer concerns about Superfund:
adverse court decisions which find unintended cover in old insurance
policies, difficulty in establishing plausible estimates of liabilities
and reserves due to conflicting court rulings and other factors, unfair
cost allocation among potentially responsible parties (PRPs) and their
insurers, and high litigation costs related to coverage disputes and
policyholder defence.  It cites a number of studies into transaction
costs in the Superfund process, including legal costs, and highlights a
1994 Government Accounting Office GAO survey which found that such
costs represented approximately one-third of PRPs' costs and an A M
Best study in the same year which estimated the insurance industry's
litigation cost share at 45%.

The report reviews the range of reform options currently on the
political agenda, focussing particularly on elimination of retroactive
liability and joint and several liability, revision of clean-up
standards and remedy selection, and delegation of clean-up authority to
the states.  It concludes that many of the proposed reforms would
reduce environmental liabilities for industry and for insurers, but
many could also increase expenses for the federal government.  In that
context, it notes that the potential payers of the taxes which the
government would be likely to raise to meet those costs, especially the
petroleum, chemical and insurance industries, disagree on the best
approach.  Overall, the report suggests that Superfund and clean up of
hazardous waste will continue to be difficult issues for insurers,
public policy-makers and society as a whole, and that the size of the
required clean up and the question of who should pay will remain the
focus of debate for many years to come.

* "Superfund and the Insurance Issues Surrounding Abandoned Hazardous
Waste Sites", available from the Insurance Services Office Inc, 7 World
Trade Center - 14th Floor, New York, NY 10048-1199.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SPATE OF OIL/CHEMICAL SPILLS

Anyone taking a snapshot of recent events in Russia could be forgiven
for thinking that something close to an epidemic of oil spills and
other leaks was taking place.  The incidents have been of varying sizes
and the overall significance of them is hard to gauge.  Nevertheless,
there seems little doubt that the general condition of the pipeline
system falls well short of what would be required in most OECD
countries and reports from depots elsewhere in Russia and the former
Soviet bloc suggest a routine disregard in the past for basic
environmental standards during operations such as oil delivery at rail
terminals and refineries.

The most serious spill in recent weeks seems to have been one in
December in the republic of Bashkortostan, at the southern end of the
Urals, where a 700mm oil pipeline, more than 30 years old and running
along the bottom of the river Belaya, was found to have burst on 26
December near the capital city of Ufa, south-west of Sverdlovsk.
Initial reports indicated that a 100 tonne (t) oil slick was presenting
difficulties because of severe weather conditions which were preventing
the use of specialised recovery equipment and even attempts to burn off
the oil.  According to news agency reports in early January, oil was by
then being removed by means of buckets through holes in the ice which
covered the river.  Only some 15t had been recovered a week after the
incident and there were fears that the oil might eventually reach the
Kama river and ultimately the Volga and the Caspian Sea.  Emergency
services were reported to be building a protective shield near
Blagoveshchensk, 40km downstream from Ufa, to try to stop that
happening and both Bashkortostan and neighbouring Tatarstan had issued
pollution warnings.

A few days later, however, the Bashkortostan Environment Minister,
Rustem Khamitov, declared that the pipeline's owner had "seriously
violated the truth" in saying that 100t of oil had been lost; the
reality was that a much larger quantity had escaped, he said, and the
crucial objective was to recover and neutralise as much as possible
before the spring thaw in 50-70 days time.  According to Reuters, the
state pipeline monopoly Transneft had declared two days after the
incident that the leak had been dealt with, but Tass was now reporting
that 160 workers were still struggling to control the leak.  The pipe
had apparently been shut off, booms put across the river and the oil
set on fire to stop it spreading.  Some 664t of oil and water were said
to have been collected, of which up to 15% was oil.  At the same time,
oil was reported to have reached Tatarstan, 160km from Ufa.

By mid-January, weak ice on the river was forcing the authorities to
resort to wider oil burning, leading Mr Khamitov to go on television to
reassure people whose homes were being "covered with smoke" as the fire
spread over a large area.  The pipeline company was by then claiming
that 468t of oil had escaped, but other estimates put the figure at up
to 2,400t.  On the other hand, according to Trud newspaper, pollution
readings in the Belaya which showed concentrations of petroleum
products five times maximum permissible levels had to be put in the
context of routine chemical contamination of the river and common
background levels of petroleum products of 2-3 times the official
limits in winter and up to 10 times in summer.  A Greenpeace
representative claimed that leaks from Russia's ageing pipeline network
were so routine now that they resulted in the loss of between 2% and
10% of the country's oil each year, representing total leaks of 20-50
million tonnes (mt) a year.

On 26 January, a Tatarstan environment official told a press conference
in Kazan that, extrapolating from the concentrations reaching the Tatar
town of Aktanysh, it appeared that 12,000-13,000t of oil must have
leaked into the Belaya.  The Interfax news agency was quoted as saying
that divers had still not located the precise point of the leak because
of silting in the river and were therefore raising the pipe to the
surface for inspection.  Meanwhile, some 150km upstream of the Ufa oil
spill, a serious leak of phenol occurred on 19 January at the Salavat
oil refinery, involving the loss of around 2 cubic metres of this toxic
substance.  The spill was initially turning into a snow-like solid in
the severe frost and efforts were being made to recover it in that
condition before a thaw allowed it to dissipate into the Belaya.

In the same month that all this was going on, a number of other serious
incidents were also reported.  On 24 December, some 400t of oil leaked
from the Ukhta-Yaroslavl pipeline in the northern Komi republic,
although the plume from this seemed to have been contained within an
area of around 5,000 square metres.  On 16 January, a second spill was
discovered in the same pipeline, this time near the town of Kotlas, in
Archangel region. Some 70t of oil were reported to have escaped, but it
appeared that none had reached the Severnaya Dvina river and work was
progressing to collect and burn it off.  On 11 January, a bulldozer
breached part of Surgut-Polotsk pipeline in the Perm region,
immediately north of Bashkortostan, releasing according to one estimate
242t of oil.  On 16 January, it was reported that a slick extending
over 2.5km had been discovered on the Syzranka river in Samara region,
west of Tatarstan.  This seemed to have leaked from an underwater
stretch of the Syzran-Zolnoye pipeline, possibly as a result of
corrosion. The total quantity of oil leaked was not known, but again
the huge river Volga was threatened as the slick occurred only 8km from
the meeting of the two rivers.

The Baltic republic of Latvia has also been experiencing some similar
problems.  In November, 100t of diesel escaped from a pipeline linking
central Russia with the Latvian port of Ventspils, apparently the
result of a breach made by thieves some 12km east of Ventspils.  A
senior Latvian official called for a return to regular inspection of
his country's pipelines, which he said had been left without any
supervision and had become an easy target for petroleum thieves who
damaged the pipelines.  On 16 January, a leak of petroleum products
from a wharf in Ventspils was reported to have reached the Baltic.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WASTE TREATMENT DISPUTE

A plan by the Industrial Estate Authority of Thailand (IEAT) to provide
mobile waste treatment units at all the country's industrial estates is
reported to have running into difficulty as a result of a previous
government contract with a Thai-US joint venture, Genco, to build
Thailand's first modern hazardous waste facility in Rayong province.
That contract gave Genco the sole right to operate hazardous waste
plants, according to FT Water Briefing.  Genco had planned to have its
plant up and running by early 1996, but had to stop work late last year
in the face of opposition from local residents who fear pollution to
local streams.  A government-run treatment plant in Bankhunthien has
been working at only 10% of its 110,000 tonne capacity, apparently
because the majority of factories evade laws requiring treatment of all
toxic waste and pay for illegal dumping.  An estimated 1m tonnes of
toxic waste is produced each year in Thailand.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>