
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000621-B040-203</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te111.html 205.156.212.5 19970122053706 text/html 38466
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:35:06 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:34 GMT
Content-length: 38279
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te111.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 16, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>RadioMail, ARDIS LOWER RATES FOR TWO-WAY MESSAGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(582 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>GOOD NEWS AND BAD NEWS FOR STOCKS IN WMR INDEX FOR 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1728 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ARCH TO ACQUIRE WESTLINK FOR $210 MILLION IN CASH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(225 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>APC, MARYLAND AGENCY FACE PCS INTERFERENCE PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>COURT SHOULD CONSIDER Mtel LICENSE SEPARATELY, FCC SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MobileComm PROVIDING NATIONWIDE SINGLE-FREQUENCY PAGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(266 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>PageNet OPENS NATIONAL ACCOUNTS DIVISION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>WTI EXPANDS WIRELESS COVERAGE THROUGH MASTER AGREEMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Items of Interest</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1035 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>FCC AUCTION UPDATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>AirTouch ACQUIRES PAGING/TELECOM COMPANY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>STORM PROMPTS DELAY OF AUCTIONS UNTIL JAN. 16</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

RadioMail, ARDIS LOWER RATES FOR TWO-WAY MESSAGING

     RadioMail Corp. and ARDIS Co. (Advanced Radio Data Information
Service) announced that they have reduced the service fees for the
RadioMail wireless messaging service over ARDIS' wireless data
network.  The new rates went into effect Jan. 1 of this year.

     Mark Elderkin, RadioMail's director of marketing, said he
expects the new rates to help spur subscriber growth, which was
less than stellar in 1995 (WMR, Dec. 5, p. 2) but started to pick
up toward the end of the year.

     Users subscribing to RadioMail via the ARDIS network will be
charged $10 per month, plus usage fees of 5 cents per kilobyte (1
kilobyte equals 1,000 characters).  ARDIS also charges 54 cents for
each kilobyte above the amount allocated in the subscriber's plan,
but RadioMail said the typical subscription, including ARDIS Mobile
Office air-time rates, starts at about $30 per month.  ARDIS is a
reseller of RadioMail.

     The RadioMail service also is available on the RAM Mobile Data
Inc. wireless data network.  RadioMail buys capacity from RAM and
resells the RAM network service to customers, along with its
RadioMail messaging service.  Elderkin said his company is
negotiating with RAM to lower its access rates, but no change is
immediately forthcoming.  As a result, RadioMail via ARDIS
currently is a somewhat better deal for subscribers, though the
difference in cost is not terribly significant, he said.

     RadioMail charges $39 per month for 100,000 characters sent
over the RAM network, plus 16 cents for each block of 500
characters beyond 100,000.

     The messaging service is expected as well to be available over
several cellular digital packet data (CDPD) networks when cellular
carriers, such as Ameritech Cellular Services and GTE Mobilnet,
begin offering CDPD services in the first half of this year (WMR,
Dec. 5, p. 2).

Competitor Plans to Lower Rates

     RadioMail's primary competition is Wynd Communications Corp.,
a subsidiary of Calif.-based Call America Business Communications
Corp., which offers Internet access, integrated services digital
network (ISDN) service, toll-free 800-numbers and long distance
services (WMR, Feb. 14, p. 1).  The company's WyndMail offering,
which uses the RAM Mobile Data network to provide wireless e-mail
services bundled with paging, voice mail, text messaging, remote
local area network (LAN) mail access and other such services,
starts at a flat rate of $49 per month for 50 messages of 1,000
characters each, with a usage fee of 29 cents for each message
beyond 50.

     However, a Wynd Communications spokesman told WMR that Wynd,
too, is in the process of negotiating these rates with RAM Mobile
Data in an attempt to reduce charges associated with WyndMail, and
possibly to change the rate structure as well.

Wynd May Again Charge by Kilobytes

     Like RadioMail's current rate structure on the ARDIS network,
Wynd used to charge on the basis of kilobytes transmitted, but
recently switched to charging by characters.  However, according to
the spokesman, "a kilobyte plan is better for the customer,"
because it charges for aggregate data usage rather than for blocks
of characters.  Consequently, Wynd may go back to providing the
kilobyte plan for WyndMail, and an announcement regarding rates and
rate structures can be expected in the near future, the spokesman
said.

     RadioMail is based in San Mateo, Calif., and can be reached at
(800) 597-6245 or (415) 904-7070, ext. 263.  ARDIS can be reached
at its Lincolnshire, Ill., headquarters at (708) 913-1215.  Wynd
Communications can be contacted at (805) 545-5174; RAM Mobile Data,
at (908) 602-5500.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

GOOD NEWS AND BAD NEWS FOR STOCKS IN WMR INDEX FOR 1995

     The good news is that 1995 turned out to be one of the best
years ever for stock price appreciation.  The bad news is that the
stocks of the wireless companies tracked by WMR seem to have peaked
in September, with the other major indices also showing signs of
fatigue.

     The 50 stocks that now make up the WMR Index (Telsoft Mobile
Data Inc. ceased trading a month ago) were down by about 2.2
percent in December - only their second monthly decline of the
year.  There were 20 advances, 28 declines and two stocks unchanged
during the final month of 1995.

     The closing prices for Dec. 29, 1995, and their comparisons to
Nov. 30, 1995, and Dec. 30, 1994, are listed in the index on p. 9. 
The same is done for the major stock indices in the chart below.

     The stocks suffered a bruising fourth quarter, posting a 5.1
percent decline over the period.  They did, however, gain 8.1
percent in the first quarter of 1995, followed by 15.7 percent in
the second quarter and 14.5 percent in the third quarter.  That
leaves them up by 30 percent for the year as a whole.

     The charts on pp. 8 and 10 indicate top gainers and decliners
for the past month and for the past year, while Tables 1-8 on p. 11
highlight the leaders and laggards within each of the four quarters
of 1995.

     As the line chart on p. 4 suggests, the WMR Index hit its peak
three months ago.  At the end of September, the WMR Index stood at
1805.  It ended the year at 1713.  Nevertheless, it began 1995 at
1261, which, after adjustments for stocks that entered and exited
during the period, indicates there was a 30 percent gain for the
year as a whole.

     During the same yearlong period, the Dow Jones Industrial
average was up 33 percent.  The Standard & Poor's 500 was up 34
percent in 1995, and the NASDAQ Composite grew by 40 percent.

     Compared to two years ago, the Dow actually is up by the
highest percentage of the four indices.  Since the final trading
day of 1993, the Dow is up 36 percent, while the NASDAQ is up 35
percent, the WMR Index is up 33 percent and the S&P 500 is up 32
percent.

     The Dow closed 1995 at a level of 5117.1.  The NASDAQ ended
the year at 1052.1, and the S&P 500 finished at 615.9.  They began
the year, respectively, at 3834.4, 752.0 and 459.3, and each
continuously set new records toward the end of the year.

     As the data in the line chart on p. 4 illustrate, the WMR
Index and the three major indices dipped in mid-1994, recovered by
the end of the year and spent most of 1995 on a steady decline. 
Taking the levels of each in December 1993 as a base point, their
courses through the past two years show how each fared month to
month.

     Interestingly, each registered two monthly declines in 1995
and 10 advances.  For the Dow 30 and the S&P 500, the declines came
in August and October.  For the NASDAQ and the WMR Index, the
declines came in October and December.

     Over the past two years, the biggest monthly gain for the WMR
Index (+9.4 percent) came in July 1995.  The biggest monthly
decline came in March 1994, when it fell 6.0 percent.  That also
was the worst month of the past 24 for the three major stock
indices.  Meanwhile, the Dow's and S&P 500's best month was
November 1995, while the NASDAQ's biggest percentage gain came in
June 1995.

Showings in December

     Only three stocks were up by more than 10 percent during
December.  Globalstar Telecommunications Ltd. topped the gainer
list with a 16.5 percent advance, closing the year at $37, just
fractions of a point below its new high.  The stock, which began
trading in February at about $15, fell as low as $11.50 before
staging a comeback in November.

     Sony Corp., another company whose stock suffered through the
early and middle months of 1995, also closed 1995 on a high note. 
It closed December at $61.38 a share, up $7.50 a share from a month
before, but up only $5.25 from a year ago.  Still, it was one of
the Top 10 gainers in December.  BellSouth Corp., which also set
new highs at the end of 1995, was up $4.63 for the month and up
$16.44 a share for the year.

     There were an unlucky 13 stocks down by more than 10 percent
during the month.  They include the 10 listed in the chart on p. 8,
plus Vanguard Cellular Systems Inc., Racotek Inc., and Grupo
Iusacell SA de CV.  The biggest decline was Cirrus Logic Inc.,
which fell $9.25 during the month and $2.75 for the year.  The
company simply fell out of bed in the past few months, declining
from a high of $61.13 a share to a low of $11.13, before recovering
to $19.75 by year's end.  In the fourth quarter, the stock declined
65.5 percent, edging out Retix and Nokia Corp. for that dubious
distinction.

     Nokia, meanwhile, closed the year at $39 a share, up $1.50
from a year ago but more than $30 below its recent highs of the
summer months.  It announced some sluggish results for its cellular
telephone operations and the market drove the stock down.  This is
a company that continuously has led the monthly gainers lists.  In
fact, it's still more than triple its price of December 1993.  But
it's up only 4 percent for 1995, after adjusting for a stock split.

     Another former high flyer, wireless modem maker U.S. Robotics
Inc., also has turned on the fasten-seat belt sign.  It's down
$22.50 a share in December, which sounds bad until one realizes
they were up $17.50 in November and $7.25 in October.  So it's
really trading at its September price, give or take a few dollars. 
And it remains the top performer for the year, having quadrupled
since the end of 1994.

     Other top gainers for the year include Bolt Beranek and Newman
Inc. (BBN), Microcom Inc. and Pronet Inc.  Each has more than
doubled in price during the past year, although Pronet fell $1.25
a share during the final month of the year.

8 CDPD Carriers Outperform Market

     Eight wireless data and/or cellular digital packet data (CDPD)
carriers outperformed the market as a whole, meaning their stocks
appreciated by more than the 30 percent to 34 percent of the
general indices.  The top-performing carrier was BellSouth, up
$16.44 a share or 60.7 percent, followed by NYNEX Corp., Ameritech
Corp., GTE Corp., Sprint Corp., MCI Communications Corp.,
Southwestern Bell (SBC Communications Inc.) and Bell Atlantic Corp.

     There were nine companies down by more than 10 percent for the
year.  In fact, there were 13 decliners and 37 advancers for the
year as a whole.  The big losers for the year were Retix and Grupo
Iusacell.  Grupo Iusacell can at least blame the Mexican economy
and the run on the peso for its woes.  But Retix is in its 23rd
month of decline, falling from a price of $10.38 in January 1994. 
It closed 1995 at $2.13 a share, down $1.88 for the year and 6
cents for the month.

     Tables 1-8 on the facing page highlight the top gainers and
decliners in each of the quarters of 1995.  Interestingly, only 14
companies scored advances in every quarter, and nine of them are
cellular or wireless data carriers - some of the same names that
topped the list in the chart above.

Perfect Quarterly Scores

     The companies with perfect quarterly scores are Ameritech;
Bell Atlantic; BellSouth; BBN; GTE; Hewlett-Packard Co.; MCI;
NYNEX; Pronet; Rockwell International Corp.; SBC; Southern New
England Telecommunications Inc. (SNET); Sprint; and U.S. Robotics. 
However, only BBN and U.S. Robotics were consistently above average
for each of the four quarters.

     Average growth in the first quarter was 8.1 percent.  In the
second quarter, stock price growth averaged 15.7 percent.  In the
third quarter, prices were up 14.5 percent.  And in the final
quarter, the average share price decline was 5.1 percent.

     Racotek nearly doubled its price in the first quarter.  Cirrus
Logic was a top performer during the first and second quarters. 
Globalstar took the top spot in the third and fourth quarters. 
U.S. Robotics was second or third for the first three quarters,
though it fell out of the Top 10 (to 18th place) in the final
quarter.

     No company suffered four quarterly declines in 1995, but three
stocks were down for three out of the four.  They were:  AllTel
Corp., Apple Computer Inc. and Samsung Ltd.  In addition, American
Paging Inc. and Nextel Communications Inc. suffered two quarterly
declines plus one quarter in which their stock price was unchanged.

     Besides the aforementioned hammering that Cirrus Logic took in
the fourth quarter, Intelligent Electronics Inc.'s 37.6 percent
decline in the third quarter and Iusacell's 36.2 percent decline in
the first quarter are the biggest quarterly declines of the year.

     During the first three quarters of the year past, there were
three or four stocks in period that were down by more than 10
percent.  In fact, in two quarters, only eight stocks declined at
all, making a Top 10 Decliner list impossible, as Tables 4 and 6
prove.

     In the fourth quarter, however, there were only 22 gainers and
28 decliners.  Of those, 21 declined by more than 10 percent.  Only
the Top 10 are listed in Table 8.

     Among the decliners of the fourth quarter, one common theme
emerges.  Investors began to reassess the outlook for cutting-edge
companies and their respective technologies, trimming back their
expectations for companies such as Mobile Telecommunication
Technologies Corp. (Mtel) and General Magic Inc., which are leading
the two-way paging and personal communicator markets, respectively.

     But as the market proved earlier in 1995, it also can reward
companies such as Globalstar and Metricom Inc., whose prospects for
cutting-edge wireless data ventures at one time seemed
questionable.  And as millions of widows and orphans know, the
safest bet in the telecommunications market continues to be Ma Bell
and her offspring.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

ARCH TO ACQUIRE WESTLINK FOR $210 MILLION IN CASH

     Arch Communications Group Inc. has signed a definitive
agreement to acquire Westlink Holdings Inc. for $210 million in
cash and the assumption of $130 million in Westlink debt.  The deal
will make Arch the third-largest paging carrier in the United
States, with more than 2.5 million subscribers.  Arch will finance
the acquisition through an existing credit line and additional
loans.

     As a privately held company, Westlink was formed in 1994 to
acquire the paging assets of U S WEST Paging Inc.  The company
operates paging systems in a 14-state region west of the
Mississippi, while most of Arch's paging assets are concentrated
east of the Mississippi.  According to C.E. Baker Jr., Arch's
chairman and chief executive officer, the acquisition "will
effectively complete the geographic footprint that makes us a
national player."

     Arch, based in Westborough, Mass., also will gain access to
other paging licenses through Westlink's 49.9 percent stake in
Benbow PCS Ventures Inc., the winner of two regional narrowband
personal communications service (PCS) licenses sold at a Federal
Communications Commission auction last year.  Arch currently owns
about 11 percent of PCS Development Corp., a Greenville, S.C.,
company that won five regional narrowband PCS licenses at the same
auction, and plans to resell that company's two-way paging services
when commercial operations are launched in 1997.

     Arch can be reached at (508) 898-0962.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

APC, MARYLAND AGENCY FACE PCS INTERFERENCE PROBLEMS

     American Personal Communications (APC) has rejected claims
that its personal communications service (PCS) system is
interfering with the operation of Baltimore's mass transit system. 
In a recent letter to APC, Maryland's Mass Transit Administration
(MTA) stated that the new wireless service has caused "serious
interference" to the communications operations of light rail and
bus services operating between Baltimore and nearby destinations.

     The letter was made public by UTC, the Telecommunications
Association, a Washington, D.C.-based trade group representing
incumbent microwave radio licensees operating in the 2 gigahertz
(GHz) spectrum band.  UTC subsequently issued a statement saying it
had distributed the letter without the MTA's consent.

     Anne Schelle, APC's vice president of external affairs,
expressed concern over what she termed an attempt by UTC to
"politicize" the effort to relocate 2 GHz microwave systems to
other spectrum bands.  The relocation of incumbent operators has
been a contentious issue since the Federal Communications
Commission first drafted rules requiring 2 GHz licensees to clear
that band to make way for new PCS licensees.  The commission
recently clarified rules adopted in the Engineering and Technology
Docket 92-9 "emerging technologies" proceeding, further defining
"good faith" negotiations over relocation issues between licensees
(WMR, Oct. 24, p. 6).

Interruptions a 'Grave Threat'

     The letter from Maryland's MTA described two occasions last
fall upon which APC's PCS system disrupted Baltimore's mass transit
communications systems.  "These communications interruptions have
posed a grave threat to public safety," the Dec. 27, 1995, letter
stated.  The MTA also asked APC for reimbursement for all costs
incurred as a result of the interference problems.  MTA spokesman
Anthony Brown declined to comment further on the interference
problems, noting that it involves "a possible issue of litigation."

     Schelle told WMR that interference problems with the mass
transit system have been resolved.  In a Jan. 3 letter to the MTA,
an APC attorney said mass transit engineers have reported no
public-safety problems resulting from interference between the two
radio systems.  Also, 2 GHz incumbents have a responsibility to
respond to frequency coordination notices in a timely manner, the
attorney added.

     The MTA received at least six such letters indicating that APC
planned to test its PCS system, he said, but MTA officials failed
to respond to a single one.

     "Microwave licensees that ignore frequency coordination
notices do so at their own peril," the APC attorney stated.  "PCS
licensees can only protect licensed facilities if they are informed
of the complete parameters of those facilities' operations.  APC
fully protected the facilities represented on MTA's FCC license and
could not have known, without being informed by MTA, that MTA is
operating at a variance from those parameters."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

COURT SHOULD CONSIDER Mtel LICENSE SEPARATELY, FCC SAYS

     The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has told the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington that it should not consider the
commission's licensing scheme for private paging licensees in its
deliberations on whether Mobile Telecommunication Technologies
Corp. (Mtel) should pay for a license obtained through the agency's
"pioneer's preference" program.

     Last month the court heard oral arguments in case no. 94-1552,
Mtel v. FCC, in which Mtel challenged the commission's authority to
charge a $33 million fee for the company's narrowband personal
communications services (PCS) license without first receiving
congressional authority (WMR, Dec. 10, p. 5).

     During the hearing, Mtel attorneys argued that the company
should not have to pay for its two-way paging license because the
FCC has granted free licenses to other paging companies that will
compete with Mtel.  The court had requested supporting
documentation, which Mtel supplied.  In its response to Mtel's
"post-argument submission," the FCC argued that private paging
licenses are not comparable to Mtel's license.

'Others Paid Substantially at Auction'

     "Mtel is a licensee in a brand new service (narrowband PCS) in
a newly allocated frequency band," the agency explained, adding
that all other licensees planning to offer narrowband PCS have paid
substantial sums for their licenses at a government auction.

     The FCC noted that it was Mtel's choice to develop an advanced
two-way paging system.  "To the best of our knowledge, Mtel did not
apply for a private paging license at 929-930 [megahertz]," it
said.  Furthermore, "Mtel's choice to commit substantial amounts of
money to its narrowband PCS licenses when private paging licenses
were 'free' undercuts its assertion in this court that the
commission is applying different rules to identical licenses," the
agency added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

MobileComm PROVIDING NATIONWIDE SINGLE-FREQUENCY PAGING

     MobileMedia Corp. has completed its previously announced
acquisition of BellSouth Corp.'s paging subsidiary, MobileComm, and
its narrowband personal communications services (PCS) licenses for
$930 million (WMR, Sept. 25, p. 6).  The combination of the two
companies gives MobileMedia a total of more than 4 million paging
units in service, making it the second-largest paging services
provider in the United States, the companies announced Jan. 4.

     With the completion of the largest acquisition in the history
of the paging industry behind it, MobileMedia will begin to market
all of its paging and messaging services under the MobileComm
brand.

All to Single Frequency During 2nd Quarter

     All MobileComm services are slated to begin using a single
frequency within the wireless spectrum sometime during the second
quarter of this year.  The frequency is in the 900 megahertz PCS
band for which MobileComm owns licenses nationwide.

     "This [will be] a significant benefit for our retailers and
the consumer," said Bill Stark, MobileComm's executive director of
retail distribution.  "By offering the one frequency, multicity
retail chains will be able to reduce the number of SKUs
[stock-keeping units] stocked in their warehouses while providing
a wider range of services....

     "Paging subscribers will also benefit from the move to single
frequency," he added.  "With the new single-frequency pagers,
consumers enhance their paging service without having the hassle
and expense of changing their pager."  When the single-frequency
offering is launched, all MobileComm pagers will operate in all
cities covered by MobileMedia's nationwide wireless network.

     MobileMedia is headquartered in Ridgefield Park, N.J., and can
be reached at (201) 462-4965.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

PageNet OPENS NATIONAL ACCOUNTS DIVISION

     The largest paging company in the world has announced plans to
target the consumer market with a major new marketing and
distribution strategy.  Paging Network Inc. (PageNet) formed a
National Accounts Division that will work with large regional or
national companies to offer paging services as part of a package of
other consumer services, such as long distance or local telephone,
or cable television.

     Michael DiMarco, formerly PageNet's vice president of
corporate development, now senior vice president of operations for
the National Accounts Division, said he expects the division will
have a "dramatic impact on PageNet's growth and expansion into new
markets, particularly among consumers."

     The company currently has a substantial reseller channel,
established in 1992, that includes more than 6,000 businesses that
purchase air time and pagers from PageNet and resell them mostly to
business users.  The National Accounts Division, however, will
establish a different kind of relationship with its partners:  It
will provide customized, turnkey paging programs - including pager
leasing, customer service, order fulfillment and billing, in
addition to paging service - that the affiliate can offer to
customers as a bonus in an attempt to increase sales.

     MCI Communications Corp. began marketing PageNet's services
with its Friends & Family Connections program in early 1995.  The
success of that program led to the development of the new marketing
and distribution strategy, which was announced Jan. 4.  GTE Corp.
and the Sprint Telecommunications Venture became affiliates of the
program in December.  The National Accounts Division plans to
target other telecommunications carriers, as well as banks, cable
television providers, utilities, retailers and other companies, for
participation in the new program.

     PageNet, whose National Accounts Division is based in the
Dallas area, can be reached at (214) 985-6791.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

WTI EXPANDS WIRELESS COVERAGE THROUGH MASTER AGREEMENTS

     Wireless Telecom Inc. (WTI), a systems integrator focusing on
mobile data network products and services, signed agreements last
month with cellular carriers throughout the United States to enable
its value-added resellers (VARs) to offer wireless data services
through the carriers' networks nationwide.  Ameritech Cellular
Services, Bell Atlantic NYNEX Mobile (BANM) and GTE Mobilnet join
AT&T Wireless Services and LA Cellular, which already have such
agreements with WTI, in expanding WTI's coverage area to include
more than 90 of the top markets in the United States.

     "End-users, VARs and vendor communities will all benefit from
WTI's nationwide cellular coverage," said Rob Balgley, president of
WTI.  "A corporation with mobile workers based in different cities
can now arrange to activate all users by working with a single WTI
VAR."

     WTI is based in Aurora, Colo., and can be reached at (303)
338-4200.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

Items of Interest

     *    Alcatel has received its first purchase order from
Pacific Bell Mobile Services (PBMS) for the construction of new
personal communications services (PCS) networks.  PBMS placed the
order for Alcatel digital microwave radios and engineering
services, covering projects in Santa Barbara County, Calif. 
Alcatel will provide its MDR-4000, MDR-5000 and MDR-6000 radios to
augment the existing 6 gigahertz (GHz) microwave backbone of Santa
Barbara's public safety communications system for 911, fire, police
and other services.  Alcatel can be reached at (214) 996-7896;
PBMS, at (415) 394-3744.

     *    American Paging Inc. will base its new Customer Call
Center in Oklahoma City, Okla.  The center, which is slated to open
in April, is expected to employ approximately 150 employees. 
Minneapolis-based American Paging is an 82.4 percent-owned
subsidiary of Telephone and Data Systems Inc.  As of Sept. 30,
1995, American Paging provided wireless messaging services to more
than 776,900 subscribers in 14 states and the District of Columbia. 
American Paging is at (612) 623-3100.

     *    Ardis has altered its Wireless Software Developer Program
(WSDP) to lower air-time costs and increase technical support for
software applications providers.  Effective Jan. 1, WSDP began
offering developers reduced air-time and registration fees, in
addition to online technical support through the Ardis World Wide
Web home page at http://www.ardis.com.  Ardis is at (708) 913-4233.

     *    Bell Atlantic Network Services Inc. and Bell Atlantic
Properties Inc. are offering to lease more than 2,000 antenna sites
to PCS licensees.  They also will help PCS operators select and
lease sites from other sources.  About 75 percent of the 2,000 Bell
Atlantic sites are central offices.  The companies plan to provide
switching and transport facilities, billing and operator services,
site acquisition, permitting, radio frequency engineering and other
services to wireless carriers.

     *    Contact New Mexico Inc. has acquired A Crystal Clear
Paging Co. of San Antonio, Texas, for an undisclosed amount.  The
transaction, which represents approximately 13,000 pagers, links
Contact New Mexico with the largest regional paging network that
covers New Mexico, Texas, Arkansas and Oklahoma.  Daniels &
Associates, which represented the seller, is at (303) 778-5555.

     *    GMSI Inc., a unit of Geotek Communications Inc., plans to
provide Comfort Transportation Ltd. of Singapore, the world's
largest taxi fleet, with 4,000 dispatch and mobile data
communications systems.  The value of the contract is $3.35
million.  The systems will provide voice and data communications,
credit card authorization and vehicle location via a global
positioning systems receiver in each taxi.

     *    Hughes Network Systems (HNS), a unit of Hughes
Electronics Corp., will extend to Geotek Communications Inc. a
two-year, $25 million line of credit for Geotek to acquire
additional 900 megahertz (MHz) spectrum in the United States. 
Geotek and HNS already enjoy a strategic partnership to develop a
series of mobile workstations and portable handsets based on
Geotek's proprietary frequency-hopping multiple access (FHMA)
technology.  Geotek is at (201) 930-9305.

     *    Mobile Telecommunication Technologies Corp. (Mtel) soon
will provide service in every Latin American country by expanding
its paging and messaging coverage into Venezuela, Guatemala and
Uruguay.  In Venezuela, Mtel has formed Telecomunicaciones SkyTel
CA with Telecomunicaciones Movilnet.  Mtel also has begun offering
services though a joint venture called Mtel Guatemala.  In
addition, Mtel will deliver paging service in Uruguay through a
recently acquired controlling interest in Radio Aviso, a Uruguayan
paging company.  Mtel is at (601) 944-7002.

     *    Page East Inc. has acquired Coastal Communications Inc.
for an undisclosed amount.  The purchase represents 4,300 pagers in
Greenville, Goldsboro, Rocky Mount and Wilson, N.C.  Daniels &
Associates, which represented the seller, is at (303) 778-5555.

     *    PageMart Inc., the nation's fifth-largest wireless
messaging provider, has initiated a rebiller program that allows
long-distance carriers and resellers to bundle wireless messaging
with long-distance telephone services and consolidate billing on
one monthly statement.  Dallas-based PageMart is targeting
long-distance providers in search of a low-risk, high-profile entry
into the fast-growing paging business.  PageMart is at (214)
750-5809.

     *    Paging Network Inc. (PageNet) has named Kenneth Sanders
senior vice president and chief financial officer, effective Jan.
22.  Sanders previously was executive vice president, chief
financial officer and director of Cell Star Corp., an integrated
wholesale distributor and retailer of cellular telephones and
related products.  Sanders replaces Barry Fromberg, who recently
was named chairman and chief executive officer of PageNet
International.  PageNet is at (214) 985 6749.

     *    RF Industries Ltd. has received $200,000 in initial
orders from three customers for its digital data radio modems.  RF
will provide 167 new surface-mount VHF transceivers to Loral
Defense Systems-East.  It also will provide MAVRIC 2000 wireless
network controllers and NEULINK 9600 system for the U.S. Air Force
and 250 NEULINK 9600 high-speed digital modems for wireless remote
to Colorado-based Master Tek International.  Contact RF at (619)
549-6340.

     *    Shaw Communications Inc. announced that its Shaw
MobileComm Inc. subsidiary has concluded an agreement to purchase
the paging assets of Page-Direct Ltd.  Page-Direct serves the
Calgary, Alberta, area.

     *    For the first time, SkyTel Corp.'s pagers, including new
SkyTel 2-Way pagers, now are available in leading retail outlets
nationwide.  SkyTel, a subsidiary of Mtel, initially plans to sell
its pagers through national retailers such as Staples, Office
Depot, Incredible Universe and Soundtrack/Ultimate Electronics. 
This increased availability is part of an agreement between SkyTel
and Sony Electronics Inc., providing for the distribution of SkyTel
paging and wireless messaging products though the Sony retail
network.

     SkyTel recently announced it has obtained a $250 million
secured revolving credit facility from several financial
institutions.  The company plans to use the credit facility for
capital expenditures, working capital and other general corporate
purposes.  Chemical Bank NA will be the administrative agent for
the credit facility; Credit Lyonnais - New York Branch will serve
as documentation agent; and J.P. Morgan will be the co-syndication
agent.  SkyTel is at (408) 342-4800.

     *    WavePhore Inc. has completed the acquisition of
Mainstream Data of Salt Lake City for $31 million.  Payment
consisted of $20 million in cash and $11 million in restricted
stock.  The acquisition combines Arizona-based WavePhore's patented
data broadcasting technologies and Mainstream's position as the
leading operator of data broadcasting networks in North America. 
WavePhore can be reached at (602) 438-8700.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

FCC AUCTION UPDATES

     WMR's publisher, BRP Publications Inc., is offering Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) auction updates on its redesigned
World Wide Web site, which was launched Friday.  The information is
provided through a joint venture with Telecommunications Research
Inc. (TRI) of Arlington, Va.

     Users can obtain demographic information and bidding data on
each of the Basic Trading Areas and Major Trading Areas for which
licenses are being sold.

     The online tracking system will supply daily updates of the
multipoint distribution service (MDS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR) and "C" block personal communications services (PCS) auctions
when they resume Jan. 16.

     View BRP's Web site at http://brp.com or call (800) 822-6338
or (202) 842-0520 for more information.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

AirTouch ACQUIRES PAGING/TELECOM COMPANY

     AirTouch Communications Inc. announced the completion of its
acquisition of privately held Message Center Beepers.  Hartford,
Conn.-based Message Center will contribute more than 345,000
customers to the AirTouch Paging division's installed customer base
of nearly 2 million.

     "Expanding our national footprint through this acquisition
will allow us to cover more retail storefronts on the East Coast,
a key element of our distribution strategy," said Todd Parker,
AirTouch Paging's vAice president of marketing and business
development.  The move also will enable the company to establish an
early presence in markets in which it intends eventually to provide
two-way services through narrowband personal communications
services (PCS) licenses it won last year.

     AirTouch can be reached at (510) 210-3910.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
WIRELESS MESSAGING REPORT via NewsNet
January 16, 1996

STORM PROMPTS DELAY OF AUCTIONS UNTIL JAN. 16

     Citing poor East Coast weather, Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) officials decided Jan. 10 to postpone three
auctions of radio spectrum licenses until Jan. 16.  An FCC
spokesman told WMR that auction participants - bidding
electronically from Boston, New York and Philadelphia - were socked
in by the same blizzard that shut down the federal government for
four of the five business days last week.

     "In fairness to the bidders, the commission decided not to
restart the auctions until next week," the spokesman said last
week.  A number of bidders told the FCC that staff resources have
been limited by the winter storm that hit major cities along the
East Coast early last week, the spokesman said.

     A public notice regarding the delay was posted on the Internet
Jan. 10 and sent to auction participants Friday.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>