
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B040-227</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122051957 text/html 34395
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:05 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:10 GMT
Content-length: 34208
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>NEW YEAR WILL FEATURE SATELLITE BROADCASTING, MOBILE SERVICES </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1746 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>U.S. DELEGATION WINS WRC-95 BATTLES WITH LOBBYING CAMPAIGN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>FCC CLEARS PATH FOR FCC DBS AUCTIONS FOR JANUARY 18</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(242 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SATELLITE SPOTLIGHT: NEW SAT-BASED TRACKING SYSTEM INTRODUCED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BILL GATES ENVISIONS WALLET PCS AS A WAY TO USE TELEDESIC SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(559 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>U.S. PLANS TO UPDATE LAUNCH PACT WITH RUSSIA TO CREATE PARITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(818 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SATELLITE BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>SATELLITE BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(835 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW YEAR WILL FEATURE SATELLITE BROADCASTING, MOBILE SERVICES 

     Direct-to-home (DTH) satellite broadcast services will be one of
the top stories during the next 12 months--for the third straight
year--along with progress in developing global, mobile satellite
communication systems and new, more reliable launch vehicles, an array
of industry leaders told SATELLITE NEWS last week in our annual Look-
ahead Survey.
     Satellite broadcasting equipment has become the fastest-selling
product in consumer electronics history and shows no signs of slowing
as deep-pocketed companies attempt to launch such services throughout
the world in '96, sources said.  And, the rush for others to provide
global, mobile services by 2000 will intensify as those systems
prepare to launch their first satellites on rockets that suffered some
failures in '95.
     Chuck Hewitt, president of the Satellite Broadcasting and
Communications Association (SBCA), said, "We think 1996 will see
continued expansion of the
direct-to-home industry with the introduction of several new players. 
That expansion includes the successful launch of the EchoStar
Communications Corp. system [see related story on p. 1] and the soon-
to-be introduced AlphaStar DTH system.  These new systems will
continue to expand the level of choice available to the consumer. 
And, we'll see the introduction of additional, niche market
programming services which will be unique to the satellite
marketplace.  Many of those programs will not be available on cable."
     A similar bullish view about DTH was offered by Bruce Crockett,
president and CEO of Comsat Corp..
     "Comsat's recent $100 million contract with News Corp. to provide
direct-to-home broadcasting in Latin America demonstrates that DTH
continues to expand in every region of the world," Crockett said. 
"News Corp. is repeating the success it has enjoyed in Europe and
Asia.  At the same time, DirecTv created the market in the U.S. and
now is being joined by other operators like PrimeStar and Echostar.
     "All of these pioneers have set the stage for a booming
international business in the second half of the '90s.  Eastern
Europe, India, the Middle East, and Africa are hot markets to watch,"
Crockett said.
     DirecTv, a unit of GM Hughes Electronics Corp., reached 1 million
subscribers for its direct broadcast satellite (DBS) service in the
United States this year, said Donald Cromer, president of Hughes Space
and Communications Co.  For '96, the big story will be progress in
developing satellite systems, such as Hughes' Spaceway project, to
offer interactive bandwidth applications, he said.

  ...Money, Money, Money Will Decide Winners in '96

     "For 1996, the story is going to be money, money, money--DBS
auctions, fundraising for the Big LEOs and other satellite ventures,
and whether Constellation Communications, American Mobile Satellite
Corp. and Ellipsat make their financial showing to obtain Big LEO
licenses by the end of January 1996," said Tim Logue, a space and
telecommunications analyst with the law firm Reid & Priest, of
Washington, D.C.
     Logue continued, "I believe the financial markets are
increasingly sophisticated about satellite communications.  That
means, however, that they are much less likely to be bowled over by
'gee whiz' types of presentations.  They understand the business and
understand full well the high risks involved.
     "Therefore, satellite companies have to do a better job of
presenting their business cases and offerings to the financial
community.  Anything that would reduce risk would be helpful, as well,
like improving launch vehicle reliability," Logue added.
     Hewitt said, "We believe that Wall Street's understanding of the
role that satellite communication plays in the Information
Superhighway has increased substantially in the past 12-18 months.  In
particular, SBCA has developed Wall 
Street's understanding of the direct-to-home marketplace through our
association's SkyForum conference that is held twice a year in New
York."
     The financial community is starting to recognize the growth
potential of satellite systems, Cromer said.
     ICO Global Communications Inc., a for-profit, spin-off of the
world's mobile satellite consortium Inmarsat, raised $1.4 billion from
its Signatories.  and was forced to turn away hundreds of millions of
dollars from some 40 investors interested in backing the
organization's planned 12-satellite, $2.6 billion system to provide
global, mobile communications (SN, Jan. 23, 1995, pp. 1-3).  Hughes
became an ICO investor late last year.
     "The $5.7 billion backlog in satellite orders for Hughes--double
last year's backlog--is some indication that new ventures are finding
the capital needed for satellite communications systems," Cromer said.

  ...Financing Generally Is Tight, Tight, Tight

     "Some, however, such as Iridium [Inc.] and Globalstar pulled
their [debt] offerings soon after they were released," Cromer said. 
"I believe financial backing will continue to become available in the
future as more satellite programs are proven and business cases are
demonstrated."
     Bruce Gerding, managing director of Odyssey Telecommunications
International Inc., said, "As more satellite financing deals are
brought to market, investors are beginning to understand them better
and deals are getting done, as evidenced by the completion in 1995 of
the PanAmSat, Orion and Globalstar initial public offerings and the
PanAmSat high-yield offering, among others.  Although some satellite
financing attempts failed this year, I believe that financial backing
will become more available in the future as risks are better
understood and more properly structured satellite deals are brought to
market."
     A less-optimistic view was offered by Ahmad Ghais, a satellite
industry consultant and the former director of engineering and
operations at Inmarsat.  Ghais warned financial markets may not become
more generous in the future.
     "Financial markets will recognize that not all contenders have
staying power, so they will be very selective in backing them," Ghais
said.  "That will lead to a shake out, beginning visibly in '96.  Who
will survive?  That is the question financing sources will need the
most expert help on."   
     Another consultant, Ed Martin, a former executive with Comsat
Corp., said, "Only a few, at most, of the new systems will achieve
financial success." 

  ...WRC 95 Spurs Optimism

     Many prospective global, mobile communications systems gained
immensely from the allocation of substantial spectrum for their
services at the World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC-95) that
ended Nov. 12.
     Russell Daggatt, president of Teledesic Corp., said, "WRC has
left us very optimistic about the future.  We now are prepared to move
forward with the project.  I would expect us to bring on a few key
partners in '96.  The objective in '96 is not so much money, because
we are adequately capitalized for the time being, but we need to begin
putting our global partnership into shape."
     Odyssey's Gerding added: "WRC-95 showed terrific cooperation
between the satellite industry and the U.S. government delegation.  As
a result of their successful efforts, Odyssey has obtained its
frequencies, as planned; that accomplishment has been well received by
our backers."
     Scott Harris, chief of the FCC's International Bureau, said, "The
success of the U.S. delegation at WRC-95, which built upon and
expanded past successes, was another giant step forward for global
satellite systems.  This success was evidenced not only by the
spectrum allocated, but also in the commitment to such systems
demonstrated by the vast majority of ITU member states."
     Ghais countered, however, the allocations do not preclude
disputes erupting between satellite and terrestrial users that must
share the spectrum.
     Joseph Krabacher, managing director of Informcosmosconsult LLC,
agreed.
     "We are concerned about the broadband MSS frequency allocation
due to anticipated technical coordination problems and the potential
for a company such as Teledesic to obtain monopolistic advantages,"
Krabacher said.
     Informcosmosconsult is a U.S.-based marketing and legal
consulting firm that represents a number of Russian government and
industry clients.
     The SBCA's Hewitt said, "With the Satellite Industry Association
operating as an independent arm of the SBCA, and having
representatives on the SBCA board of directors, we're very pleased to
see the satellite-related spectrum allocations that were granted by
WRC-95."

  ...Launch Reliability Remains in Question

     Many observers thought one of the biggest stories of the past 12
to 18 months was the partial or total failure of at least one launch
each by Arianespace, Lockheed Martin Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp.,
Orbital Sciences Corp., EER Systems Inc. and China Great Wall Corp. 
New rockets intended to carry small- and mid-sized commercial payloads
performed the worst with three consecutive failures (SN, Oct. 30,
1995, pp. 1-3).
     Irving Goldstein, director general and CEO of Intelsat, said
launchers needed to become far more reliable in the future.  And those
launchers also must provide their services at a reasonable cost, he
added.  Some launchers are charging upward of $100 million for each
launch.
     "Even though satellite communications is a relatively mature
industry, there still is a fair amount of risk associated with getting
spacecraft into orbit and in service for their entire lifetime,"
Goldstein said.  "Over the past year, the industry has experienced its
share of launch vehicle failures and delays, complicating an already
tight overall industry launch manifest.  While there have been some
positive trends, such as [Lockheed's] expanding launch capabilities
and progress on the Ariane 5, there still is considerable room to
improve the range of launch vehicle choices, scheduling options and
costs."
     He Xing, vice general manager of the space division at China
Great Wall, said 1996 will be an important year for new rockets that
launch big payloads.
     "The more powerful major launch vehicles, such as Ariane 5, Long
March 3B and 3C, will all experience their maiden flights, and
something new will also be brought about with Delta 3, Zenit and
Proton," Xing said.  "The world will suddenly receive such a large
number of new launch vehicles.  Fortunately or unfortunately, the
satellite operators will find it very difficult to distinguish and to
choose their favorite launch services package."

  ...Orbital Slot Disputes Will Spark Litigation in '96

     One negative development that will emerge this year is the
problem of orbital congestion between satellites, said Delbert Smith,
a partner with the Washington, D.C., law firm Reed Smith Shaw &
McClay.
     "I'm predicting the first, formal litigation or arbitration will
take place in 1996 dealing with disputed orbital arc locations," Smith
said.  "We've come very close in the recent past with four or five
instances of orbital arc disputes.  Each of these times the disputes
have been settled at the 11th hour through negotiation and
coordination.  Now, the stakes are much larger.
     "The companies are much bigger and their markets are much larger,
particularly for broadcasters.  These are major corporate entities. 
They have much to lose, and therefore the protection of their
corporate assets will become a prime motivating factor in their
ability to continue to raise financing."
     Past disputes about orbital positions largely have been limited
to technical issues, not commercial ones, Smith said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

U.S. DELEGATION WINS WRC-95 BATTLES WITH LOBBYING CAMPAIGN

     The U.S. delegation to the World Radiocommunication Conference
(WRC 95) last fall gained critical new spectrum allocations for some
proposed, global mobile telephony services, but used some
unconventional lobbying activities previously not seen at any of the
past conferences, some satellite industry insiders said.
     In one instance, the U.S. pressured other delegations to support
an allocation for Teledesic Corp., the U.S.-based company that plans
to offer broadband communication services via 840 low-Earth-orbit
satellites by 2001.
     Teledesic aided its cause by serving members of the various
delegations an assortment of goodies that included pizza, beer, ice
cream, tote bags, hats and notebooks, said Leslie Taylor, who heads
the Bethesda, Md.-based satellite consulting firm Leslie Taylor
Associates Inc.

  ...Promising Free Service Usually Works, Too!

     The strategy worked because the WRC allocated 400 MHz in Ka-band
for non-geostationary fixed services, such as Teledesic.  And, the
allocation of an additional 100 MHz for such services was placed on
the agenda for WRC-97.
     Teledesic won another victory when the conference adopted a
precedent-setting "freeze" on the filing of new geostationary or non-
geostationary fixed satellite services (FSS) before the end of WRC-97,
Taylor said.  That gives Teledesic extra time to win votes for the
additional 100 MHz allocation.
     To curry further backing, Teledesic promised two years of free
service in certain parts of the world, Taylor added.  Teledesic
President Russell Daggatt said his system won broad support on its
merits.
     The U.S. negotiators pressed their counterparts from other
countries for quick action on a number of key mobile satellite
spectrum allocations, said Taylor, who accompanied the U.S. delegation
in Geneva.
     Although the lobbying was cranked up at this WRC, FCC
Commissioner Susan Ness said the U.S. achieved some important gains
for Teledesic and others.  Ness praised delegation head Amb. Brian
Fontes for winning support on several key issues for U.S. mobile
satellite ventures.  Ness was part of the delegation. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FCC CLEARS PATH FOR FCC DBS AUCTIONS FOR JANUARY 18

     FCC commissioners voted unanimously late last month to hold the
long-awaited and much-anticipated auctions for 52 DBS channels split
between the 110 degrees W and 148 degrees W orbital slots on Jan. 18.
     Commissioners also voted to restrict current DBS operators from
participating in the auction.  A "single spectrum cap" will limit
companies from controlling more than one full-continental U.S. orbital
slot.  As a result, DirecTv Inc., EchoStar Corp. and United States
Satellite Broadcasting Co. Inc. (USSB), as well as other DBS
permittees, will not be allowed to bid on the frequencies unless they
divest their other licenses.
     The commission, however, did not prevent cable TV companies and
multiple system operators (MSOs) from bidding on the valuable
spectrum.
     A host of communications giants are thought to be interested in
bidding on the frequencies including, MCI Corp., backed by Rupert
Murdoch, Bell Atlantic Corp., Nynex Corp., U S West, BellSouth Corp.
and, of course, TeleCommunications Inc., the nation's largest cable
MSO.
     Indeed, MCI already has announced it will open the auctions, the
first in the history of the satellite industry, with an initial bid of
$175 million.

  ...How Will the Auctions Be Conducted?

     The electronic auctions will be held in sequential, multiple
rounds that will grant two permits, one for 28 channels at 110 degrees
W and the other for 24 frequencies at 148 degrees W--the spectrum
formerly licensed to Advanced Communications Corp., of Little Rock,
Ark., and Tempo Satellite Corp.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SATELLITE SPOTLIGHT: NEW SAT-BASED TRACKING SYSTEM INTRODUCED

     Fairfax, Va.-based Arrowhead Space & Telecommunications Inc.
(Arrowhead) has introduced a new vehicle monitoring and security
system (VMSS).  The new product will be available through Arrowhead
Technologies Inc., a division of Arrowhead Space & Telecommunications,
located in Newport News, Va.
     The VMSS is designed to solve two short- and long-haul trucking
problems: trailer hijacking and cargo theft.  It also functions as a
dynamic location device providing real time automatic updates
displayed on high-resolution maps.
     Arrowhead said the benefits of VMSS include reduced cargo
insurance premiums, improved loss control and less pass-through of
costs resulting from theft.  The VMSS is incident-driven and can be
interfaced with a wide variety of nationwide communications networks. 
The entire system is battery operated and completely independent of a
trailer's electrical system.
     "VMSS is an extension of our automated vehicle location product,"
said Mary Ann Elliott, president and CEO of Arrowhead.  "With VMSS, a
firm can determine a vehicle's exact location, status of the engine,
accumulated mileage, intrusion and security status.  It's the
difference between a home burgler alarm and a full-home monitoring and
security system."
     VMSS combines a computer processor, a global positioning system
(GPS) receiver, up to 24 sensor alarms, eight analog and six digital
inputs.  The entire system occupies a space approximately five inches
square and two inches deep.  The system also provides all weather
positions, heading and time information.  (Arrowhead Space &
Telecommunications Inc., 3040 Williams Drive, Suite 201, Fairfax, VA
22031-4618, 703/876-4005.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BILL GATES ENVISIONS WALLET PCS AS A WAY TO USE TELEDESIC SYSTEM

     Billionaire businessman Bill Gates recently shared his dream
about developing wallet-sized personal computers that people could
carry anywhere to use with his planned Teledesic Corp. satellite
system.
     The Teledesic system, which Gates and telecommunications mogul
Craig McCaw are backing with seed money, is intended to provide
global, broadband communications services via a constellation of 840
low-Earth-orbit satellites beginning in 2001.  Gates envisions the
"wallet PCs" becoming one of many products that would use his proposed
system.
     Those wallet PCs would contain people's credit cards, tickets,
phone numbers, keys and additional information, said Gates, the
founder and chairman of Microsoft Corp. , of Redmond, Wash.
     "All of that literally will be available when you have a wireless
network in place," Gates said during a recent Smithsonian Institution
speech here.
     Craig Mundie, senior vice president of the consumer systems
division at Microsoft Corp., told SATELLITE NEWS Editor Paul Dykewicz,
"The advantage of Teledesic is it has the prospect of becoming a
broadband equivalent to cellular. I think there are other advantages,
particularly in lesser-developed countries.  But, there still is not
enough capacity in the satellite system to see that as an alternative
for the fiber optic network that we would have on the ground.
     Wallet PCs clearly would need to use some form of a broadband
delivery system, said Mundie, who added Teledesic could be one of the
answers.
     "Today, it doesn't exist," Mundie said.  "It might take Teledesic
or something akin to that to produce that kind of capability.  Our
goal is to write software for these families of products.  We're real
advocates of any communications technology that produces more
connectivity between communications and computers.  It gives us an
opportunity to write more software."

  ...Wallet PCs Are a Futuristic Concept

     Jon Magill, group product manager of Microsoft's personal systems
division, said wallet PCs are a "futuristic concept, not a product or
project announcement."
     "Coverage provided by satellite networks certainly would enable
people to go anywhere in the world," Magill said.  "But, more cost-
effective local wireless solutions would probably be the kind of
things you would see sooner rather than later."
     The wallet PCs could take various forms.  The PCs may include a
video screen and easily fit into a person's pocket, Magill said. 
Microsoft likely would not manufacture the PCs, since its specialty is
software.
     The applications of a wallet PC could include electronic commerce
or interacting with ATMs at local banks, Magill said.  The wallet also
could carry digitized photographs of family members, he added.  A
wallet PC could be the size of a pager or a personal organizer, Magill
said.
     "It also could be an extension of the watch that we worked on
with Timex not too long ago," Magill said.  "You could imagine it
taking on a form factor not too dissimilar from a checkbook."
     Magill said the device would need to be small enough for people
to carry it with them all the time.  The PC also would serve as an
electronic badge that provide identification for people, he added.
     "It could also have some interactions with a house," Magill said. 
"When a person approaches his or her home, the device could signal for
the garage door to open and the house lights to turn on."
     Magill added, "It can take away many of the mundane things that
we need to do day-to-day."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

U.S. PLANS TO UPDATE LAUNCH PACT WITH RUSSIA TO CREATE PARITY

     U.S. government officials are expected to offer Russia an
opportunity to launch up to 20 U.S. commercial payloads into
geostationary orbit by the end of 2001.
     Indeed, negotiators from the two countries likely will meet in
the coming months, well-placed sources said.
     Such an offer would give Russia a similar deal to the one reached
last month with the Ukraine and another deal struck last year between
China and the United States, the sources said.  However, the U.S.
position has yet to be finalized and no firm dates have been set to
begin talks with the Russians, the sources added.
     The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative has not issued a
formal U.S.  position about what Russia will be offered in any such
talks.  However, some senior officials in the Clinton administration
support giving the Russians parity with the Ukraine and China, which
have received permission to launch up to 20 U.S. commercial payloads
each into geostationary orbit by the end of 2001.
     Russia currently has a deal that limits it to nine launches of
U.S. commercial satellites by the end of 2001.  The gap has caused the
Russians to call for a review of their deal.  Such a request likely
will be honored early this year.
     On the other hand, McDonnell Douglas Corp. officials have
complained their company's plans to develop a Delta 3 rocket have been
undermined by the U.S. policy of rapidly increasing the number of
foreign launches of U.S. commercial satellites during the last two
years.  Launchers from non-market countries receive subsidies from
their governments that give them an unfair pricing advantage, those
McDonnell Douglas officials charge.

  ...U.S. Official Defends Deal

     Frank Weaver, associate administrator for the Transportation
Department's Office of Commercial Space Transportation (OCST), said
the agreement includes a variety of pricing factors to ensure an even
playing field.
     "The purpose of that [language] is just to ensure that our
providers have been given fair consideration," Weaver said.  "That
will not necessarily stop a satellite service provider from going
forward [and using a foreign launcher].  But we do want to make sure
that the U.S. launch industry has an opportunity to be fairly
considered in the deployment of anything."
     The latest U.S. launch pact allows the Ukraine to win up to five
contracts for geostationary launches.  An additional 11 GEO launches
also could be won by an international partnership with Ukrainian
participation.
     Those 11 sea-based launches would be conducted by a joint venture
that includes a subsidiary of the Boeing Co. [BA] (SN, Dec. 18, 1995,
p. 10).  Up to four other launches--three involving the Boeing
venture--may be permitted if the demand for launches grows during the
life of the agreement.
     Boeing, which will manage the joint venture, must obtain a
license to conduct launches on behalf of the partnership, Weaver said
in a recent news briefing about the deal.  Boeing's joint venture
includes Russia's RSC Energia, the Ukraine's NPO Yuzhnoye and Norway's
Kvaerner a.s.
     The partnership is intended to build a launch infrastructure on
an ocean-going platform and conduct launches from international waters
in the Pacific Ocean.  The U.S. government had refused to allow the
partnership to launch any U.S. commercial payloads until the trade
deal with the Ukraine had been reached.
     In contrast, Lockheed Martin Corp. is not required to obtain a
license for its role as the marketing agent for launches provided by
Russia's Khrunichev Enterprise and NPO Energia.
Commercial Satellites Play Role in Bosnia Space-based assets, many of
them owned and operated by commercial entities, will play a vital role
in the U.S.-led NATO peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, a U.S. Air Force
official said recently.  A mixed fleet of commercial and military
satellites are being used for a variety of applications, including
communications and reconnaissance, said Maj. Gen. David Vesely,
commander of the 14th Air Force.  Heavy demands on the military's own
communications system--the Defense Satellite Communications System
(DSCS)--during Operation Desert Storm demonstrated the need for more
bandwidth during large-scale operations, reports our sister
publication DEFENSE DAILY.  Since then, the Pentagon has begun to
exploit the capabilities of commercial satellites for some of its
communications needs, especially for high data-rate transmissions,
Pentagon officials said.  DSCS is being augmented by commercial
communications satellites and those owned by NATO for Bosnian mission. 
These satellites recently have undergone "minor repositioning" to
optimize their use in the Bosnian theater, Vesely said.  The military
also is using commercial remote sensing systems, in addition to its
own reconnaissance satellites, in support of the Bosnia mission. 
Multispectral imagery provided by the Spot satellite system, owned by
Spot Image Corp., already is being fed directly into the European
theater from Ramstein Air Base in Germany, and plans are currently in
the works to set up a similar feed from U.S. Landsat satellites. 
Other space-based assets at use in the Bosnian theater include
military and commercial weather satellites, and the Pentagon's Global
Positioning Satellite (GPS) system.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SATELLITE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SATELLITE BRIEFS

McDonnell Douglas Conducts Tests on Potential EELV Engine
     McDonnell Douglas Corp. successfully completed tests for a liquid
hydrogen, liquid oxygen rocket engine that the company hopes to use in
its Delta 4 family of boosters being developed for the U.S. Air
Force's Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) program, the company
said recently.  The tests, which occurred in October at NASA's
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., were conducted on
the RS-68 engine built by Rockwell Corp. subsidiary Rocketdyne. 
Rocketdyne is working with Mac-Dac to develop the main engine for the
Delta 4 boosters.  The tests involved varying the mixture ratios of
the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen to determine combustion
efficiencies.  Four industry teams--Alliant Techsystems, Boeing Inc.,
Lockheed Martin Corp., and Mac-Dac--are engaged in low-cost concept
validation studies, the first phase of the EELV effort to develop a
single family of launch vehicles and reduce space launch operations by
25 to 50 percent.

Ariane 5 Debut Set for May 1996
     After last month's successful test of the cryogenic main stage to
be used in Europe's Ariane 5 launch vehicle, Arianespace has set a May
7 target date for the rocket's inaugural launch.  Another
qualification test of the main stage is set for this month, and a
first report of the launcher qualification review begun this past June
will be delivered in February, according to the European Space Agency.

AT&T Tridom and ViaSat Ink Pact to Develop New VSAT/Mesh-DAMA Systems
     AT&T Tridom and ViaSat Inc. announced an agreement recently to
develop new products jointly for domestic and international VSAT
customers.  Under the agreement, AT&T Tridom and ViaSat will integrate
their hardware and software technologies to develop VSAT/Mesh-DAMA
(demand assigned multiple access) systems.  AT&T Tridom will begin
offering the new systems in the first quarter of this year as an
enhancement to its line of high-capacity VSAT data transmission
systems and voice networks.  (AT&T Tridom, 908/221-4178.)

Uniden Introduces Its DSS System
     Fort Worth, Texas-based Uniden America Corp. has introduced the
Uniden-brand Digital Satellite System (DSS) hardware.  The Uniden
units feature event 
timers, front displays and channel access and universal remote
controls.  The company said these features will increase consumer
demand for the hardware.  "Uniden has always had the biggest share of
the C-band market," said Tony Mirabelli, Uniden's vice president of
   Uniden's UDS 200 DSS Hardware   marketing.  "We know what features
are popular with consumers and we've designed those into the Uniden-
brand DSS receiver."  (Uniden America Corp., 4700 Amon Carter Blvd.,
Ft. Worth, TX 76155, 817/858-3300.)

British Telecom Opens Gateway for Access to PanAmSat
     British Telecom opened an earth station in the United Kingdom
that will enable broadcasters to access PanAmSat Corp.'s PAS 4
satellite.  The PAS 4 footprint covers Africa, Asia, Europe, the
Indian subcontinent and the Middle East.  BT and PanAmSat also have a
joint marketing deal to attract broadcast customers; the two
companies' first customer is Doordarshan, India's national
broadcaster.  Separately, Hong Kong-based Television Broadcasts
Limited International (TBLI) chose PanAmSat's PAS 2 satellite for C-
band broadcasting.  The company already leases a Ku-band transponder
on PAS 2.  TVBI will uplink its programming from Hong Kong for
distribution throughout Asia.  (PanAmSat, 203/622-6664.)

Global Access Expands Asian, European Operations 
     Global Access Telecommunications Services Inc., the Boston-based
provider of satellite and fiber broadcast services, opened an office
in Singapore to coordinate its Asia-Pacific business.  The office will
handle broadcast services for clients including ESPN in Singapore,
Hong Kong's Star TV and Japan's Fuji Television and Nippon Television. 
Telecom veteran Simon Patch will head Global Access' Asian subsidiary,
Global Satellite and Video Services (Asia) Pte Ltd.
Separately, Global Access launched European broadcast services from
its United Kingdom subsidiary.  Previously the company served Europe
from its U.S. office.  The company also announced a bulk buy of C- and
Ku-band transponder capacity off PanAmSat Corp.'s  four satellites. 
(Global Access, 617/624-7431.)

Primestar-commissioned Survey Puts Whoopi and Tom at the Top
     A recent survey conducted by Roper Starch Worldwide for Primestar
Partners found actors Whoopi Goldberg and Tom Hanks top the list of
actors Americans most want to see in a new holiday movie.  The movie
"Miracle on 34th Street" came first in the favorite holiday movie
sweepstakes, while in the animated-movie derby, "Rudolph the Red-Nosed
Reindeer" swept the competition with a commanding 60 percent favorite
rating.  "Rudolph" has been seen approximately 2.5 billion times by
U.S. adults, the study found.  "At Primestar, we know that movies are
as much a part of the holidays as gift-giving and turkey, which is why
American families can find so many of their favorite holiday movie
selections on our digital TV entertainment service," said a Primestar
executive in a statement.
(Primestar Partners, 610/617-5446.)

DirecTv Expands Free Hotel Service
     Hughes Electronics Corp. subsidiary DirecTv Inc. expanded its
"free-to-guest" hotel programming packages, with the Best Western
International hotel chain signing up as its first customer.  Best
Western is scheduled to begin offering the service this month.  Other
target areas include hospitals, dormitories and office buildings. 
(DirecTv Inc., 310/535-5062.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>