
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B09-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B021-124</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/po06.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035715 text/html 19218
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:23 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:14 GMT
Content-length: 19031
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/po06.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
November 19, 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FRONT PAGE NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>     Friday's market plunge after credit card capping reveals the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1330 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>PRESIDENTIAL '92</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(954 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>POLITICS '91</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(405 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SPECIAL REPORT FROM ISRAEL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNet
November 19, 1991

     Friday's market plunge after credit card capping reveals the

     Friday's market plunge after credit card capping reveals the
extent of Administration dismay on economic policy and shows a
split between the President's advisers.
     Pat Buchanan's sudden appearance as a challenger signals real
problems for Bush presidential campaign, which is a long way from
getting started. He also may face David Duke and possibly others.
     Is this the week for Mario Cuomo? Nobody knows for sure. It is
unthinkable that he won't announce after all the backing and
filling, but it is still not a done deal.
     Despite being badly beaten, David Duke still poses serious
problems for the Republican Party and George Bush.
     Senate outlook for Republicans is so grim that Majority Leader
Robert Dole is dead serious in possibly bowing out rather than
seeking re-election.

BUSH ADMINISTRATION
     Economic Policy: Amid all the confusion, it is now clear that
Bush will not press for a tax cut package until the State of the
Union address. In so doing, the President has put himself in the
middle of three groups inside his Administration on strategy about
how to handle the recession.
     Group #1: This is largely Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady
all by himself. He is into optimism on the economy, contending that
recovery is at hand and arguing against "talking down" the economy.
His comments on Meet the Press Sunday were viewed as "not helpful"
by one key Republican insider but nobody wants to take on the
President's close associate.
     Group #2: The economy is in bad shape and it's absolutely
essential that something be done now. HUD Secretary Jack Kemp is
the only cabinet member who publicly takes this position, but he
has substantial support from conservatives in Congress led by Rep.
Vin Weber (R-Minn.).
     Group #3: The economy is poor, but this is not the time to
move. Since it will be very difficult to make any progress in the
Democratic Congress at any rate, why not wait until next year? This
is the view of a majority inside the Administration (including
Budget Director Richard Darman) and much of the Congressional
Republican leadership.
     Bush has moved quietly from Group #1 to Group #3. On his
political travels he has heard the sad story of economic woe from
"Team 100" members (GOP heavy financial contributors) who tell him
they simply no longer have the resources to put out the
contributions that they used to. He wants action, but doesn't
really know what to do and isn't ready to do it now.
     Against this backdrop is deep irritation, particularly from
Chief-of-Staff John Sununu, that Kemp went public in declaring his
wishes for an immediate tax cut. Kemp has no intention of quitting,
and the President has no intention of firing him. But the tension
is such that it is hard to imagine how the current state of affairs
can continue indefinitely.
     Kemp is privately urging Bush to call for a special session of
Congress to deal with the economy, but his status is shown by the
fact that the President signed the bill gouging Kemp's efforts to
privatize public housing.
     Credit Card Cap: The President's support of a "voluntary"
credit card cap and subsequent Senate passage of a "mandatory" cap
reflect the lack of economic strategy both in the White House and
on Capitol Hill.
     1) The idea originated at a secret political planning meeting
Nov. 6 by formal and informal Bush advisers. Ex-White House Chief-
of-Staff Ken Duberstein urged that the President start "demagoging"
on credit card interest rates. The reaction around the dinner was
mixed.
     2) Duberstein's idea crept into the White House bloodstream
and got some support from Sununu. Although it was not officially
part of the text, the President included it in a New York
speech.
     3) Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R.-N.Y.), facing a tough re-election,
took off with the idea and ran; and a Senate wanting to do
something passed the proposal. Speaker Thomas Foley (D.-Wash.)
responded that he would hurry the bill through the House pronto.
Bush's economic gurus were apoplectic, and CEA Chief Michael Boskin
railed against it at the senior staff meeting two days later.
     4) That set up two distinct schools of thought in the Bush
camp. The policy people--Brady, Darman, Boskin, Kemp--are appalled
by the whole idea. The politicians--Republican National Chairman
Clayton Yuetter, Charlie Black, Craig Fuller and Duberstein--think
it's a terrific idea.
     5) Last Saturday after the credit card cap appeared to have
played its part in the Friday market drop, Kemp--appearing on the
Evans & Novak program on CNN--declared Bush would veto the D'Amato
bill. It is extremely doubtful that Kemp had a real authorization
from the President to go this far, but he is a fearless soul not
averse to taking chances. The next day, Brady and VP Dan Quayle
took the same stance, though a little bit more chary about
predicting a veto.
     6) That leaves Bush in the position of making sure that a bill
will not pass that embodies the position he wanted the banks to
take voluntarily. It is a straddle that would make any politician
look uncomfortable.
     7) It is clear now that the credit card cap will not become
law, but the mischief of a policy vacuum becomes obvious. With the
economy down, deadlock between the branches of government and the
budget deal impeding action, frustration both downtown and on the
Hill can cause severe trouble.
     RTC Financing: The coming battleground, perhaps this week, is
the attempt by Weber and other House conservatives not to let the
RTC financing bill pass without aa economic growth package
attached. Weber is insisting on a capital gains rate reduction and
an elimination of the "passive loss" provision from  the '86 reform
act.
     Kemp, as befits his character, has jumped in to support the
Weber proposal. Establishment Republican Senators, intimidated by
Democratic power, think messing around with the bailout is sheer
madness. This is the kind of proposal that the Bush Administration
would veer away from quickly, but oddly it has said nothing about
it one way or another as we go to press.
     The question is whether the House GOPers can even bring this
onto the floor under the right rules there, which is why they would
like some collaborators in the Senate to take advantage of the
easier rules there. Conservative House members are looking at House
Minority Whip Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) to see which way he will go on
this one; some colleagues see him trying to straddle the Bush White
House and the House bomb-throwers.
     U.S-China: If Secretary of State James Baker has actually
succeeded in reducing China's arm sales proclivity, not many in
Washington believe it. But there is no doubt that Beijing's
hardliners are not as powerful as they were in the aftermath of
Tiananmen Square. Outside Beijing, the Chinese are paying very
little attention to their government and the free-market
experiments continue in the South.
     This is the China that White House advocates of continued MFN
status point to whenever the topic is broached. Denying those
potential markets to U.S. business, they say, will guarantee that
the Japanese and other Asian players will dominate the Pacific for
years to come. Both the Japanese and Taiwanese believe they can use
the coming integration of Hong Kong into China as a springboard for
ventures in South China.
     All of this will come to the fore when Congress reacts to
Baker's failure to get human rights pledges from the Chinese. With
only limited success on other fronts, the Administration will
likely fall back on economic arguments to keep the MFN window to
China open. Beijing's conditional pledge not to sell missiles to
Syria or Pakistan won't carry much weight with Congressmen who
think such sales shouldn't even be contemplated and does nothing to
address nuclear assistance to Iran. But the White House is helped
by the Democrats' insistence on focusing on domestic events.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNet
November 19, 1991

PRESIDENTIAL '92

     Buchanan: His sudden appearance at the door, presumably to
run, makes life difficult for the White House. What does he have in
mind?
     1) Almost certainly, he will run. He cannot again pull up to
the line as he did in '87 and then pull away. His announcement is
expected at the end of next week.
     2) He is not merely interested in pulling Bush back to the
Reaganite conservative positions that Buchanan thinks the President
has abandoned (notably the tax issue and quotas) but to stake out
the nationalistic "America First" agenda he has been airing out
over television and in his column: protectionist on trade,
exclusionist on immigration, isolationist on foreign intervention.
     3) A realist, Buchanan knows he cannot be nominated. But an
impressive performance would put him on the top of the '96 list,
where he would now be an also-ran. His underlying premise must be:
can '92 do for Buchanan in '96 what '76 did for Reagan in '80?
     4) That means Buchanan is not interested in a quick pop in New
Hampshire but wants to stay in as long as possible, picking up lots
of delegates to take to Houston.
     All this hinges on how Buchanan does in N.H.:
     1) Apart from the Manchester Union Leader and possibly ex-Rep.
Chuck Douglas (R), Buchanan does not have much in the way of
conventional endorsements. Even State Sen. (and ex-U.S. Sen.)
Gordon Humphrey (R) is not helping.
     2) Sununu, who guided Bush to victory there in '88, is less
influential as Chief-of-Staff and has not enhanced his popularity
with repeated political interventions from the White House the past
three years.
     3) Buchanan's right-wing populism--and anti-foreign aid
strictures--should play well in New Hampshire's deep recession.
     4) His opposition to Desert Storm is a negative, but less so
today than it would have been nine months ago.
     5) The question of how Bush reacts to Buchanan is a difficult
one, and has not even been addressed at the White House.
     Duke: There has never been any doubt that once Duke lost his
race for Governor of Louisiana, he would enter the presidential
primaries. It looks as though he will stay out of N.H. to see how
Buchanan does there but enter all the southern primaries.
     Other Republican Candidates: Critics of Bush who don't care
for Buchanan would like a supply-side, pro-Israel, free trade, free
immigration, internationalist alternative. Kemp and former
Education Secretary William J. Bennett both fill the bill, but
neither has the slightest intention of running against Bush.
     Bush: He is his own campaign manager and all reports show that
he is not happy about the way things are going. The delay in naming
the proposed triumvirate of Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher,
political consultant Robert Teeter and businessman Fred Malek leads
to musing that he is not happy with that set-up.
     Reports from the inside suggest that Sununu may be brought
over from the White House to run the campaign with either Brady or
Transportation Secretary Sam Skinner taking over at the White
House. But the odds are against it. Another version has a more
important role for Charlie Black.
     Cuomo: Almost everybody thinks this is the week he will
announce his candidacy, but nobody is sure. They are swimming
upstream but two astute Mario-watchers think he will say
no--figuring in the end his unsureness will lead him not to run.
     No other figure in American political life would go through
the process that Cuomo has for the last month and then destroy
himself by saying no, but with the Governor that is barely
possible.
     If on the other hand, he does what is rational and announces
his candidacy shortly before or after Thanksgiving, here is the
outlook:
     1) By design or not, Cuomo's delay has radically shortened the
game--to his advantage and to the disadvantage of lesser known
candidates. In a short campaign for the New Hampshire primary, he
has a huge edge in name i.d., money and campaigning experience. If
he wins comfortably in New Hampshire, he could be off and running
for the nomination.
     2) How much Cuomo has hurt himself with this minuet is hard to
say. The reporters don't like it and neither do many politicians,
but it shouldn't make much difference to politicians.
     3) The conventional wisdom of six months ago, that Cuomo was
the only Democrat who could have a chance to overtake an invincible
Bush, has turned into the current conventional wisdom that he is
the one of the least effective challengers of a wounded Bush.
     4) Cuomo's greatest liability is the fiscal crisis of New
York. Whereas Dukakis in '88 campaigned with the benefit of the
Massachusetts Miracle, Cuomo this time would have to campaign with
the burden of the New York Nightmare. Cuomo was a bit rough two
weeks ago in answering questions from his own constituents over the
televised ombudsman's program. Think what it will be like with the
media.
     Clinton: Mario-mania has eclipsed Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton,
but so far he looks like the pick of the Demo litter. He has his
act in order and impresses everywhere. He is a long way from being
a regional candidate and is on the verge of locking up some big New
York money.
     Kerrey: Those who expected Sen. Bob Kerrey (D-Neb.) to be the
salvation of the Democratic party are a little disappointed. One
party insider told us he personally looks a little "weak"--a
strange description for a war hero. He did attract some attention
for audacity this week, however, by going after some anti-Mario
public employees' unions in New York.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNet
November 19, 1991

POLITICS '91

     Louisiana Governor: Edwin Edwards (D) prevented what was
widely regarded across the political spectrum as a political
catastrophe in the election of David Duke. But neither party can
take much satisfaction in the results--particularly the Republicans
(who from Washington provided more strategic and logistic help in
beating Duke than was generally realized).
     1) Even with all the incredibly heavy baggage carried by Duke,
Democrats still showed they have a terrible time getting white
votes in the South--particularly white, middle-class males. While
Duke's 55 per cent of the white vote was lower than conventional
Republican candidates get in Louisiana, he collected more than 60
per cent of white males, white Protestants and middle-income
voters.
     2) Apart from the catastrophe of Duke running as the GOP
candidate for governor, the state GOP was nearly wiped out. Lt.
Gov. Paul Hardy (R) was defeated for re-election, and Secretary of
State Fox McKeithen's (R) re-election was the only statewide win.
The state party is set back about 12 years by Duke.
     3) The GOP is not through with Duke. He seems set on
continuing his '92 game plan of running against Bush in the
southern primaries and then running back in La. either against Sen.
John Breaux (D) or Rep. Jerry Huckaby (D).
     4) Worst of all, Bush did not get the specter of DD off his
back. Democrats now will accuse any Republican, including the
President, who raises the quota issue of imitating David Duke (even
Edwards attempted it in his victory statement Saturday night).

SENATE '92
     In the wake of the Pennsylvania debacle, Senate GOP Campaign
Committee Chairman Phil Gramm (R-Tex.)is putting the best face on
it, saying the race showed that insiders are vulnerable and there
are more Democratic insiders than Republicans. The key, however, is
for Republicans to run on "issues not on your resume" as Gramm
thinks Dick Thornburgh did in Pennsylvania. But the bottomline
remains that the GOP has not been able to recruit top-drawer
candidates for several vulnerable seats.
     Dole was really stricken by the Thornburgh loss and what it
means for his leadership in the Senate. He never really expected to
be returned to Majority Leader after the '92 election, but worries
now of forces so depleted that he will be leading a corporal's
guard. If Thornburgh can go down in Pennsylvania, can the Demos
pick up open seats in Utah and Idaho?



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNet
November 19, 1991

SPECIAL REPORT FROM ISRAEL

     With bilateral talks between Israel and, separately, Jordan-
Palestinians, Syrians, and Lebanese likely to start soon, Israel
confronts severe problems. Reporting from the scene, we make the
following points:
     1) Pressures grow from American Jewish leaders for territorial
and political compromises with Palestinians, who gained stature out
of the Madrid meeting. An Israeli poll shows 70 per cent of Israeli
voters favor the land-for-peace concept, but leaders say no.
     2) Record unemployment plus huge costs of handling Soviet
Jewish emigres threaten Israel's worst economic crisis. Current
record jobless of 145,000 will swell close to 250,000 in 1992. The
state-controlled economy does not seem able to convert fully to
free-market.
     3) Despite a new settlement on the Golan Heights and three on
the West Bank, doubts increase as to long-term viability of
settlements. Jewish immigrants are being quietly steered to
settlements despite U.S. warnings. Government officials now fear
another major battle with President Bush in January over the $10
million loan guarantees denied Israel in September.
     4) But there is an up-beat note: private talks with top
leaders show definite movement toward a general agreement that
Israel not only must but will make real compromises at least on the
Palestinian question. Heavy political pressures from the Bush
Administration, U.S. Jewish lobby and Western Europeans are helping
change winds here in Israel, the most politically sensitive country
in the world.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>