
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B32-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B022-236</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec32.html 205.156.212.5 19970114220700 text/html 28204
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:05:10 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:45 GMT
Content-length: 28017
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec32.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet <BR>
January 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>WORLDWIDE E-MAIL CENSUS SOARS PAST 90 MILLION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1024 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>GENERAL ELECTRIC TAKING INTERNET CONTRACT BIDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(440 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CompuServe Self-CENSORs AFTER GERMAN OFFICIALS COMPLAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(706 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>14TH ANNUAL READERS POLL BALLOTING IS UNDER WAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(899 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>EMMS Stock Index Year in Review; EMMS STOCK INDEX UP 33% FOR THE&nbsp;YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(877 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Meetings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

WORLDWIDE E-MAIL CENSUS SOARS PAST 90 MILLION

     It seems incredible that the number of electronic mail users
worldwide has passed 90 million, but that is exactly the conclusion
the following data supports.

     The number of e-mail users worldwide jumped from 71.73 million
at the end of the third quarter of 1995 to 90.96 million at the end
of the year, a gain of 21 percent in that short amount of time.  A
year ago, the worldwide e-mail census counted 52.2 million
mailboxes, suggesting an annual growth rate of 74 percent for the
year.

     There are now 47.3 million local area network (LAN)
e-mailboxes worldwide, up from 25.2 million a year ago.  There were
29.7 million host-based mailboxes at the end of 1995, up from 19.9
million at the end of 1994.  And there are just under 14 million
public e-mail subscriptions worldwide, up from 7 million a year
ago.

     As for the American share, EMMS estimates that roughly 68
percent of the mailboxes are located within the United States. 
About 60 percent of the host mailboxes, 70 percent of the LAN
mailboxes and 80 percent of the public mailboxes are located within
the United States, EMMS estimates.  That totals about 62.1 million
e-mailboxes within the United States at year's end, and about 28.9
million in other countries.

     More than half of all e-mail users are now on LANs, the first
time that threshold has been crossed.  About 52 percent of all the
world's e-mail users are on LANs, up from 48 percent at the end of
the third quarter.  There were 47.3 million LAN e-mail users
worldwide at year's end, up from 34.4 million at the end of
September.

     Interestingly, the share of e-mail users on the public
messaging networks also is rising.  At the end of 1994, about 13.6
percent of the mailboxes were on public network services.  At the
end of 1995, about 15.3 percent were on the public networks.

Host Category Has Smaller Market Share

     Obviously, the segment with a decreasing share of the market
is the host category.  This segment isn't contracting, but neither
is it growing as fast as the other two segments.  So the 4.5
million unit gain in host mailboxes since the third quarter
translates to a 2.5 percent decline in market share (falling from
35.2 percent to 32.7 percent).

     Worldwide, the No. 1 messaging vendor continues to be IBM
Corp.  Between its domination of the LAN segment and its 1995
acquisition of Lotus Development Corp., and its continuing inertial
motion with the OfficeVision product family, IBM controls about
25.5 percent of the private mailboxes worldwide.  That share is
down marginally from the end of the third quarter and a year ago,
but is still far out in front of either Microsoft Corp. or Digital
Equipment Corp., the other contenders running in the money.

     Interestingly, Microsoft Mail and cc:Mail once again are tied
for the lead within the LAN category, as they were in the second
quarter of 1995.  cc:Mail was ahead a year ago.  MS Mail took the
lead in the first quarter.  cc:Mail regained the lead in the third
quarter.

     What makes this dogfight significant is that Microsoft sold
off its Macintosh server-based MS Mail product line to StarNine
Corp., now part of Quarterdeck Corp.  That resulted in its falling
well behind cc:Mail in the tally three months ago.  But it has made
up the lost ground in the interim.

     What makes this dogfight less significant is that both
companies are releasing new messaging product families.  Microsoft
already has Windows 95 and its Exchange Inbox on the market.  It
thereby has made e-mail, fax and Internet access a basic part of
the operating system.

     Lotus has delivered Notes Release 4, its big new messaging
server architecture.  And Microsoft expects to deliver Exchange
Server to the market in a matter of months (between one and 48
months).  So while the installed bases of cc:Mail and MS Mail will
provide the companies with a ready list of upgrade prospects, their
revenue and therefore their ultimate success will not depend on
their respective mailbox client counts.  Messaging clients - at
least the basic inbox/outbox/address book package - essentially
have joined Web browsers and image viewers on the freeware pile.

     The host messaging totals are up for three reasons.  First,
Digital Equipment representatives insist they have 7 million users
of All-In-1 and MailWorks worldwide, not the 5 million reported in
previous EMMS reports.  So EMMS revised that figure to match
theirs.  Likewise, Wang Laboratories Inc. complained of a
750,000-user undercount, and Hewlett-Packard Co. reported an actual
sales gain of 2 million mailboxes for OpenMail and OpenDesk.  The
end result of these and other readjustments is a jump of 4.5
million mailboxes, to 29.7 million host mailboxes worldwide at the
year's conclusion.

Public E-Mail Subscriptions Climb

     The number of public e-mail subscriptions counted by EMMS
continues to climb.  America Online Inc. (AOL) widened its lead to
4.5 million customers - almost a third of all public e-mail users. 
Amazingly, AOL has tripled its size since a year ago.  CompuServe
Inc., the former leader, added 1.5 million users during the year
but grew only 59 percent while doing so.

     It's a sign of how fast this segment is exploding that one
even could consider 59 percent annual growth to be disappointing. 
By the way, AOL, CompuServe and Prodigy Services Co. together now
control 72.4 percent of the customer base (but not the revenue). 
Add in newcomer Microsoft Network (MSN), and the Big 4 have 76.7
percent of the world's public mailboxes.  And with AOL launching
across Europe, MSN launching all over, and CompuServe already
worldwide, their global share is bound to increase in 1996.

Others More Elusive

     Further down the list of carriers, however, growth of any kind
was somewhat elusive.  Most of the traditional business-oriented
public messaging carriers remained even, although some of the
Internet access providers such as NetCom Online Communication
Services Inc. reported huge gains.  As the chart on p. 4 shows,
though, only nine carriers can claim more than 1 percent of the
world's e-mail subscriptions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

GENERAL ELECTRIC TAKING INTERNET CONTRACT BIDS

     Seeking to streamline its operations, General Electric Co.
launched the GE Trading Process Network (TPN) Jan. 2 to let
suppliers bid for GE contracts over the Internet.  TPN primarily
will use electronic mail to solicit bids from outside contractors,
and GE hopes to conduct about $1 billion in transactions over the
network this year.

     This would quadruple the amount of online business-to-business
transactions GE already handles through a private electronic data
interchange (EDI) network run by subsidiary GE Information Services
(GEIS), which was roughly $250 million last year, according to a
company spokesman.  GE will distribute the TPN software to
suppliers that will be able to receive information from the World
Wide Web and submit bids for projects through e-mail.

     The GEIS unit has been promoting this brand of electronic
commerce for online trading between companies as part of the
International Business Exchange (IBEX) project, officially launched
last September with AT&T Corp., Dun & Bradstreet Corp., the Global
Business Alliance, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Chase Manhattan
Bank and other partners.  IBEX is promoting an electronic
mail-based service for companies to solicit and bid on contracts
online.

     IBEX has sold over 1,000 units of its software front-end so
far, but the company is hoping for more rapid growth after AT&T,
Dun & Bradstreet and Simon & Schuster Inc. increase their marketing
and sales efforts this month.  Also, IBEX plans to solidify its
relationship with Microsoft Corp. soon so the service can be
offered to small businesses via the Microsoft Network by the end of
the first quarter.

     While GEIS is involved in this effort, its parent company
opted for a proprietary solution instead of IBEX for handling its
in-house suppliers.  According to a GEIS spokesman, the company
still is evaluating its relationship with IBEX, and is not sure
what role GE will play with IBEX in the future.

     GEIS also announced a partnership last week with X-Change
Software Inc. to expand GE's "Bid Board" service used for
electronic commerce transactions with the federal government.  The
Bid Board lets companies access and respond to federal and state
government Requests for Quotes (RFQs), but the GE service has been
limited to select military and civilian agencies.

     GE plans to incorporate X-Change's X-Bid software, which is
designed to collect RFQs from the Federal Acquisition Computer
Network, into Big Board to expand the number of agencies accessible
through the service.  X-Bid will interface with the different
agencies and automatically format a bid to fit within their
systems' parameters.  The X-Bid system is based on EDI standards.

     GE can be reached at (203) 373-2039; GEIS, at (301) 340-4712.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CompuServe Self-CENSORs AFTER GERMAN OFFICIALS COMPLAIN

     CompuServe Inc. is positioning itself as a victim of
censorship after denying all of its subscribers access to 200
Usenet news groups at the end of last month in response to
complaints from local officials in the southern German state of
Bavaria.

     Rather than fight the move in German courts, or take time to
devise a way to localize the news group blackout to selected areas,
CompuServe simply stopped carrying the 200 titles on its servers. 
It thereby ends up with the enviable position of looking like a
victim to the anti-censorship forces, and looking like a good
Internet citizen to parents, educators and others who might see
some value in the removal of alleged pornography from the Internet.

     At first, the online service claimed it acted in response to
an order from German authorities who had identified the news groups
as illegal under the country's law.  After a public outcry, German
officials appeared to backpedal by insisting they did not provide
the online service with a list of targets, and CompuServe officials
later admitted they acted without any specific order from the
authorities.

     The upshot of the verbal skirmish was that CompuServe
subscribers worldwide, not just those in Germany, were affected by
the action, but by the end of last week the online service was
trying to find a way to restrict access only to its German
customers.  CompuServe spokeswoman Daphne Kent would not speculate
as to when, or even if, access would be restored but said the
company is "always concerned" that blocking access to information
could cost it customers.  Kent said no other online service was
similarly restricted and said "we were likely targeted because of
our size."

     Although smaller than its chief competitor, America Online
Inc., CompuServe has the greatest overseas presence of any consumer
online service.  In Germany it claims 100,000 members.  The number
is insignificant, however, in comparison to the more than 1.8
million individuals who use the Internet in Germany and whose
access to the same news groups is harder to restrict, depending
upon their method of access.

     Kent said CompuServe is "looking at several options," among
them implementing a system that would restrict access to news
groups by region of the world and a "software solution" customized
to abide by each country's laws.

Was This an Accident?

     Observers note that even before the Germans provided
CompuServe with an official excuse to censor, the carrier refused
to list the titles of many of the more risque (alt.) news groups in
its index.  Users who knew the exact names of those unlisted groups
still could subscribe, although all access is now cut off.

     Across most of the media coverage of the CompuServe action,
the spin put on the news was that governments were censoring the
Internet.  It's happened in Singapore, Canada, Germany, and soon
may happen in the United States.  Internet users screamed their
rage in some undiplomatic postings, calling for boycotts of
everything from CompuServe to German beer.

     One question remains:  Suppose CompuServe had concluded that
being known as the family channel is desirable and profitable? 
Perhaps CompuServe, as it fends off AOL, Europe Online, the
Microsoft Network and other services in Germany, Britain and
France, has discovered that parents are concerned about what their
kids are reading?  By cutting access to many of those XXX news
groups that parents fear, CompuServe has made worldwide, mainstream
news.  Does anyone believe this was an accident?

     AOL, which recently launched a German online service with
German publisher Bertelsmann AG that relies heavily on
Internet-based content, has yet to encounter any similar
difficulties.  AOL spokeswoman Pam McGraw said the company is
investigating the CompuServe issue, but has yet to receive any
notification from the German authorities.

     "To the best of our knowledge, we have not received any
requests from the German government," she said.

     However, McGraw added, AOL offers users the ability to block
access to news groups, which may be its saving grace.  Although
CompuServe's Internet division offers Internet access software with
the ability to block access to adult content, the company's
flagship online service does not offer the same capability.

     CompuServe can be reached at (614) 538-4632.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

14TH ANNUAL READERS POLL BALLOTING IS UNDER WAY

     As it has done every year since 1982, EMMS again is scanning
the world of electronic messaging, looking for the best of the year
gone by.

     Once again, we're asking readers to vote for what they think
was the best messaging hardware, software, service and company of
the year, as well as the most important messaging event of 1995.

     It was extremely difficult to trim the list of nominees in
each category to 20 candidates.  Therefore, as always has been the
case, additional write-in votes are welcome and encouraged.

     The voting was scheduled to begin over the weekend of Jan.
19-21.  Everyone who has voted at least once since 1991 should have
received a ballot in his or her mailbox.  People who voted but who
didn't receive a ballot by today should contact EMMS to find out
why.  Most likely, some minor change in the voter's user name or
host name prevented EMMS from making a successful delivery.

     People who haven't voted previously are welcome to do so. 
There are several options available.  Included in this issue is a
written ballot, which readers may complete and mail or fax back to
EMMS.  Users who prefer an electronic ballot can send a request to
the mailbox earnum@attmail.com.  They automatically will receive a
ballot by return e-mail.

     In addition, EMMS is posting a copy of this ballot to several
Usenet News Groups, including:

          comp.dcom.fax

          comp.dcom.modems

          comp.groupware.groupwise

          comp.mail.misc

          comp.os.magic-cap

          comp.os.ms-windows.apps.winsock.mail

          comp.os.msdos.mail-news

          comp.protocols.iso.x400

          comp.protocols.iso.x400.gateway

     It also will become available for down-loading from the EMMS
publisher's home page on the World Wide Web, at the address
http://brp.com.

     As mentioned, the voting already has begun.  It is scheduled
to conclude Saturday, Feb. 10, 1996, which allows readers about
three weeks to vote.  Ballots will be counted in the days that
follow, and the results will be announced in four weeks, in the
Feb. 19, 1996, issue of EMMS.

Open to All E-Mail, Fax Users

     As in past years, voting is open to all e-mail and fax users. 
Multiple votes from different people in the same company routinely
are received and counted.  Voters are encouraged to pass along
blank copies of the ballot to their friends and co-workers, to post
copies of the ballot on their internal bulletin boards, and to
otherwise involve additional people in the process.

     Multiple votes from the same person, however, are discouraged. 
Two good ways around that rule, however, are to register five
different screen names on America Online Inc., and to vote from
each one.

     Alternatively, users can send e-mail ballots to EMMS via their
Netscape Navigator browsers, which allow users to change their
return addresses at will.  EMMS, however, uses a special tabulation
algorithm when multiple votes from the same source are discovered.

     In years past, the number of voters has tended to surpass 450,
involving people in more than a dozen countries.  It is hoped that
the count this year will surpass those tallies.

     Voting takes place in five categories:  Messaging Hardware of
the Year, Messaging Software of the Year, Messaging Service of the
Year, Messaging Company of the Year and Messaging Event of the
Year.  Winners receive a certificate commemorating their receipt of
an "EMMSy Award," suitable for mounting.

     This year, the hardware category is again dominated by modems
and fax machines.  There are, however, several personal
communicators, scanners and voice mail systems on the list as well.

     The software category is as usual the most competitive of the
five.  Only a small fraction of the total number of notable
messaging software products released in 1995 would fit on the list. 
They range from operating systems such as Windows 95 to
mail-enabled applications such as Decisive Survey.  This category
more than any other is a dependable source of write-in votes.

     The messaging service category contains a diverse mix of voice
mail services, wireless and satellite messaging carriers,
Internet-related networks, and specialized offerings of the major
online services.

     The list of nominees in the messaging company category
reflects the cross-section of nominees in the other categories. 
These are the companies that in some way made a name for themselves
during the year - some through their arrival, others through their
return, and still others through their continued ability to
dominate their market niches.

     And finally, the messaging event category contains a motley
list of trade shows, mergers, demos, lawsuits and product
announcements that helped shape the messaging industry in 1995.

     Undoubtedly, there are products, services, companies and
events that didn't make it onto the list of nominees.  For that
reason, EMMS will list all of the top write-in vote-getters in the
Feb. 19 issue, alongside the eventual winners.  On occasion, in
fact, a write-in nominee actually has won an award.

     In addition to the list of winners and other top vote-getters,
EMMS will publish a roster of all voters who check off the "Yes"
box where it says "Please list me as a voter."  It's our way of
recognizing the people who make this Readers Poll possible.  It's
also a way for readers to get their names immortalized in a variety
of online databases, news clipping services and other services that
currently carry electronic copies of EMMS.

     Let the voting begin, and good luck to all the nominees.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

EMMS Stock Index Year in Review; EMMS STOCK INDEX UP 33% FOR THE
YEAR

     Despite the huge hit that computer and telecommunications
stocks have taken in recent weeks, the EMMS index of 58 stocks was
up 33 percent for the year gone by.

     The stocks fell 2.9 percent in the final month of 1995, their
third monthly decline for the year and their biggest loss since
November 1994.

     Two stocks - General Magic Inc. and UUNET Technologies Inc. -
began trading publicly for the first time during 1995 and therefore
are not included in the annual comparisons.  Companies such as
Lotus Development Corp., which were acquired by larger companies
during the year, were subtracted from the annual comparisons.

     In addition, because of acquisitions made during 1995,
companies such as Netscape Communications Corp., Symantec Inc. and
Quarterdeck Corp. shortly will join the EMMS index, as will several
other companies that completed initial public offerings in the
latter part of the year.  Finally, after decades of domination by
very large public companies (IBM Corp., Digital Equipment Corp.,
MCI Communications Corp. and AT&T Corp. among them) and very small
private companies, a cluster of medium-sized messaging companies is
now listed on the stock exchanges.

     Among the 58 stocks now included in the EMMS index, and the
five to 10 candidates for future inclusion, are a good number of
companies that make most or all of their sales in the messaging
arena.  In fact, some of the Internet-related new issues of 1995
were among the hottest stocks on the market - or they were for
their first few weeks of trading, at least.

Slow Compared to Others Indices

     Compared to the major stock indices, the EMMS index actually
was a little slow during 1995.  While the EMMS index was up 33
percent, the NASDAQ Composite Index was up 40 percent.  The
Standard & Poor's 500 Index was up 34 percent, and the Dow Jones
Industrial Average was up 33 percent during the year.

     However, EMMS dug up statistics for 1994 as well, and
discovered something intriguing.  Compared to prices two years ago,
the EMMS index is up almost 56 percent, while the NASDAQ is up 35
percent, the S&P 500 up 32 percent, and the Dow up 36 percent.

     In the accompanying chart on p. 13, the progress of the four
indices is compared, by setting each to equal 100 in December 1993. 
As the chart shows, each index took its dips during 1994, actually
declining in price for months at a time.

     The EMMS index spent only three months of the last 24 below
its December 1993 price - May through July 1994.  It underwent an
almost uninterrupted climb from November 1994 to November 1995 -
peaking at a total 60.6 percent ahead of its 1993 close.

     The Dow, meanwhile, set new highs in December, as did the S&P
500.  The NASDAQ peaked in November, but none of the major indices
is as far ahead of its 1993 closing prices as the EMMS index.

     The 56 stocks that traded for the entire year are listed in
descending order in the chart to the right.  Of those on the list,
43 were up while 13 were down.  Microlog Corp. posted the largest
percentage gain in 1995 - plus 641 percent - while Retix posted the
largest percentage decline -  minus 47 percent.  Eight stocks more
than doubled their per-share prices during the year.

     U.S. Robotics Inc. posted the largest dollar gain per share -
$66.13 - but percentagewise that represents only a quadrupling of
its price.  Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.'s $26.25 gain was good for
a 176 percent leap, while Microsoft's $26.62-per-share gain was
good for only a 44 percent increase.

     The Canadian carrier MPACT Immedia Inc., while up an
impressive 273 percent for the year, was up by that percentage only
because its price was so low a year ago.  MPACT Immedia gained
$3.25 a share to close the year at $4.44 per share.

Items of Interest

     *    The Federal Communications Commission gave its approval
to the Phoenix global alliance between Sprint Corp., Deutsche
Telekom and France Telecom.  There are some conditions on the
approval, but none that will impact the companies' plans to move
the SprintMail and Global SprintFax operations over to the new
entity.  Final shareholder approvals and then the closing of the
deal should occur next week.

     *    RSA Data Security Inc. is spinning off its Certificate
Services Division into a separate company called VeriSign Inc.  The
company will issue X.509 digital certificates to companies and
end-users for use in encryption and authentication applications. 
Jim Bidzos, president of RSA, is chairman of VeriSign.  The new
company can be reached at +1 415-508-1151.

     *    Sterling Software Inc. plans to spin off its electronic
commerce operations into a separate company.  Sterling Commerce
Inc. will be a wholly owned subsidiary of Sterling Software.  It
will include the company's e-mail/electronic data interchange (EDI)
software and network service operations.  In the second quarter,
the company plans to sell about 16 percent of the shares of the
subsidiary to the public, and then to distribute the balance to
existing shareholders of Sterling Software (Ticker:  SSW).  The
underwriters include Alex. Brown & Sons Inc. and Bear Sterns & Co.
Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MAIL & MESSAGING SYSTEMS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

Meetings

     *    The Electronic Messaging Association holds a Public
Policy Forum at the Washington Renaissance Hotel in Washington,
D.C., Feb. 5-7.  The theme is the impact of telecommunications
policy on electronic commerce.  There's also an EMA Client-Server
Messaging Forum at the same location on Feb. 5 and 6.  Phone +1
703-524-5550, fax to +1 703-524-5558, or send e-mail to
meet@ema.org for details.  Information also is available from the
EMA's Web page at http://www.ema.org/ema/.

     *    The European Electronic Messaging Association will hold
a regional conference in Munich Feb. 27-29, as well as its next
round of committee meetings.  Contact EEMA at +44 1386 793 028 by
phone, at +44 1386 793 268 by fax, at eemaoffice@attmail.com on the
Internet, or use !eemaoffice on AT&T Mail.  Information also is
available on the EEMA's Web page at http://www.eema.org/eemahq/.

     *    Email World takes place at the San Jose Convention Center
in California Feb. 19-21.  Fax to +1 508-470-0526 or visit the Web
site at http://www.DCIexpo.com/ for details.

     *    The Association of Banyan Users International will hold
its Spring '96 Conference at the Sheraton Chicago Hotel & Towers
March 9-13.  Contact ABUI at fax +1 312-321-5133 or at the Web page
(http://www.abui.org/abui.html) for details.  Also contact ABUI at
+1 508-779-5520.

     *    CeBIT '96 takes place in Hannover, Germany, March 14-20. 
Contact Hannover Fairs USA Inc. by phone at +1 609-987-1202 or by
fax at +1 609-987-0092 for details.  CeBIT also now has a page on
the Web at http://www.messe.de.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>