
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B11-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B034-114</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te38.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044048 text/html 33433
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:52 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:00 GMT
Content-length: 33246
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te38.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet <BR>
NOVEMBER 7, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>AMERITECH TO TEST PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(688 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>PCS SUGGESTIONS ARE PERFECTLY CLEAR -- NOBODY AGREES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1386 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>LO-JACK SEARCHES FOR STOLEN VEHICLES, UNCOVERS PRODUCT DEMAND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1269 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>TELEPOINT-TYPE SYSTEMS MORE LIKELY TO BECOME PROFITABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(578 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>PAC TEL PROPOSES MOST EXTENSIVE U.S. PCS TEST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(485 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>TELEZONE SET TO BEGIN IN 1992</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>ACT TO TEST CT-2 PBX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>COMSAT, BELL ATLANTIC TEAM UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>BRITS START PCN OPERATORS' GROUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

AMERITECH TO TEST PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS

Ameritech, the latest Bell regional holding company (RHC) to announce a test
of personal communications service (PCS), will attempt an ambitious, two-year
program beginning with simple, one-way calling and ending with two-way calling
that allows roaming.

Similar to Millicom's Orlando., Fla., test, Ameritech's network will operate
in the 1850-1990 megaHertz range, now used by fixed-point microwave operators.

The RHC said it will conduct both technical and marketing trials in the
Chicago area.  Chicago was chosen because of its "high concentration of
multiple types of radio traffic, a large variety of ... structures (including
high-rise buildings) and a complex customer base," Ameritech said.

In its most sophisticated form, the PCS will be able to make use of signaling
system 7 and integrated services digital network (ISDN), the RHC said.  It did
not say how the microcell channels would accommodate the greater bandwidth
requirements of ISDN and intelligent-network services.  Like most proposals
for experimental PCSs, Ameritech's request gave little technical detail.

The company would not say what manufacturer will supply the microcell base
stations, interfaces to the public switched telephone network and hand-held
phones.

Nor has the RHC determined where in the city it will start its test or when it
will begin, although it did say that it would conclude operations within two
years

Ameritech said it would test three different services.  The first, and most
rudimentary, is similar to Britain's telepoint service.  Users will be able
make and receive calls at home and make calls within 25 to 100 yards of
telepoint-type public base stations.

The second phase will add an alert signal to let a customer know that a call
is coming in.  As with the first phase, hand-off capability between cells will
not be available. The third stage network will allow customers to make and
receive calls from their homes and all public base stations and will have
hand-off capability.

Ultimately, up to 100 cell sites, each 50 to 200 yards in diameter, and 1,000
portable handsets may be used.

The RHC also will experiment with sending low-speed data over PCS, said Dave
Connolly, Ameritech Services manager of corporate strategy.

An important part of the trial will be testing what customers are willing to
pay for each type of service.  "We've had some people say, 'I don't want
two-way service.'  They don't want their phone going off in public," Connolly
said.

How To Please Everyone?

Ameritech envisions offering a variety of PCS services, he added. "At home,
they may want full, two-way service like their regular phone.  Outside the
home they may want something else."

Which presents Ameritech with the formidable problem of letting the customer
change service at will.  To arrange that, Ameritech will rely heavily on
intelligence within its wireline network.

"When you read the other [PCS] filings and they ask for personal
communications networks, they're asking for a specific type of service with
switching and intelligence and databases," Connolly said.  "We want to use our
own [wireline] network for that to keep the radio network simpler."

By testing increasingly complicated systems, the RHC also will face the
difficulty of finding one or more manufacturers who will develop products to
order, Connolly noted.  Sticking with one manufacturer would simplify matters,
but "We're going to see how things develop and who can to what for us" before
deciding, he said.

The company emphasized that it will develop an interface between the radio
systems and its wireline network that will allow furnishing ISDN and
out-of-band signaling.

At today's state of the art, however, Ameritech won't be able to provide true
"2B+D" service over the channels covering just 50 MHz of radio spectrum.
Customers probably will not be able to use their PCS phones to transmit voice
and data at the same time, Connolly said, "But even one "B" plus "D" is better
than other proposals,"  The D channel could be used to provide information
about signal strength and facilitate hand-off, he said.  And
intelligent-network services such as call forwarding, selective call blocking
and caller ID also would be possible.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

PCS SUGGESTIONS ARE PERFECTLY CLEAR -- NOBODY AGREES

The personal communications service (PCS) comments submitted to the FCC Oct. 1
set a landmark of sorts.  Rarely have so many parties intensely held such
different views about what a new service is or should be.  Roughly 100
personal communications service (PCS) comments, comprising some 3,000 pages,
submitted to the FCC Oct. 1, testify to the discord.

But on one thing commentors agree:  Consumers want new wireless services.
According to figures furnished by Motorola, there are more than 100 million
communications devices (excluding CB and toys) in use today.  Land mobile
accounts for 48 million subscribers, as of Jan. 1, 1990.

Over 50 million cordless telephones are in service.  And cellular subscribers
have passed the 4-million mark.  Motorola projects that these combined
categories will grow from 100 million to almost 500 million by the end of this
decade.  That would equal nearly one wireless device for every two local
access lines. Millicom backs up its contention with a study from Arthur D.
Little which indicates that 40 percent of all U.S. households would subscribe
to PCN if it were priced $10 above existing telephone service.  The percentage
dropped to 14 if the service were priced at $40 above existing telephone
service.

CT-2, or outgoing, telepoint-type systems; digital European cordless
technology (DECT), a CT-2 variation accepted in Europe; and personal
communications service (PCS) proponents are joined by cellular carriers,
telephone companies and private radio service providers in their optimism
about the vast market potential for both wireless devices and services.
That's where agreement stops.  As a result, PCS is sure to be built on a
foundation of controversy.

The Miles-Per-Hour Spectrum

GTE, for instance, sees PCS in "miles-per-hour" categories.  That is, the
speeds at which mobile users are moving.  It characterizes today's cellular
service as a "60 mph service," in which customers are moving at high speeds
over wide areas.  To GTE, a new "6 mph service" is emerging that will meet
pedestrian needs -- a local offering designed for short walking distances.
Finally, GTE envisions a "zero mph service" that would be used in specific
locations.  Wireless PBX or wireless building networks fall under this
category.

In contrast, McCaw Communications, one of the largest non-wireline cellular
carriers in the country, envisions PCS as a continuum of mobile services
integrated into a seamless network. In this plan, cellular provides the core
network on which new microcellular PCS services will be introduced.
Pedestrian and in-building needs should be met by existing cellular spectrum
or through new spectrum for cellular carriers.

Telephone companies have a fundamentally different view.  They see wireless
services as a new means of accessing the established public switched network.
These "tetherless" access systems would consist of residential- or
business-area transceivers which would:  1) be a substitute for local loops,
2) replace in-building wiring with more flexible systems,  3) provide local
area computer networks,  4) meet needs of special communities such as trailer
parks, marinas, resorts and convention centers, and  5) provide a less
expensive form of telephone service to remote areas, now referred to as basic
exchange telephone service.

The telephone companies insist that PCSs are best built upon the telephone
infrastructure of the future with its digital switching, integrated services
digital network transmission, signaling system 7 and intelligent-network
capabilities.

New Kid On The Block

Millicom and other PCS proponents have a radically different concept in mind.
To them, PCS will be a stand-alone, digital network of advanced microcellular
networks.  Local-exchange telephone service would be a competitive business
opportunity, not an infrastructure to be built upon.

CT-2 and DECT advocates argue that pedestrian-based services can offer
improved residential cordless services, new public payphone services and
in-building telecommunications.  They complain that industry analysts are
unfairly denigrating their capabilities and overstating the ability of PCS and
cellular to meet such needs.

Private radio service providers are concerned that the commission's notice of
inquiry talks about common-carrier services without leaving adequate room for
private-carrier provision of PCS.  Private carriage may be appropriate in
cases such as self-contained, in-building networks. Cordless telephone
manufacturers simply want out of the PCS debate.  They worry that the
Telecommunications Industry Association's request for new 46-49 MHz
frequencies will be delayed and ensnared in the PCS melee.

As if these different visions of PCS weren't enough cause for debate, the
comments reveal sharply contrasting technical, spectrum-allocation,
eligibility and federal/state jurisdiction issues.

Will It Work?

Three basic technical approaches for PCS are suggested.  Not one of them,
however, has been field tested in a real-life situation. Qualcomm advocates
code division multiple access (CDMA), a digital, spread-spectrum technology
that permits numerous calls on one channel.  CDMA would permit PCSs to share
frequencies with existing services, its advocates say.

Motorola, GTE and AT&T question whether CDMA can operate without its own
exclusive spectrum allocation.  Millicom's test in Orlando, Fla., where a
version of PCS will be tested in the private, fixed microwave range, may
resolve the question. Time division multiple access (TDMA) systems similarly
do not emerge unscathed.  Motorola, McCaw and others note that TDMA has not
been adequately tested.

Centel has announced another variant -- "narrow advanced mobile phone systems"
(NAMPS). NAMPS, an analog technology, would use discrete portions of the
cellular bands for microcellular applications.  The technology, developed by
Motorola, will be tested next year in Las Vegas. A fourth option, only hinted
at to date, is frequency hopping. AT&T has indicated it will explore this
technology.

In short, no one really is sure what CDMA, TDMA, NAMPS or frequency hopping
can offer.  They must undergo a wide variety of tests in the lab and in the
field.  Until test results are in, the agency can't answer questions such as
whether spectrum sharing is possible or how many PCSs technically could be
accommodated in any given market.  The last point clearly affects whether or
not PCS spectrum scarcity is real or perceived. The FCC specified 1850-1990
MHz as a potential home for PCS.  But none of those holding licenses to
operate in that spectrum are stepping forward to volunteer to relocate.  In
fact, law enforcement agencies, petroleum companies, railroads, broadcasters,
public utilities and others have all argued that it would be prohibitively
expensive and technically dubious for them to be evicted from or forced to
share their spectrum.

Stunting Growth

In addition, private and common carrier land mobile operators want to hang on
to the three unused 1 MHz slices of spectrum in the 900 MHz band that the FCC
has suggested using for CT-2 and DECT.  They need it, they say, to handle
specialized mobile radio and paging growth.

Here, engineering fades and a political question appears:  Does the FCC have
the will and fortitude to act in the face of such opposition?

Assuming the FCC finds new spectrum for PCS, the most contentious issue of all
looms -- Who will be allowed to file for new spectrum?  The FCC's notice
offers two tentative possibilities. First, to promote competition, cellular
carriers would be barred from using new PCS spectrum to expand their systems.
Second, some new spectrum might be set aside for local telephone companies to
introduce new telephone services.

Telephone companies, of course, support a telephone-company set-aside.
Non-wireline cellular carriers strenuously oppose any prohibition that would
prevent them from applying for new spectrum within their own cellular markets.

If The nature of the game and the rules are settled, that still leaves the
question of referees.  State utility commissions argue against any FCC
preemptions or classification of PCSs as private radio services.  That would
automatically preclude state regulation under Section 332 of the
Communications Act.  They are joined by rural independent telephone companies
concerned about PCS as bypass threats.

The plain fact is that there aren't many hard facts in the opening comments.
Nor is it likely that such information will materialize in time for the Dec. 1
reply comments.  Given this state of affairs, the commission is left either to
remain idle until tests are finished or to take a more active role and set
guidelines. -- Nancy J. Victory

Nancy J. Victory is counsel for Telocator, a trade association for mobile
radio common carriers.  She is an attorney with Wiley, Rein & Fielding,
Washington, D.C.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

LO-JACK SEARCHES FOR STOLEN VEHICLES, UNCOVERS PRODUCT DEMAND

It's pretty rare to have a stolen car recovered an hour and a half after
thieves take it, but that is the average time it takes police to track down
cars equipped with small, hidden transmitters sold by Lo-Jack Corp., of
Needham, Mass.

When an owner reports a Lo-Jack-equipped car as stolen, police transmit unique
code to the Lo-Jack unit in the vehicle, "waking" it up.  It begins
broadcasting a regular, pulsing signal over the low end of the FM band.

Patrol cars pick up the signal on special Lo-Jack receivers, which print out
the stolen car's description and vehicle identification number.

A compass-like device in the patrol car points in the direction of the stolen
car, indicating which way to turn to home in on it.

Since the company began selling them in Massachusetts in 1988, 50,000 Lo-Jack
units have been installed, and 1,200 stolen cars have been retrieved -- a 95
percent success rate -- the company says.

Lo-Jack sells its transmitters through new-car dealers and provides the
patrol-car receivers and related equipment to police departments for a nominal
$1 charge.

With 15 million new vehicles sold each year in the U.S. -- and a car stolen
every 30 seconds -- Lo-Jack has tapped into a lucrative market, says
securities analyst Jyoti Aggarwala, whose firm, Ladenburg, Thalmann & Co., of
New York, recommends Lo-Jack stock as a long-term investment. If the company
wins just 1 percent of the new car market, it will garner $45 million
annually, she estimates.

But Lo-Jack, which went public in 1983, has yet to show a profit, largely
because it must spend about $2 million each time it enters a new state,
according to company president Michael Daley. Lo-Jack's current strategy is to
focus on stolen-vehicle recovery, not vehicle location.  It strives to get its
systems adopted by police agencies, preferably the state police, in what Daley
terms the "top 10 states," where 60 percent of the nation's auto sales and
thefts occur.

Though it only expanded outside Massachusetts in 1988, Lo-Jack already has
recruited police departments in Miami, Chicago and Detroit, and anticipates an
agreement with state police in Illinois, where 63,000 cars were stolen in
1988. Daley and Aggarwala agree that Lo-Jack should be profitable by 1992.

By then, however, Lo-Jack may be feeling the heat from some competitors.  So
far there is one entry: the Intercept system from Code-Alarm of Madison
Heights, Mich.

Sounding The Alarm

When an Intercept-equipped car is stolen, a transmitter hidden in the vehicle
begins broadcasting the car's location to Code-Alarm's headquarters, using the
cellular telephone network. The module knows the car is stolen because other
sensors on the car have been tripped, explains Mary Gingrich, Code-Alarm's
operations coordinator.

The module knows its location because it receives the broadcasts of the Loran
C network, a nationwide radio navigation system used by aircraft and boats,
which also covers one-third of the land area of the continental United States.

Code-Alarm headquarters, in turn, notifies local police of the stolen car's
location and even its speed.

Gingrich says that, if police approve, Code-Alarm can tell the Intercept
module to shut off the gas to the car's motor, bringing any chase to a
grinding halt.

Other competitors with products in the works include an Indianapolis, Ind.,
firm named MITS Inc. and International Tele-trac systems, which is testing a
cellular-based system for tracking fleet vehicles that Daley says could easily
be adapted to tracking stolen ones.

Of these, Teletrac's could represent a major threat because of Teletrac's
partnership with PacTel Corp., the cellular telephone subsidiary of Bell
regional holding company (RHC) Pacific Telesis.  (Lo-Jack has challenged that
partnership as a violation of the AT&T Consent Decree's ban on the provision
of information services by RHCs.)

Lo-Jack suffers a disadvantage over such competitors, noted Dennis Zogbi, an
analyst with the U.S. Market Perspective division of World Information
Technologies in Northport, N.Y. "Owners have to notify police before a search
for a car begins. If somebody steals a car at night, the owner may not be
aware of it until morning.  In New York City, most cars stolen in Manhattan
are driven into New Jersey and disassembled in "chop shops" within 30
minutes."

Element Of Surprise

Daley acknowledged the potential problem, but said that Lo-Jack owners have
had little difficulty in actual practice.  "We don't perceive it as a
weakness," he said.  "We have recovered cars within hours, days and weeks of
being stolen without damage.  The thief doesn't know whether a driver has left
a car for a few minutes or a long time."

Thieves also don't know if the car is equipped with Lo-Jack, and aren't likely
to take the time for a thorough search, Daley said. "In this state
[Massachusetts] we've had thieves steal the car, then drive it somewhere to
cool off.  They go back in several days to see if it's still there."

In real life, more sophisticated systems such as Code Alarm's have
difficulties, too, Daley said.  "The owner must set codes on leaving the car
and returning."  If not, the alarm goes off.  If the owner forgets the code or
a family member who doesn't know the code takes the car, a false alarm may
result.

In any case, there is still a delay.  "The police must contact the owner to
verify that it is, in fact, a stolen vehicle.  The police don't want to be
embarrassed or be sued for false arrest," Daley said. "And since they operate
on cellular, they can only be used in cities or areas of heavy vehicle
traffic," he noted.

In confronting these competitors, Lo-Jack will likely maintain a decided price
advantage, Agarwalla notes.  Its Lo-Jack Retrieve product, the transmitter,
sells for $595, including installation, which Lo-Jack representatives do
themselves, randomly concealing the device in one of 35 locations on the car.
There are no monthly charges because the unit is used only if police activate
a hunt for it.

For customers in Massachusetts and Florida, the deal is even better:
Insurance companies there give those who also buy Lo-Jack's optional $100
Lo-Jack Prevent product, a theft-prevention device, at least a 25 percent
reduction in the cost of their comprehensive auto insurance coverage.

And, if the customer's car is stolen and not retrieved, any Lo-Jack customer
gets his Lo-Jack investment refunded. By comparison, Code-Alarm's Intercept
costs $1,495, including installation and a cellular telephone.

Lo-Jack scored a coup last year when the FBI, at Lo-Jack's request, persuaded
the FCC to designate a special frequency (173.075 megaHertz) for use
nationwide by Lo-Jack's small transmitters.

Daley says the FCC's action will smooth police acceptance of the devices,
eliminating the need to gain a specific FCC license for each state.

For the future, Daley says Lo-Jack will "expand this network till we cover one
end of the country to the other," largely by winning the involvement of police
agencies along major transportation corridors on both coasts and along
Interstate 80 through the Midwest and West, he says.

Lo-Jack, he adds, is also discussing cooperative arrangements with European
police agencies, and, one day, would like to expand the use of its technology
to recover stolen aircraft and boats. Just last year, he notes, a Lo-Jack unit
installed in a truck led to the breakup of a hijacking ring when that truck
was stolen and tracked to a Florida warehouse.

Police found the truck in less than an hour, Daley says.

-- Edward Warner



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

TELEPOINT-TYPE SYSTEMS MORE LIKELY TO BECOME PROFITABLE

A British consulting firm has concluded that telepoint-type systems, limited
though they are, are more likely to return profits to investors than personal
communications networks (PCN).

"We see a window of opportunity for telepoint," said Enda Hardiman, general
manager of telecommunications market analysis for London-based BIS Mackintosh.

Telepoint, as used in Britain, is a one-way telephone system accessed outside
the home.  Users move to within a few hundred yards of a base station
(typically mounted on a building) and make outgoing calls.

The keys to telepoint success, according to BIS, are its low cost compared to
personal communications and telepoint's proven technical feasibility.  Three
such systems have been operating in London for more than a year, noted Ian
Reese, author of an analysis comparing telepoint to PCN.  In contrast, no PCNs
have been put into commercial service or given field tests.

"PCN operators are caught between a rock and a hard place," Hardiman said.
The current estimate to produce a PCN phone, which can receive calls as well
as make them, is about $3,000, he said.  A telepoint phone, which is limited
to placing outgoing calls, costs about $400.

PCN operators are either going to have to retain a high price for the phones
or subsidize them with income from high airtime charges, Hardiman said.

Because PCN must be considered a riskier investment than telepoint, operators
will have to pay higher interest rates to investors, according to Reese.  As a
result, a PCN system large enough to cover 60 million people (about the
population of Great Britain and Ireland combined) would become profitable nine
or 10 years after startup.

Getting The Payback

A telepoint system of equal capacity, on the other hand, would begin making
money in its sixth year, according to Reese's analysis.

"Unlike telepoint, PCN is unproven, and the rational investor should attach a
high level of risk to investment in PCN," BIS said.

PCN is seen as a much larger system, attracting some seven million subscribers
by the end of the seventh year of operation, as opposed to 600,000 telepoint
subscribers in the same period.

Revenue per subscriber would be about the same, however. Telepoint subscribers
are projected to pay about $700 a year for airtime, whereas PCN subscribers
would pay about $800, according to Reese.  The telepoint figure matches
revenues quoted by current system operators.  The PCN estimate is based upon
average use of cellular telephones in the United Kingdom.

BIS estimates that the hypothetical PCN would realize a profit of about $100
million in its first year in the black, or 3.6 percent of total investment.

By the end of the same period, telepoint would increase in value about 75
percent, Reese said.  That corresponds to an increase in value of about $104
million on an investment of $140 million. The sizeable increase can be
attributed to predicted profit margins.  "Like other telecommunications
infrastructure investments, once the major initial capital outlays have been
recovered there is considerable potential for large and sustained profits as
the service matures," BIS said.

"PCN must, for the time being, be regarded as a high-risk investment with
uncertain long-term yield prospects," Reese concluded.

Bell Atlantic, which proposes to begin a telepoint field test in Philadelphia
in December, had no estimates of demand for service or when a commercial
system might become profitable. "At this time, we're just testing the
technology," a spokeswoman said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

PAC TEL PROPOSES MOST EXTENSIVE U.S. PCS TEST

Pacific Telesis has proposed a two-year, five-city research project into
personal communications service (PCS) radio frequency (RF) propagation and
systems performance.

Pac Tel applied for an experimental license on the eve of the Oct. 1 deadline
for comments on the FCC's inquiry into advanced wireless technology.

"PCS is more than just wireless cellular," said Stagg Newman, Pac Tel's
assistant vice president for corporate strategy.

Pac Tel wants to "provide a 'global' picture of radio propagation and
interference characteristics at different frequencies," he said.  The systems
tests are designed to "provide an understanding of the new PCS system
alternatives, including propagation characteristics, system capabilities,
functionality, economies and preliminary user acceptance," the company said.

Although Pac Tel, Pacific Bell and PacTel Cellular will focus on advanced
wireless communications, many of the features contemplated will rely on
intelligent network capabilities. If Pac Tel's experimental license is
granted, testing will start with examinations of how signals of various
frequencies and power levels behave in different cities, starting with San
Francisco and Los Angeles and reaching across the country to Chicago, Dallas
and New York.

Narrowband and wideband testing will be done in the following frequency
ranges: 614-806 megaHertz (now allocated to UHF television), 824-849 MHz and
869-894 MHz (cellular telephone services), 849-851 MHz and 894-896 MHz
(air-to-ground services), 864-868 MHz (public safety and specialized mobile
radio).

Also, 901-902 MHz, 930-931 MHz and 940-941 MHz (general purpose mobile radio
and advanced paging) 902-928 MHz (industrial, scientific and medical [ISM]
services, automatic vehicle location and amateur radio), 1850-1990 MHz
(point-to-point microwave), 2110-2130 MHz and 2160-2180 MHz (point-to-point
microwave) and 2400-2483.5 (ISM and low-power or spread-spectrum uses).

Pac Tel will seek out "challenging RF environments" to test propagation and
interference characteristics.  "These tests  will encompass five metropolitan
areas, each with distinct topography, and will include a combination of
in-building, on-street and unique coverage situations at ranges of less than
and greater than one kilometer," the company said.

The tests will attempt to answer some of the questions the FCC posed in its
PCS inquiry, namely:  "Can PCS be overlaid within existing spectrum
allocations on a shared basis?" and "Can multiple spread spectrum operators
share the same spectrum?"

Newman said these tests will attempt to settle the debate about whether
spread-spectrum technologies can, in practice, share the same frequencies as
point-to-point microwave.

Seeing Double

The second phase of Pac Tel's testing proposal will focus on tests of at least
two "technology platforms" and will reflect experience gathered from the RF
propagation and interference research.  About 100 handsets and 20 to 30 base
stations will be established for each technology in a given city.

The basic system will offer a "low-end, low-functionality" service with small,
low-cost handsets providing an "enhanced version of CT-2," according to
Newman.  The second will be a "high-end, next-generation cellular" service
complete with "intelligent network functionality," he said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

TELEZONE SET TO BEGIN IN 1992

American TeleZone will begin public service in two years, according to CEO
Robert Gray.  Others are anticipating service launches in 1995.

TeleZone is aiming to avoid the FCC's personal comunications inquiry and the
process of licensing equipment.  The company's one-way, telepoint-type system
will operate under Part 15 of the FCC's rules, governing devices such as
model-airplane controls, which do not require licenses.

TeleZone's greatest lure will be price.  "We plan [to offer] unlimited calls
for $50 a month, and we can go a whole lot lower than that," Gray said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

ACT TO TEST CT-2 PBX

The first company in the country to operate an experimental telepoint-type
system will test wireless PBXs early next year, according to its founder.

American Cordless Technology (ACT), Montville, N.J., has received FCC and New
York State Public Service Commission permission to operate an experimental
CT-2 system in Manhattan, said Matt Edwards, the company's president.  ACT
expects to begin service in "early 1991," Edwards said.

The company plans to cover Manhattan south of the Brooklyn Bridge and the
region's three main airports: Kennedy, LaGuardia and Newark, Edwards said.

ACT plans to install roughly 200 base stations.  Most will go on the outside
of buildings but 50 will be placed on already installed PBXs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

COMSAT, BELL ATLANTIC TEAM UP

Comsat and Bell Atlantic have joined to build an emergency radiotelephone
network.  The National Transportable Telecommunications Capability will use
existing cellular and satellite products to provide communications to federal
agencies during natural disasters or civil emergencies.

Comsat is to provide Ku-band satellite links to the public telephone network,
fixed earth stations, a digital telephone system and microwave transmission.
Bell Atlantic will provide cellular switching, cell base stations, towers,
antennas and cellular phones.

The whole thing goes in a package that can fit on a C-130 cargo airplane.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ADVANCED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 7, 1990

BRITS START PCN OPERATORS' GROUP

The three companies licensed to establish personal communications networks in
the United Kingdom have formed an organization to promote use of their
transmission standard in other European nations.  The Association of European
PCN Operators consists of Unitel, Mercury and Microtel.

One objective of the association is roaming service for subscribers.  DCS
(digital cellular system) 1800 will operate at 1.8 GHz and is based on 900 MHz
GSM, the standard for the proposed Pan European Digital Cellular System.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>