
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-275</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033634 text/html 19629
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:40 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 19442
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet <BR>
May 1, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>WHEN DO A GROUP&nbsp;OF EMPLOYEES&nbsp;CONSTITUTE A `CREW'?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(406 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>IS A COMPANY BOUND&nbsp;BY AN ERROR IN FIXING&nbsp;AN EMPLOYEE'S PENSION?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(365 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>IS IT DISCRIMINATORY&nbsp;TO DENY A MERIT HIKE&nbsp;TO A SHOP STEWARD?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>CAN AN EMPLOYEE&nbsp;BE COMPELLED TO POSTPONE A VACATION?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>HAS A COMPANY A RIGHT TO SUSPEND AN EMPLOYEE&nbsp;WHO IS UNDER ARREST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(446 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>WHEN DOES AN EMPLOYEE BECOME PERMANENTLY AND&nbsp;TOTALLY DISABLED?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>IF AN EMPLOYEE IS SICK MUST HE BE CALLED&nbsp;FOR OVERTIME?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(490 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

WHEN DO A GROUP
OF EMPLOYEES
CONSTITUTE A `CREW'?

What Happened: At the Rolidack Steel Company,
the job of Mould Dipping Laborer was concerned
with knocking plugs off the hot top
moulds,cleaning off the stools, replacing metal
plates on these stools and washing them down.
For a while there were three employee Mould
Dipping Laborers on each shift.

Suddenly, the Rolidack powers ordained that
only two Dipping Laborers were needed. That
brought the union running with a grievance
demanding that Rolidack return to the
three-workers-per-shift policy.

At an arbitration hearing, the union argued:

1. Our union contract guarantees the existence
of a protected crew size--a minimum of three in
the case of Mould Dipping Laborers.

2. The elimination of the third worker has
placed too great a strain on the remaining two
workers.

3. Furthermore, management has not justified
the removal of the third worker on the basis of
significant changes in the job.

A Rolidack official responded:

  *  Because of the varying kind of work done
by the Mould Dipping Laborers, we have never
considered these workers to compose a protected
"crew."

  *  Moreover, recent changes in the job
support the removal of one employee from this
work.


RULING

The Mould Dipping Workers do not compose a
'crew' and the company can change their number
at its own discretion, ruled Arbitrator Thomas
J. McDermott

The referee held:

"The number of Mould Dipping Laborers worked
per (shift) has varied from 1 to 3 and on a few
occasions to 4. No relationship was shown
between the changes in numbers that have taken
place and any given set of working
conditions.Thus, it can only be concluded that
this job has been scheduled on the basis of
what was determined to be the work load. There
is absent, therefore the proof that a protected
work crew...has existed." (46 LA 733)

COMMENT

In another ruling, the same arbitrator
declared:

"Most arbitrators hold...that a crew for
purposes of local working conditions exists
where the employees making up the work force
have a relationship that is interdependent of
each other. This would mean that, when one
member is removed or absent, the remaining
workers are required to assume an increased
amount of work, or there is a significant
change in the type of work they are required to
perform. In other words, there must be a
relationship between the--nature of the work
and the interdependence of members to each
other." (40 LA 67)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

IS A COMPANY BOUND
BY AN ERROR IN FIXING
AN EMPLOYEE'S PENSION?

What Happened: Following surgery to relieve a
cancerous condition, Gerald Mack, who was 62
years old and had been employed by the Carvian
Company for 43 years, felt that his working
days were drawing to a close. He was attracted
by the possibility of early retirement under
the Social Security Act in conjunction with a
pension from Carvian.

Mack took early retirement after consulting his
Foreman and Henry Galt, the company's Personnel
Manager. Both assured him that he would receive
a monthly retirement check from Carvian for
$220.78. Mack's first retirement check was in
that amount and he was again assured by Galt
that the figure was correct.

However, the next month Mack received a check
for $110.39. When Mack demanded an explanation,
an embarrassed Henry Galt admitted that the
original check for $220.78 was an error; the
figure should have been $110.39.

At an arbitration session called to consider
Mack's grievance, the pensioner's union
advocate expounded:

1. Gerald Mack, a faithful, longtime employee
relied implicitly upon the representations made
to him by his foreman and Personnel Manager
Galt that he would receive  a certain sum in
retirement which would make it feasible for him
to cease working.

2. This turned out to be an irresponsible
mistake, which makes it difficult for him to
cover his retirement living expenses.

The company's Personnel Manager answered:

  *  Mistakes in pension figures occasionally
occur in processing retirement requests.

  *  These are inadvertent errors and should
not be made binding on the employer.

Did The Employee Win?  YES  q  NO  q

RULING

The company must continue to pay Mack the
greater pension, ruled Arbitrator John F.
Sembower. The arbitrator declared:

"Gerald Mack was entitled to rely upon the
positive and well-intentioned although
erroneous information supplied to him by his
foreman who, in turn obtained it from the local
officer of the company charged with developing
such information accurately."(63 LA 669)

COMMENT

On the other hand, arbitrators and courts have
held that when a worker who receives by error a
windfall payment of some sort to which he/she
is not entitled, and of a nature which should
have forewarned him that something had gone
wrong, he must make restitution.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

IS IT DISCRIMINATORY
TO DENY A MERIT HIKE
TO A SHOP STEWARD?

What Happened: Five years had elapsed since
Glenn Collier had received a merit increase.
Each time, Collier had been stymied by the
section of the Progress Report Form labeled
"Output." The wording was virtually always the
same: "His output is low because of endless
outside distraction and telephone calls."

Finally, Collier, who was the shop steward,
filed a grievance in his own behalf calling for
a merit increase.The matter was bucked to an
arbitrator before whom Collier thundered:

1. The company's Progress Report Form lists
nine factors considered in awarding a merit
increase: knowledge, judgment, dependability,
cooperation, initiative, communication,
flexibility, creativity and output.

2. I was rated "good"  on all but "output."
Obviously, I'm being discriminated against
because I'm a dedicated steward.

A company spokesman contradicted:

  *  The passage of time does not justify a
merit raise.

  *  A merit raise means that an employee has
done more than is normally expected of him.

  *  Collier's union duties keep him from doing
no more than getting by on his job.That's his
problem, not ours.

Was The Company Right?  YES  q  NO  q

(See Ruling - Page 4)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

CAN AN EMPLOYEE
BE COMPELLED TO POSTPONE A VACATION?

What Happened: Ordinarily, vacations granted to
employees by the Glimbit Corporation occurred
between April 1st and October 31st. The company
reserved the right to determine each employee's
vacation period.

When Paul Gregory requested a two-week vacation
in August, it was denied him because, according
to Glimbit, it did not have an experienced
replacement. "We can't spare you during the
period prior to October 31st without affecting
the efficient operation of the plant," a
Glimbit higher-up told him. However, on
November 18th, Paul Gregory was told he would
start his vacation on November 21st.

Paul Gregory hotfooted to union headquarters
and had the Local process a grievance
protesting the manner in which his vacation
desires had been treated by Glimbit. At the
arbitration hearing, Gregory contended:

  *  I've been treated unfairly by Glimbit. The
company pretended I could not be spared during
the month of August, the period during which my
and my family's vacation needs could best be
met.

A company official rejoined:

1. We genuinely could not have spared Gregory
until November.

2. Anyway, the granting of time off in the
usual vacation period is not mandatory. Our
company has the exclusive right to schedule
vacations.

     Was The Company Right?  YES  q  NO  q


RULING

The company had the right to postpone the
employee's vacation, ruled Arbitrator Peter M.
Kelliher. The referee stated:

"The contract does not require that employees
be granted a vacation during the period of
April 1st to October 31st. (The contract)
indicates that the vacation season shall
'preferably' be during such a period. It is
also noted that the final right of determining
the vacation period of any employee is
exclusively reserved to the company to insure
efficient operation of the plant."  (15 LA 481)

COMMENT

Here's the provision in the union contract
which reserved to management the right to
determine when vacations could be granted:

"Section 8. Vacations shall insofar as possible
be granted by the company at time between April
1st and October 31st most desired by the
eligible employees, but final right of
determining the vacation of any employee is
exclusively reserved to the company  to insure
efficient operation of the plant." (emphasis
added)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

HAS A COMPANY A RIGHT TO SUSPEND AN EMPLOYEE
WHO IS UNDER ARREST?

What Happened:On October 8, 1992, Travis
Lowery, a Security Protection Officer (SPO)
employed by the Vansellor Security Service, was
arrested while on duty at a facility operated
by an oil company. Lowery was charged with
committing the crime of assault and battery. He
was taken to a local jail and released on bail
24 hours later. When Lowery returned to work,
Vansellor immediately suspended him without pay
pending the outcome of the criminal charges
against him.

Lowery's union came to his defense with a
grievance for his reinstatement. The union's
demand was adamantly rejected by Vansellor and
both sides soon squared off before an
arbitrator. At the hearing, the employer
maintained:

1. A security officer like Lowery is held to a
higher standard than other workers because he
carries a weapon and has authority over people.
Lowery was arrested for a crime of violence. We
can't take the risk of permitting him to
continue on duty.

2. To permit a security employee, who is under
arrest, to remain at his post would cause us
great embarrassment among our clients.

Lowery's union advocate insisted:

  *  During his 6 years as a Security
Protection Officer at Vansellor, Lowery has
been an excellent employee and has received
high performance evaluations from his
superiors.

  *  Vansellor did not conduct any
investigation of the charges made against
Lowery, nor produce any evidence he is guilty
of the offense.

  *  There was little publicity about Lowery's
arrest - and Vansellor has suffered little, if
any, embarrassment.
   Did The Employee Win?  YES  q  NO  q


RULING

Reinstate the Security Protection Officer,
ruled Arbitrator Charles H.Frost. The
arbitrator saw no merit in the employer's plea
of "embarrassment." He could find no proof that
there was widespread public knowledge of
Lowery's arrest--or that his co-workers were
reluctant to work with him. The arbitrator was
also impressed by the fact that Lowery had
received disparate treatment in that  other
security personnel who had been charged with
more serious crimes were not disciplined. (94-1
ARB Par.4100)

COMMENT

Where an employee is arrested at the work site
for committing a crime, the employer is faced
with two options. If the employer finds that
the offense calls for discipline, it can
proceed to prove its case  in the same way as
if the employee were charged with industrial
misconduct. On the other hand, the employer can
leave the matter to the courts and reserve
final decision until the verdict is rendered.

Bear in mind that if an employer decides to
suspend the employee, it must be able to prove
that keeping the employee on the job pending a
court decision, would have an adverse impact on
its operations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

WHEN DOES AN EMPLOYEE BECOME PERMANENTLY AND
TOTALLY DISABLED?

What Happened: While cutting torque converters
in the course of his job with the Nedicrode
Corporation, Edward Fowler reached up to pull a
converter from a pallet. The act caused him to
feel a burning sting and to pass out.

Fowler was hospitalized and treated by various
neurosurgeons and orthopedic surgeons. He
underwent operations which, among other
results, led to the removal of the disc around
the nerve in his lower spine. Despite all the
treatment rendered to him, Fowler was often
racked  by severe pain.

Fowler pressed a claim for Workers'
Compensation and was awarded permanent and
total disability benefits. While conceding
Fowler's entitlement to Workers' Compensation,
Nedicrode's insurance company challenged his
right to total benefits. Both sides wound up in
a courtroom, where Fowler's lawyer set forth:

1. The physicians and vocational experts who
have examined and treated Fowler unite in
declaring that he is 100% vocationally disabled
because of his pain. He will never again  be
able to do the only work he was trained to
perform.

2. There is no choice but to grant him
permanent and total disability benefits.

The insurance attorney replied:

  *  If he tried, Fowler could find employment
other than that he performed prior to his
accident. He could be retrained to handle
lighter jobs. After all, he has no restrictions
on walking or driving.

  *  It is unreasonable to place a relatively
young person such as Fowler into virtual
retirement on full benefits.
     Was The Insurance Carrier Right?  YES  q
NO  q

RULING

Fowler is entitled to permanent and total
disability benefits, ruled the Alabama Court of
Civil Appeals. Fowler's case was strongly
bolstered by testimony from physicians and
vocational experts as to the incurable and
relentless pain visited upon him by his
on-the-job accident. The court brushed aside
the insurance carrier's argument that Fowler
should explore possibilities of alternative
employment.

"The test for total disability is the inability
to perform one's trade, and if so unable, then
the inability to obtain other reasonably
gainful employment. The employee is not
required to be absolutely helpless or suffer
total disability. Gainful employment means
employment similar in remuneration to that
earned prior to the injury (and) compatible
with the employee's pre-injury occupation, age,
education and aptitude," the tribunal held.
(630 So.2d 471)

COMMENT

In an earlier decision, an Alabama court ruled
"An employee who is so injured that he can
perform no services other than those which are
so limited in quality, dependability, or
quantity that a  reasonable stable market for
them does not exist, may well be classified as
totally disabled." (103 So.2d 315)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

IF AN EMPLOYEE IS SICK MUST HE BE CALLED
FOR OVERTIME?

What Happened: "I won't be in today, Mr.
Schultz," Charley Stratton rasped over the
phone to his supervisor one Friday morning.
"I'm down with a cold."

"Hope you feel better. See you Monday,' replied
Schultz.

Stratton looked better on Monday--until he
learned that several members of his unit had
been asked to work overtime on the previous
Saturday.

"Why wasn't I asked,too?" Stratton asked his
supervisor in an injured tone.

"You were out sick. You weren't in shape to
work."

Stratton was so angry that he filed a grievance
demanding that he paid for the overtime denied
him. When the issue reached arbitration,
Stratton fumed:

1.The union contract says that all employees
are entitled to an equal crack at overtime.

2. Although I was sick on Friday, it didn't
mean that I was unwell on Saturday. A telephone
call to my home by the supervisor would have
made that clear.

A company factotum riposted:

  *  When an employee calls in sick, we assume
that he's out of commission - until he tells us
otherwise.

  *  It's unreasonable to expect a supervisor
to call up employees who are at home sick every
time we have to get up a group for overtime
work to check up if they're well enough to come
in.
  Was The Compnay Right?  YES  q  NO  q


RULING

No overtime money for Stratton, ruled
Arbitrator Raymond Goetz. There is a reasonable
basis for assuming that an employee who is out
sick is unavailable for overtime, the
arbitrator pointed out. Furthermore, the need
for overtime usually arises shortly before the
work is to be performed. A company cannot be
expected to phone absent employees to come in
for work on short notice. The logical step is
to ask the employees who are on hand to do the
extra work. (72-2 ARB Par., 8459)

COMMENT

The outcome might have been different if
Stratton had known about the overtime and had
telephoned in to his supervisor to volunteer
for the work. The arbitrator suggested that
then the employer would have been on notice
that the employee was able to work overtime.

RULING

No merit raise for Glenn Collier, ruled
Arbitrator Neil M. Gundermann. The umpire
opined:

"The Progress Review Form did not indicate that
the employee was performing in a manner which
would support a merit increase. To receive such
an increase there must be real merit--greater
output, handling of more difficult assignments,
greater effort or some manifestation of greater
value to the company. A merit increase is not
due merely with the passage of time." (67-1 ARB
Par. 8217)

COMMENT
What won this case for the company is that
management was able to show that it had a true
"Merit Progress" procedure. The employees were
rated every six months--not haphazardly--but in
face-to-face talks with their supervisors. Good
and bad points were discussed and supervisors
encouraged employees to ask questions on how
they could improve.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>