
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B01-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA074-000493-B047-111</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013909 text/html 31363
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:36:56 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:53 GMT
Content-length: 31176
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/gt03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>*BUDGET*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Senate Approves CR; Budget Talks To Continue Today</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(946 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*HOUSE ADMINISTRATION*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Oxley Wants To Head House Commerce Telco Panel</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*AGRICULTURE*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Roberts Seems Reluctant To Extend Food Aid Programs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(465 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*HOUSE RACES*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>A Third Of Calif. Delegation In Play As Filing Closes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1335 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*TAXES*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>81 Republicans Oppose Deal That Trims $245B Tax Cut</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(223 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*OUTLOOK*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>No Senate Votes Slated This Week</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*TELECOMMUNICATIONS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Pressler Urges Quick Passage Of Th Telco Bill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*HEALTH*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Senators Object To Proposed Regulations On Tobacco</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*POLITICS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>NRSC Files Complaint Against Wyden Senate Campaign</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Majority In State Believes Thurmon Should Not Seek Re-election</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Durbin Camp Seeks To get Primary Foe Off The Ballot</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Senate Approves CR; Budget Talks To Continue Today

      As late-night White House budget talks produced "progress"
but no final deal, the Senate Tuesday hedged its bets and passed
a continuing resolution to reopen the federal government as well
as a backup measure to bring federal employees back to work
without pay if, as it appears, the House refuses to approve the
new CR immediately. President Clinton and Hill leaders met from
about 6:15 p.m. (EST) to 9:15 p.m. (EST) Tuesday at the White
House, but did not announce any new agreements on the budget or a
CR afterward. Instead, the participants, continuing their efforts
to keep the budget negotiations behind closed doors, left without
talking to reporters and issued a one-sentence joint statement
said to have been authored by Vice President Gore. The statement
declared, "Our talks continue to make constructive progress and
we will reconvene tomorrow at 1:30 p.m."

      White House Press Secretary Michael McCurry said today's
meeting would be at the White House. Among the participants in
the meeting with Clinton Tuesday night were House Speaker
Gingrich, Senate Majority Leader Dole, Senate Minority Leader
Daschle, House Majority Leader Armey, House Minority Leader
Gephardt, Gore and White House Chief of Staff Panetta. After
spending 90 minutes in the Oval Office, the negotiators moved to
the White House residence to continue talks over a dinner of
pasta and shrimp. Meawhile, the Senate earlier Tuesday evening
approved a "clean" continuing resolution that simply extends the
now-expired CR until Jan. 12. Dole appeared on the Senate floor,
shortly after meeting in the afternoon (EST) with House and
Senate Republican leaders for more than two hours, to make
several unanimous consent requests, including one to pass the new
CR. Most programs would be funded at the lowest of House, Senate
or FY95 funding levels. Technically, the CR was added to
legislation that would provide most favored nation status to
Bulgaria.

      In a floor statement, Dole declared, "People have been gone
from their jobs long enough."

      He said while some House Republicans want to refuse to pass
a new CR until a budget deal is set, "I don't quite understand
the logic in all that." And Dole said federal employees "want to
work," adding: "They're caught in the middle. They're pawns [...]
If there's any point to be made, it should have been made by
now."

      While Gingrich refused to consider the possibility of a new
CR until he saw how Tuesday night's budget talks progressed, Dole
denied there was a split between himself and the speaker, but
agreed "there are some differences" between House and Senate
Republicans on "how we should proceed."

      Asked later if he was trying to pressure the House to pass
the CR, Dole said: "Me? No."

      Gingrich speaking with reporters on Capitol Hill declined
to discuss the Senate action Tuesday evening, saying, "I don't
have any comment." And Gingrich spokesman Tony Blankley termed
the Senate action as "a tactical judgment for the Senate."

      Talking with reporters in the Oval Office later Tuesday
before the meeting with Clinton, Gingrich said, "Our members will
be back by noon (EST) tomorrow, and we hope to meet with all of
them and brief them on tonight's meeting and whatever happens
tomorrow morning, and maybe get something done during the day
tomorrow." "I think if we can both get movement on the balanced
budget and get the government back to work, and paid for, that
really would be a good step in the right direction," Gingrich
added.

      House Budget Chairman Kasich said it is "very unlikely" the
House would pass a CR until a budget deal is set, adding, "We see
all this as being connected to balancing the budget."

      Anticipating that the House may refuse to consider the new
continuing resolution, the Senate, by unanimous consent Tuesday,
also amended and passed separate House legislation that would
bring federal employees back to work without pay, but with the
guarantee they would eventually be paid.

      The legislation in effect declares all federal employees
"essential."

      In addition, the Senate amended the legislation to provide
targeted funding to several programs, which Dole said could not
continue without the funding.

      Those programs include the federal Meals on Wheels program
for the elderly, child protection services, unemployment
compensation for 11 states, passport offices, programs for native
Americans, certain veterans programs and national parks.

      The Senate also deleted a House provision that would
require the Senate to consider any budget deal on an expedited
basis. However, Dole also requested, and received, unanimous
consent that if Daschle agrees at the time, any budget deal be
considered as budget reconciliation legislation and be subject to
the same limits. Those limits would prohibit a filibuster and
limit debate to a maximum of 20 hours. "That would speed up the
process considerably," Dole said. Because the Senate amended the
House-passed "essential" employees proposal, it apparently would
have to be reconsidered by the House before it would be sent to
Clinton.

      Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D., Tuesday applauded Dole's efforts
to reopen the federal government, saying, "This is a major step
forward."

      In addition, Senate Budget Chairman Domenici, commenting on
the CR said: "I think it's time we do this [...] Most federal
employees are saying they'd like to work to be paid [...] I hope
the House gives serious consideration to this."

      On another front, as public officials continue to feel the
heat from their constituents over the government shutdown, Rep.
Martin Hoke, R-Ohio, Tuesday announced he donated his $11,133
congressional pay for the month of December to 28 northeast Ohio
charities. Hoke in a statement called his decision a "matter of
conscience."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Oxley Wants To Head House Commerce Telco Panel

      There seems to be some dissension in the GOP over who will
chair the House Commerce Telecommunications and Finance
Subcommittee in the next Congress. Last week, newly converted
Republican Rep. W.J. (Billy) Tauzin of Louisiana, in announcing
he will not run for the open Senate seat in his state this year,
also reportedly said he is the anointed chairman-in-waiting for
the subcommittee after its current chairman, Rep. Jack Fields, R-
Texas, retires later this year. But sources Tuesday said Tauzin's
news came as a surprise to the panel's current second-ranking
Republican, Rep. Michael Oxley of Ohio. "Mr. Oxley intends to be
the next chair of the telecommunications subcommittee," said
Peggy Peterson, his spokeswoman, adding, "He is currently the
vice chairman, and he is pursuing the chairmanship."

      Tauzin last week told reporters Speaker Gingrich promised
him the Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee chairmanship
in the next Congress. When he switched parties, the Republican
leadership agreed to retain Tauzin's seniority in the House.
Tauzin said he would not usurp a "sitting" chairman. In his ninth
congressional term, Tauzin has four years on Oxley and two years
on Commerce Chairman Bliley.

      Asked if Oxley had discussed the matter with Gingrich,
Peterson had no comment. However, she said: "Mr. Oxley does not
think that Republicans are the party of seniority. Seniority is
only one factor in picking a chair."

      Ever since Tauzin made his remarks, sources on and off
Capitol Hill have speculated about whether the reports were
accurate and, if so, why the speaker would make such a deal.

      Some close to the matter said Gingrich hoped Tauzin's plum
spot would lure other senior Democrats over to the GOP, and
strengthen the Republican position in the House.

      The speaker's office did not return several inquiries from
CongressDaily Tuesday.

      Technically, under House Rule 19, the speaker does not
appoint subcommittee chairmen, staff noted. The chairman of the
full committee proposes a leadership slate that must be ratified
by the majority members of the committee, they said. The House
Commerce Committee spokesman had no comment on the matter.

      Oxley intends to file for re-election in his district
Friday, according to his staff.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Roberts Seems Reluctant To Extend Food Aid Programs

   House Agriculture Chairman Roberts appears to be resisting
writing an extension of authority for the Food for Peace and Food
for Progress programs, which provide food to poor countries,
including war-torn Bosnia.

      Authority for the two food programs expired Dec. 31, along
with the rest of the 1990 farm bill. The vetoed GOP budget
reconciliation bill would have reauthorized agricultural
programs, including the international food assistance programs,
but the reauthorization has been tied up in the ongoing budget
negotiations.

      A Roberts spokeswoman Tuesday said the Clinton
administration has not "conveyed to us that there is a particular
problem" regarding the two food programs, adding, "Our effort is
strictly working on the balanced budget."

      But a farm organization lobbyist speculated the underlying
reason probably is that Roberts does not want to break out any
pieces of the farm bill reauthorization that are contained in the
budget reconciliation bill.

      Agency for International Development Administrator Brian
Atwood, Agriculture Secretary Glickman and House International
Relations Chairman Gilman have been pushing Roberts to extend the
program since mid-December, when it became apparent no budget
agreement would be reached before the 1990 farm bill expired.

      Atwood and Glickman both wrote Roberts and other Hill
officials Dec. 13 asking for an extension, and Gilman planned to
introduce it before Christmas. However, Roberts insisted on
obtaining another letter from Glickman explaining the situation
was an emergency. The second Glickman letter was held up for
clearance at the White House, but arrived at the House
Agriculture Committee Tuesday morning.

      The letter states that "any lapse in authority could
seriously undermine the ability of the United States to meet the
needs, particularly emergency needs of vulnerable populations,
and to augment food supplies in food-deficit countries."

      Nevertheless, Agriculture Committee staff director Gary
Mitchell Tuesday through a spokeswoman said the letter was not
specific enough to require action.

      Commenting on the turn of events, a House International
Relations Committee staffer Tuesday said: "We felt that there was
so much agreement to go ahead and do this anyway that there
wasn't a need to go through the specific contracts. We're talking
about a program to feed starving people. If they need specifics,
we'll get specifics."

      In addition, Atwood told CongressDaily he does not think
Roberts needs more specifics to act. "I think a request by Dan
Glickman and me citing that OMB has no objections is clarity
enough. We really need the clear support of Congress and need
their authorization to deliver food in emergency circumstances,"
Atwood said. Atwood said he had a good relationship with Roberts
and believes Roberts "is thinking about this not in partisan but
legislative, tactical terms. I think the approach he is taking is
a risky one and I hope that he would reconsider."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A Third Of Calif. Delegation In Play As Filing Closes

     Filing for the March 26 California primary closed late
Friday, and while there will be no megabucks Senate race in the
Golden State this year, there will be competitive races in at
least a third of the state's 52-member House delegation.

      The California congressional elections this year are
complicated by several minor party candidates who are largely
conservative and could draw enough votes away from Republicans to
affect some close races.

      This is the first year the Natural Law Party and Ross
Perot's Reform Party have qualified as official parties, while
the Libertarian Party has fielded candidates in the past.

      For example, Libertarian candidate Ross Crain took 4
percent of the vote against Democratic Rep. Vic Fazio in 1994 and
9 percent against Fazio in 1992; Fazio won only 50 percent of the
vote in 1994, and 51 percent in 1992, while the GOP nominees and
Crain divided the conservative vote in the Sacramento area seat.

      As a chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, Fazio is one
of the GOP's top House targets this year. But Republicans could
encounter a bitter primary battle for the right to oppose Fazio
between 1994 nominee Tim LeFever, a conservative, and Esparto
school board member Charles Schaupp, a moderate.

      The LeFever-Schaupp ideological battle has split GOP
central committees in two of the district's counties, resulting
in attempts to remove people from those panels.

      While Fazio is the GOP's most prominent California target,
his is but one of up to eight Democratic-held seats being eyed by
the Republicans.

      In the San Fernando Valley north of Los Angeles, where
Democratic Rep. Anthony Beilenson is retiring, Richard Sybert, a
former aide to Gov. Pete Wilson, is expected to emerge as the
winner of a three-way GOP primary.

      Sybert, who owns a toy manufacturing company and can tap
into his family fortune, spent $1.6 million in 1994 to win 48
percent against Beilenson.

      Leading a field of five Democrats is Brad Sherman, who has
twice won elections to represent the Los Angeles area on the
state's four-member tax board. Sherman also has family wealth on
which to rely.

      On the southern side of the Los Angeles area, Democratic
Rep. Jane Harman faces the prospect of a rematch against 1994 GOP
nominee Susan Brooks, who lost to Harman by a mere 812 votes.
After the election, Brooks pursued a legal challenge claiming
election irregularities, including that illegal aliens voted.

      Torrance businessman and physician Irwin Savodnik has filed
to challenge Brooks in the primary.

      Another prime GOP target is Democratic Rep. George Brown,
ranking member of the Science Committee, who edged GOP candidate
Robert Guzman by just 51-49 in 1994. Guzman is again seeking the
GOP nod, but so are four other candidates. Widely regarded as the
front-runner in the primary is Linda Wilde, a state Superior
Court judge who has taken a leave of absence to run.

      Included in the next tier of GOP targets are two
conservative Democrats from the state's Central Valley, Reps.
Gary Condit and Calvin Dooley, as well as two northern California
liberals, Reps. Sam Farr and Anna Eshoo.

      Three Republicans have signed up to challenge Farr, who
holds White House Chief of Staff Panetta's former House seat. The
would-be nominees against Farr, who won just 52 percent in 1994,
include Santa Cruz County Farm Bureau Director Jess Brown.

      Eshoo appears more secure: She was re-elected with 61
percent in a difficult year for Democrats. Her 1994 opponent, Ben
Brink, is one of two candidates seeking the GOP nod this year.

      Challenging Condit, a leader of The Coalition, will be
Republican Bill Conrad, a general contractor who has never held
elective office. Condit won his 1994 race by a 2-1 margin,
although GOP nominees for governor and senator won the district.

      Three Republicans are contending for the right to oppose
Dooley, who won 57 percent in 1994. The GOP front-runner is
Assemblyman Trice Harvey, who reportedly did not want to run
against Dooley, but opted to do so because the state's term
limits law is forcing him out of the California Assembly.

      At the southern end of the state, Republicans also think
they may have a shot against San Diego-based Rep. Robert Filner.
While three Republicans have filed for the nomination, local
observers feel Filner is in greater jeopardy in the Democratic
primary.

      San Diego Councilman Juan Vargas, a Democrat who lost to
Filner in a crowded primary in 1992, is running again. Vargas'
assets include a Harvard degree and a Hispanic background in a
district that is 40 percent Hispanic.

      For the Democrats, the targets include three GOP freshmen:
Reps. Frank Riggs, Andrea Seastrand, and Brian Bilbray.

      Riggs, who represents a district that stretches from north
of San Francisco to the Oregon border, first won the seat in
1990, lost it in 1992, and regained it in 1994. Former Democratic
Rep. Dan Hamburg, who lost to Riggs last time out, opted not to
run again this year.

      There are a half-dozen contenders in the Democratic primary
for Riggs' seat, with the three leading contenders including two
recent immigrants from San Francisco. They are Carol Ruth Silver,
a former member of the San Francisco Board of Supervisors who
moved into the district last year, and Michela Alioto, a daughter
of former San Francisco Mayor Joseph Alioto and, until recently,
an aide to Vice President Gore.

      The third major contender is attorney Monica Marvin. She is
backed by state Sen. Mike Thompson, who was the Democrats' first
choice to take on Riggs.

      In the Santa Barbara area, Seastrand will face a rematch
against Democrat Walter Holden Capps, whom she defeated by just
1,500 votes in 1994. And in San Diego, three Democrats are vying
to take on Bilbray. But Democratic prospects there received a
setback just days before the filing deadline when former Rep.
Lynn Schenk, who lost to Bilbray in 1994, announced she would not
run again.

      The leading contender in the three-way Democratic primary
is University of California at Irvine professor Peter Navarro,
who hosts a local talk show. But Navarro carries political
baggage from unsuccessful runs for supervisor and mayor. Also
running is small business owner Nancy Casady, who has ties to
some leading state Democrats.

      The Democrats also are eyeing the open seat of retiring GOP
Rep. Carlos Moorhead in the Los Angeles area and the Long Beach-
based district of GOP Rep. Stephen Horn.

      Two Democrats have filed to take on Horn: 1994 primary
candidate and professor Peter Matthews, and attorney Rick Zbur.
Horn won in 1994 with 58 percent, but won with only 49 percent in
1992.

      Assemblyman James Rogan is the leading GOP contender for
Moorhead's seat, while the Democrats will have tough primary
battle between Douglas Kahn, a wealthy businessman who was
Moorhead's 1992 and 1994 opponent, and Barry Gordon, an actor and
former president of the Screen Actors Guild.

      In the second tier of Democratic targets are GOP Reps.
Richard Pombo and Sonny Bono. Pombo likely will face Democrat
Jason Silva, a public relations consultant, in the Stockton area
seat. Former radio personality and retired businesswoman Anita
Rufus has filed for the Democratic nod against Bono in the Palm
Springs-based district. Meawhile, 10 Democrats have entered the
special election to succeed Democratic Rep. Walter Tucker, who
resigned last month following his conviction on federal bribery
and tax evasion charges.

      The special primary will coincide with the March 26
primary. If no candidate for the open seat receives more than 50
percent, a runoff will be held. The Los Angeles area district is
three-quarters black and Hispanic and is overwhelmingly
Democratic.

      The leading Democrats in the race include Assembly members
Willard Murray and Juanita McDonald, Lynwood Mayor Paul Richards,
Compton Mayor Omar Bradley and Compton City Clerk Charles Davis,
as well as Tucker's wife, Robin, who has operated a youth
training center.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

81 Republicans Oppose Deal That Trims $245B Tax Cut

      A group of 81 Republican senators and House members, as
well as one House Democrat, has sent a letter to President
Clinton, House Speaker Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Dole
vowing to oppose any final budget deal that has less than the
$245 billion in tax cuts contained in the budget reconciliation
bill vetoed by Clinton. "We urge you to support a plan that
provides real tax relief for families and economic growth for
small businesses and that balances the budget in seven years; we
also urge you to reject any plan that does not," said the letter,
which was initiated by Rep. David McIntosh, R-Ind., and Sen. Rod
Grams, R-Minn., and released Tuesday. "You can count on our
steadfast opposition to any budget plan that turns its back on
our promises to American families," the members said. The letter,
signed by 52 Republican House members, one House Democrat, Rep.
Ralph Hall of Texas, and 29 GOP senators also said "the
congressionally approved tax relief package must not be
sacrificed at the altar of more spending and a bigger
government." It further contends "tax relief for families is
critical."

      Among those signing the letter were Senate Majority Whip
Lott, Senate Banking Chairman D'Amato and Sen. Phil Gramm of
Texas, who was the only GOP senator seeking the presidency to
sign the letter.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

No Senate Votes Slated This Week

      No roll call votes are planned in the Senate this week or
next week unless there is significant movement in budget
negotiations which would require floor action, Senate Majority
Leader Dole announced Tuesday.

      In a Senate floor statement, Dole added that senators will
have ample warning to return to Washington if votes are called
for any reason.

      Today at noon, both the House and Senate are slated to
officially begin the second session of the 104th Congress.

      Votes are expected in the House today, Thursday and Friday,
according to the House GOP cloakroom recorded message for
members.

      The House this week may take up an override of President
Clinton's vetoes of the FY96 Defense authorization legislation
and FY96 Commerce-Justice-State, Interior and VA-HUD
appropriations bills.

      An override attempt also is possible in the House this week
on welfare reform legislation if it is vetoed by Clinton, as the
president promised before Christmas.

      In addition, a bill to permit states to operate national
parks at their own expense during the federal government shutdown
also may be brought to the House floor.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Pressler Urges Quick Passage Of Th Telco Bill

      In an effort to keep up the momentum for passage of
telecommunications reform legislation, Senate Commerce Chairman
Pressler Tuesday issued a statement urging his colleagues to act
quickly to approve a conference agreement. "Congress should put
telecommunications reform first on its list of New Year's
legislative resolutions," Pressler said. House Speaker Gingrich
during a Capitol Hill press conference last Thursday said he "was
going to ask [Senate Majority Leader] Dole probably to have a
meeting on Wednesday with the leading members on the House and
Senate Republican side to go over the [telecommunications] bill."
Gingrich added, "Both of us had expressed some interest, some
concern, about some pieces of the bill." In addition, sources
earlier Tuesday said Dole and Gingrich were expected to try to
iron out a final compromise on four or five outstanding issues in
the telecommunications bill at a joint House-Senate leadership
meeting this morning. However, Dole's office and House Commerce
Committee aides late Tuesday said no such meeting on the
telecommunications legislation had been scheduled for today.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Senators Object To Proposed Regulations On Tobacco

      A group of 32 senators, led by Sens. Jesse Helms, R-N.C.,
and Wendell Ford, D-Ky., Tuesday signed a comment to the FDA
strongly objecting to the agency's proposal to regulate the sale
and advertising of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco. "Congress
has not given FDA either `clear direction' or any authority to
regulation tobacco," the senators said. Tuesday was the deadline
for public comment on the FDA proposal, which is designed to
prevent teenagers from taking up cigarette smoking and tobacco
chewing. The tobacco industry submitted several thousand pages of
documents opposing FDA regulation and denying that nicotine is
addictive. The senators in their comment declared, "While we
stand steadfastly against tobacco use by minors, we strenuously
object to FDA's effort to expand its jurisdiction and the federal
bureaucracy in dealing with a problem that Congress has already
designated to the states." The senators said Congress in 1992
decided that states should address tobacco use by minors when it
required each state to implement a program to keep minors from
obtaining tobacco products. Congress has denied FDA the authority
to regulate tobacco, the senators added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

NRSC Files Complaint Against Wyden Senate Campaign

      The National Republican Senatorial Committee has filed a
complaint with the FEC alleging irregularities in the Senate
campaign of Rep. Ron Wyden, D-Ore. The complaint, dated last
Thursday, said the AFL-CIO and the National Abortion and
Reproductive Rights Action League "are about to violate federal
election law in the Oregon Special Election by making a series of
massive illegal independent expenditures they have improperly
coordinated with the Wyden for Senate campaign and its agents."
The complaint requested the FEC make an "immediate determination"
that the AFL-CIO is illegally subsidizing the Wyden campaign with
"an unusually large number of political operatives" and that the
AFL-CIO and NARAL are prohibited from making independent
expenditures on behalf of Wyden because the groups are "not
legally independent" from the campaign. The Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Committee termed the complaint is "superficial" and "an
attempt to shift focus from [GOP candidate Gordon Smith's] dismal
business and political record." Wyden and Smith are seeking the
seat of former GOP Sen. Bob Packwood in a Jan. 30 special
election.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Majority In State Believes Thurmon Should Not Seek Re-election

      In a new South Carolina poll, almost 60 percent of likely
GOP primary voters believe 93-year-old Senate Armed Services
Chairman Thurmond should not seek another term. The survey,
conducted for The State newspaper by Mason-Dixon Opinion
Research, found 59 percent believe Thurmond should not seek
another term, while 33 percent feel he should. And while 44
percent said they would vote for Thurmond in a primary, 56
percent said they would consider someone else. In a matchup
against former Gov. Carroll Campbell and Secretary of State Jim
Miles, Thurmond led Campbell by just 40-37 percent, within the
survey's 4.7 point error margin. Miles was at 8 percent. In a
head-to-head with Thurmond, Miles trailed 53-26. Campbell told
The State he will not run against Thurmond, while Miles
sidestepped questions about challenging Thurmond. The poll of 472
likely primary voters was conducted Dec. 26-27.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Durbin Camp Seeks To get Primary Foe Off The Ballot

      Rep. Richard Durbin, D-Ill., who is seeking his party's
Senate nomination in the March primary, is hoping to get a
little-known, but well-heeled, foe off the primary ballot. Durbin
last week lodged objections to more than 90 percent of the
petition signatures filed by Chicago attorney Clinton Krislov,
and asked state officials to bar Krislov from the ballot, the
Chicago Tribune reported. An attorney for the Durbin campaign
said volunteers had cross-checked signatures on Krislov's
petitions with voter lists, and had found thousands that did not
match. Krislov, who made a fortune by representing plaintiffs in
class action suits, termed the allegations "outrageous," while
adding, "I'm almost flattered that [Durbin] recognizes the impact
I'm going to have on this race." Krislov has said he will dip
into personal funds to bankroll his campaign. There are four
other Democratic contenders, including former state Treasurer
Patrick Quinn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>