
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-25</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033322 text/html 72239
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:31:17 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:59 GMT
Content-length: 72052
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>** FROM THE ALERT **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>WHAT'S IN THIS ISSUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** LEAD ARTICLE **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>EDGAR Update: The Proliferation of Commercial Products&nbsp;By Bonnie Fox Schwartz</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2833 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** FOR YOUR INFORMATION **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Items on Legal Tech, IAC, Matthew Bender & Folio, Lawyers Coop & Shepard's&nbsp;Personnel, CCH Sold, Thomson Acquisitions, RIA Group, Legal Info&nbsp;Management, Marquis Who's Who Lawsuit, Where to Get SEC Documents, AND MORE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1468 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** THE FRUGAL LIBRARIAN **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>By Michael Saint-Onge -- Items on Internet Time Charges, Good Industry&nbsp;Magazines, Owning Two Treatise Sets, Time Wasters, CD Recycling, Employee&nbsp;Incentives, CLE Information Publication</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(994 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** NEW PUBLICATIONS **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Publishers' addresses and telephone numbers are listed in the "PUBLISHERS"&nbsp;department.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>EMPLOYMENT LAW --&nbsp;Privacy in Employment Law</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(422 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>EMPLOYMENT LAW --&nbsp;Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(626 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT --&nbsp;ELR: The Environmental Law Reporter</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(326 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>HEALTH LAW --&nbsp;When Life Ends: Legal Overviews, Medicolegal Forms, and Hospital Policies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(457 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --&nbsp;BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(471 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --&nbsp;Legal Research Guide to Mechanical Patent Litigation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --&nbsp;Software and Intellectual Property Protection:&nbsp;Copyright and Patent Issues for Computer and Legal Professionals</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(604 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>INTERNATIONAL & FOREIGN LAW --&nbsp;European Union Law Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(489 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>TAXATION --&nbsp;OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** CALENDAR **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Seminar and show dates for law librarians.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** PUBLISHERS **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>The following is the contact information for items reviewed in this issue.&nbsp;Please mention the ALERT when inquiring about them.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

WHAT'S IN THIS ISSUE

I can't believe that this is the start of our 15th year! Little did I think
that U.S. Law Library Alert, as it was first design-ed, would evolve into
the LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT of today. When we started, law librarians had
only the AALL newsletter, chapter newsletters, and us. Then Bob Berring
started Legal Reference Services Quarterly, and others followed. Some are
still with us . . . and some have fallen along the wayside.

We are glad to still be here. We love this business--there is always
something new to learn! Do you realize how different legal publishing and
legal research are today from 15 years age? Throughout this coming year we
plan to keep you informed about the coming publishing and research
changes--and we expect lots of them!

Bonnie Fox Schwartz, who writes for both this newsletter and its sister
publication, BUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT, tells us all about EDGAR's current
commercial variations. The choice is yours, but she helps guide you through
the maze.

We hope you read all the reviews in each issue. Sometimes there are ones
worth noting here. Be sure to read Sex Discrimination in the Legal
Profession. Then buy it for your managing partner/administrator/dean.

Finally, a big thank you to our readers, reviewers, authors, publishers,
and advertisers. We couldn't have done it without you! Happy New Year!

--Donna Tuke Heroy
Editor & Publisher



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EDGAR Update: The Proliferation of Commercial Products
By Bonnie Fox Schwartz

On October 1, 1995, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) unveiled
its home page, with access to the EDGAR database as its centerpiece. This
event occurred after the demise of the Town Hall EDGAR site and the offer
by commercial vendors--notably Disclosure and Global Securities
Information--to provide EDGAR access through their Internet home pages to
publicize their value-added products. EDGAR users are now blessed with
several Net sites, as well as a proliferation of related on-line and CD-ROM
products from database producers and document delivery services.

EDGAR, the acronym for Electronic Data Gathering and Retrieval, symbolizes
the vast collection of corporate filings made directly and electronically
to the SEC. With more than 15,000 public companies required by law to
report on such activities as quarterly and annual financials, stock
ownership changes, and securities offerings; the SEC, by the 1980s, was
literally flooded with documents. Therefore, in a move toward a paperless
world, an effort was launched to automate the process of filing, reviewing,
and disseminating SEC information.

Voluntary participants engaged in a pilot project in 1984; and after eight
years, the fully operational system was launched in 1992. By August 1995,
when two additional groups were phased in, approximately 6,500 registrants
were EDGAR filers. All companies will be required to file electronically by
May 1996. Without EDGAR, the SEC would stagger under 10 million pages a
year.

With the full functioning of EDGAR almost accomplished, debate now centers
on how to make this electronic data accessible to the public. Even though
all the information is supposed to be available without cost, the data
exists on the SEC database only in the form of gigabytes, raw numbers, and
ASCII text.

The SEC initially chose Mead Data Central (now Lexis-Nexis since its
acquisition by Reed-Elsevier) to handle the dissemination of EDGAR
information to interested parties on a wholesale basis. (Mead also enjoyed
the contract to develop the initial EDGAR database.) Under this agreement,
the SEC would receive only microfiche copies of the filings, with Mead
retaining the electronic records and providing terminals for the public in
SEC reading rooms in Washington, New York, Chicago, and other regional
offices.

While Mead constructed the "back end" of this system, Compu-Serve won the
communications contract, which includes the receipt and notification of
EDGAR filings to companies. With EDGAR Link, registrants can file online
through CompuServe's network or via a direct connection to the SEC.

The EDGAR database has proven a daily necessity to a variety of
professionals, including attorneys, investment analysts, management
consultants, accountants, librarians, and information brokers. Since each
of these groups has specific needs, retailers of SEC filings compete to
provide products that access and search EDGAR filings easily and
efficiently. Each commercial vendor repackages and formats the electronic
data, in the process adding different software interfaces and search
engines to ease the retrieval process and make the information usable. In
addition, these competitors offer other products, integrated with EDGAR
data, to enhance the information and its presentation.

In the past, EDGAR "updates" consisted of endless recitals of statistical
charts detailing how many companies were electronic filers, how many
records were in the database, and phasing in schedules with future
projections. Now that three out of four companies file electronically, with
all expected to be computerized this year, an appropriate EDGAR update is
an overview of commercial EDGAR products as well as EDGAR on the Internet.
In addition, while law librarians, paralegals, and attorneys who use EDGAR
data share many priorities with accountants, investment analysts, and other
professionals, information needs peculiar to the legal environment will be
the focus here in evaluating EDGAR products.

Everyone insists on timeliness and accuracy: How quickly are the filings
posted? Are the companies listed correctly and in a standardized format?
Are tender offers and other ownership-related filings listed by target or
bidder/owner? Beyond these basics, users must always remember that the
EDGAR universe is not the complete world of SEC filings. Foreign issuers,
sovereigns, initial public offerings, and certain forms (like 20Fs,
Schedule Bs, 6Ks, ADVs, TAs) are not yet electronically filed. Likewise,
EDGAR documents cannot always include graphs and other visual materials.
Historical filings also are not on EDGAR. When a complete list of documents
is required, such limitations must be considered.

Searching capabilities are also crucial, whether the question involves a
particular corporation or precedent research. How easily can a company's
stock purchase agreements be located or can examples of specific types of
contracts with particular language be easily found? Can sections and pages
be quickly located, saved to disk, and printed out in customized reports?
This review will address such issues.

====================
Moody's Company Data

Moody's Investors Service, owned by Dun & Brad-street, offers EDGAR in
conjunction with its Company Data database. This product combines detailed,
descriptive information on companies (from the Manuals) with SEC filings on
EDGAR. One can search Moody's Company Data for more than 10,000 public
corporations and simultaneously access EDGAR filings on CD-ROMs. Moody's
EDGAR discs contain the full ASCII text of all mandated filings since
August 1993. Multi-font, multi-column printouts can be customized, and the
data can be directly downloaded to spreadsheet programs.

Features that enhance the accessibility of Moody's EDGAR files include:
searching by word or phrase with an EDGAR document; reviewing the index by
company name, filing, or file date; section and exhibit jumping; cutting
and pasting; and integrating document printouts with the Company Data
database. Moody's proprietary MoodEASE software allows searching by 160
variables including word, phrase, and financials. The program also enables
sorting by variables as well as peer group analysis. Printing options
reduce the number of pages as well as save on cost, volume, and time, with
an optional dual-column compressed print function.

Moody's also is filling the gaps both for pre-EDGAR historical filings and
for the most recent documents electronically filed after the last CD-ROM
was pressed. For old paper documents, Moody's promises to add the Workload
Index, a compendium of all filings with a computerized-link order form for
hard copies (those not available electronically) from Docutronics, Moody's
recently purchased subsidiary specializing in document delivery. For the
latest EDGAR filings, Moody's offers EDGAR Edge, a real-time dedicated
server with unlimited access, monitors for watches, word search capability
across all EDGAR documents, and additional indexes and tags.

Moody's presents a handsome, comprehensive package, especially for those
who have not previously invested in a large CD-ROM collection. Its Company
Data database, combined with EDGAR filings, covers a broad range of
business and financial information needs; and Moody's also offers other
discs on foreign companies--an attractive supplement. When anticipated
products are in place and all SEC filings are EDGARized, Moody's will be a
formidable competitor in the EDGAR arena.

===========================
Global Securities' LIVEDGAR

LIVEDGAR, produced by GSI Online, a division of Global Securities
Information, Inc., provides real-time, dial-up access to EDGAR filings,
with documents available as soon as they are filed. Although GSI Online
connects to the database via a dedicated line, its on-demand dial-up
service is a cost-effective means of obtaining EDGAR filings from any
personal computer with a modem.

LIVEDGAR is a Windows-based, menu-driven system, that enables searching of
filings in the entire EDGAR universe, since April 10, 1993. LIVEDGAR is
also the only commercial source at present to research the text of unusual
filings like S6s (unit investment trusts), mutual fund documents on N2 or
N1A, and other unfamiliar forms.

One can access the database by company name, SEC file number, or by
example. After a company name or file number is entered, a list of
documents appears. Once a particular document is selected, the user has the
option to search for a word or string of terms within the document. The
split screen--a convenient search feature--provides the filings list along
with a glimpse of the full-text with the term(s) highlighted.

Searching by example offers a choice of fields, including form, date
ranges, state of incorporation, stock exchange, SIC code, and free-text
terms. This capability over the entire EDGAR database makes LIVEDGAR an
excellent resource for precedents. When the search is completed, a list of
documents is generated, again with a split screen that gives a partial view
of the full-text with the search term(s) highlighted.

LIVEDGAR's printing capabilities have pluses and minuses. Exhibits are
always separated for easy access and printing of specific items. But if an
entire document is desired, a worksheet must be called up on a separate
menu, and a cover page is generated for each exhibit.

While LIVEDGAR is cost-effective, easy to use, and opens doors to filings
heretofore unsearchable, Global Securities does not fill the non-EDGAR gaps
with additional products. They must be supplemented by a competitor's
offerings for the complete documents picture.

==========================================================
Disclosure's Access Disclosure, Laser D II, and EDGAR PLUS

Disclosure Inc.--historically a supplier of SEC paper filings on microfiche
and CD-ROM--has now integrated EDGAR into its product offerings, with
Access Disclosure, EDGAR PLUS, and Laser D II.

Access Disclosure (formerly known as Electronic Company Filing Index or
ECFI) lists all documents available via Disclosure. While its major purpose
is to facilitate ordering, Access Disclosure also can serve as a research
tool because it integrates the EDGAR filings with the paper documents as
well as a range of non-SEC materials (like stock exchange listing
applications, annual reports of foreign companies, Euro prospectuses, and
Canadian filings) all into a single list by company, which dates back to
1968. EDGAR filings are clearly noted and can be viewed and printed from
the same computer terminal. Documents are not textually searchable on
Access Disclosure, however, although sections and exhibits are broken out
for selective printing. The first page of EDGAR documents is supposed to be
available for viewing free of charge, as a check for accuracy, but this
screen is frequently blank.

For specific document and precedent research Disclosure has introduced
EDGAR PLUS for word searching EDGAR filings. This CD-ROM product is updated
monthly. EDGAR PLUS is a full-text, value-added database of EDGAR filings
that includes extracts of non-electronic SEC documents. The composite of
information allows menu searching on Disclosure's 300 fields and format
tags, keyword searching, and displays of specific categories without wading
through entire documents. EDGAR PLUS features also are integrated into
Disclosure's Laser D II, which supports its formatting and navigational
tags for electronic filings on its laser discs.

Because of Disclosure's long prominence in SEC document delivery,
subscribers are familiar with its products and coverage and can adapt
easily to the new EDGAR product offerings. No other service, at present,
can match the retrospective coverage in the filing index, combined with
foreign company and sovereign filings, as well as non-SEC documents. Those
familiar with Compact D SEC and Compact D New Issues, will have no problem
using EDGAR PLUS, but may hesitate to rely on yet another disc, when
alternative online competitive products are available.

===============================
EDGAR PLUS on Lexis and Westlaw

Both the Lexis and Westlaw databases have contracts with Disclosure to
offer EDGAR PLUS. Since law firms subscribe to these providers and legal
information searchers are familiar with these systems, this convenient
access to electronic SEC filings provides a comfortable alternative.
However, users need to be aware of the currency of the filings as well as
the extent of the coverage. At present, periodic EDGAR filings (10Ks,
proxies, 8Ks) are searchable full-text, but the Williams Act filings
(tender offers) will be phased in.

Again, searchers must realize that not all companies are EDGAR filers, and
certain registration statements (like initial public offerings) are not yet
filed electronically. In the EDGAR PLUS files, all exhibits included with
the document are available online separately. Those documents filed prior
to September 1994, however, include only selected exhibits. While these
products have the advantage of familiar search commands, they do not cover
the complete EDGAR picture.

=============================
Federal Filings' EDGAR Direct

Produced by Federal Filings, Inc., a Dow Jones company, EDGAR Direct
provides real-time online access to SEC electronic filings the instant they
are available. EDGAR Direct is received through a dedicated line, as
opposed to a dial-up service. Windows-based software uses the "find"
command to search for particular documents and cut-and-clip sections;
converts to word processing or spreadsheet programs; downloads directly to
a network or e-mailbox; and manipulates fonts and text sizes. Searching can
be done by company name and file form, with the ability to create profiles
to filter out desired documents. Generated lists of filings can be grouped
by all, mergers and deals, high yield, or convertibles; and they can be
viewed simultaneously with specific filings sorted into appropriate
windows.

EDGAR Direct promises additional search capabilities in the future, such as
by ticker symbol, SIC code, and other fields. Most customers run the system
all day long so users are aware as soon as documents are filed. Such real-
time access is especially useful for investment analysts who need EDGAR
information instantaneously.

=====================
EDGAR on the Internet

The availability of the EDGAR database on the Internet marks the final
realization of Progressive Era and New Deal securities legislation
sponsors, who envisioned that public disclosure of company information
would enable investors to make prudent decisions. When the SEC awarded Mead
the contract to develop EDGAR and disseminate the data on a wholesale
basis, public-interest groups demanded free access to this information.
Jamie Love, of Ralph Nader's Taxpayer Assets Project (TAP), who has lobbied
for years to make publicly funded government data available, considers the
SEC EDGAR database one of the "crown jewels."

Ed. note: For background information, see the January 1995 issue of LEGAL
INFORMATION ALERT, a special guide featuring "Assault on the Citadel:
Romancing the Crown Jewels of West Publishing."

At the same time, Carl Malamud, who formed the Internet Multicasting
Service (IMS), in October 1993 teamed up with New York University on a two-
year National Science Foundation grant, to make EDGAR available on the
Internet. With additional support from corporations like Sun Microsystems,
HarperCollins, Persoft, and UUNET Technologies, the project was supervised
by NYU's Stern School of Business, while the database management was
subcontracted to IMS, who made EDGAR available on its Town Hall Internet
site (http://www.town.hall.org).

The Town Hall project provided a variety of mechanisms to access the EDGAR
database, from low-end and e-mail interfaces to high-end Mosaic
connections. This Internet EDGAR Dissemination Project allowed users to
obtain electronic filings made since 1994 on a "day-delayed" basis. Search
capabilities as well as printing options were not as sophisticated as
commercial products, but for the individual user or small information
center, the cost only amounted to basic Internet provisions.

With the end of the grant and the Town Hall project on October 1st, the SEC
inaugurated its home page on the Internet (http://www.sec.gov) with access
to the EDGAR database. Since this server is "under construction" at the
time of this writing and is expected to undergo changes over the next few
months, I will describe the menus offered.

The SEC Internet site enables retrieval of 1994 and 1995 electronic filings
available to the public. The service has two types of access: via Web
browsers or via anonymous file transfer protocol (ftp). You can log on as
user "anonymous" with a password consisting of your electronic mail
address. Searchers can use OR, AND, and ADJ, when entering terms, and
results are generated in a list of filings posted by form and in reverse
chronological order. Other retrieval tools include a quick forms lookup,
current events analysis, mutual funds retrieval/prospectus search, Schedule
13D ownership report, and executive compensation test extracted from proxy
(DEF 14A) filings. The prospectus report, for example, gives all "485"
filings pertaining to mutual funds of choice.

While the SEC Internet site appears to offer an equivalent replacement for
Town Hall (including a trade off between limited search capabilities and
low cost) two commercial vendors also offer access to EDGAR through their
home pages. Disclosure entered into an agreement with New York University
to continue providing full access to EDGAR by allowing NYU to maintain its
Web site without interruption. NYU can be accessed directly
(http://EDGAR.stern .nyu.edu) or through a link from Disclosure's home page
(http://www.disclosure.com). Its search menus seem almost identical to the
SEC's home page EDGAR site. At the same time, Global Securities offers free
real-time access to LIVEDGAR via its home page (http://www.gsionline.com),
although this service is a scaled-down version of the commercial product
and must be downloaded to a disk and added to the program manager through a
"special client program".

With EDGAR a reality, SEC information specialists must determine the best
means to access the database, search it, and present the data. Priorities
like currency, coverage, search capabilities, and value-added features
should be considered when choosing EDGAR products to meet your specific
information needs.

--Bonnie Fox Schwartz is a reference librarian in New York City.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Items on Legal Tech, IAC, Matthew Bender & Folio, Lawyers Coop & Shepard's
Personnel, CCH Sold, Thomson Acquisitions, RIA Group, Legal Info
Management, Marquis Who's Who Lawsuit, Where to Get SEC Documents, AND MORE

By Donna Tuke Heroy

==========
Legal Tech

In November of 1995, I attended the Legal Tech show, which is sponsored by
Price Waterhouse. Held three times a year, it is clearly a marketing
vehicle for Price Waterhouse's legal technology consulting department.
Legal Tech differs from other technology-related shows in that it targets
large law firms as its primary market.

There were more research-oriented presentations than at previous Price
Waterhouse Legal Tech shows, and the sessions I attended were uneven in
quality. Sabrini I. Pacifici from Sidley & Austin's Washington, D.C. office
gave an excellent presentation on the use of technology in law libraries.
In "New Legal Research Tools," Professor J.C. Smith, a Canadian legal
theorist, attempted to explain FlexLaw, a product whose object is to
automate the management of legal information based on linguistic
connections between words. I'm at a loss to explain what this system adds
to the online landscape.

Another presentation by a partner at Baker & McKenzie, titled "Going
Online: Electronic Research by Trial Lawyers," was a thinly veiled overview
of what's new on Lexis.

More electronic legal research products were exhibited than at previous
shows. Lexis-Nexis is focusing on its Office product (which we will be
reviewing) in many of its trade show appearances. West Publishing Company
demonstrated its West Legal Network, which is still in beta testing and
also will be reviewed in LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT.

The Microsoft Network (MSN), a new commercial online service available as a
fee-based option to Windows 95 users, introduced its new Law Office
product. In the coming months MSN will be looking for partners to help
build its online venture. One of the first services to be offered is
Platinum Pages, a global collection of online directories of attorneys,
legal experts, and vendors.

The exhibits at this show are always worthwhile, but given the lack of
quality I witnessed in many of the presentations, I cannot recommend paying
the high fee to attend the seminar portion. Pre-registrants may view the
exhibits for free; otherwise, there is a fee ($20) at the door. For
information about future Legal Tech dates, contact PW Corporate
Presentations, 212-877-5619.

==========
IAC Update

Many readers have asked when our newsletters will be available on
Information Access Company's Newsletter Database. As you may know, the
ALERT signed the agreement to do so over a year ago. One issue of BUSINESS
INFORMATION ALERT was formatted and sent electronically. However, it was
not completely loaded by IAC onto its database, nor was it loaded in a
manner acceptable to the ALERT.

I felt that this was unethical. We have asked IAC representatives to reload
that issue in its entirety and as originally formatted. As soon as we are
able to independently confirm that our newsletter is electronically
represented on Information Access' Newsletter Database as we originally
intended it to be, we will commence formatting and sending future ALERT
newsletters.

In the meantime, both LEGAL INFORMATION and BUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT are
still available on NewsNet and can be retrieved for an extremely fair
price: $5 for an article (usually an entire article or review) and $20 for
the whole issue. The ALERT is seriously looking for additional online
outlets for our publications. If you have suggestions about where you would
like to see our publications, please let us know.

================================
Matthew Bender Converts to Folio

Abandoning its proprietary CD-ROM search-and-retrieval software, Matthew
Bender is converting its CD-ROM Practice Libraries to Folio, the industry
standard. By the time you read this 18 Practice Libraries should be
converted. This was one of the first things that MB's new CEO, Katherine
Downing, ordered when she joined the company in September 1995.

For more information on Matthew Bender products call 800-223-1940. For more
information on Folio, see our September 1995 article, "Folio Corporation Is
Improving Your Future," written by Kevin Miles of Haynes & Boone.

=================
Personnel Changes

Erik J. Heels has joined American Lawyer Media as Director of Internet
Product Development. He came from Lawyers Cooperative where he served as
Internet Systems architect. Heels is well known for The Legal List,
published for several years on the Internet and, most recently, in print
format as The Legal List, Internet Desk Reference, Law-Related Resources on
the Internet and Elsewhere from Lawyers Cooperative.

Gary Spivey has been promoted to Vice-President, Electronic Product
Development at Shepard's/McGraw-Hill. He was previously in charge of
citations development.

============
Merger Mania

CCH has been acquired by Wolters Kluwer for the sum of $1.9 billion. This
was a surprise to many law librarians. We hope that the incredibly high
price paid in the merger will not result in higher prices for CCH products.

Thomson Corporation is on a buying spree. Thomson Legal Publishing (TLP)
has acquired the topical products and other non-citation legal information
products from Shepard's/McGraw Hill. This includes some 270 print titles,
23 desktop codes, and 30 software products.

Librarians will be hearing from Thomson in a letter introducing the new
publisher. However, during the first quarter of 1996, servicing will be
done by a Shepard's transition team. Products will be divided as follows:
specialty titles to Clark Boardman Callaghan, state-specific titles to
Lawyers Cooperative Publishing or Bancroft-Whitney, and tax titles to a new
RIA Group (see below). Interestingly, Brian Hall, current president of
Thomson Legal Publishing used to be with Shepard's/McGraw Hill.

Thomson, through its Bancroft-Whitney division, has acquired Legal
Solutions Inc., a publisher of California-specific computer generated legal
forms. Recently Thomson also agreed to work with the Association of Trial
Lawyers of America to develop legal research products for trial lawyers.
These products will include national and state-specific print and
electronic products.

=======================
Thomson Forms Tax Group

Thomson Corporation has formed the Research Institute of America Group (RIA
Group), which is comprised of the former Research Institute of America,
Practitioners Publishing Company, and Warren Gorham & Lamont. Euan Menzies
who has been president of RIA for the past two years was appointed
president and CEO of this new group, which will focus on the tax and
accounting information markets. RIA Group parallels Thomson Legal
Publishing, and both groups report to the Thomson Financial and
Professional Publishing Group.

Visit RIAWeb at http://www.riatax.com for weekly tax news.

==================================
Legal Info Management Reports Sold

Legal Information Management Reports has been sold to Library Specialists,
Inc., of Marietta, Ga., which will continue the title starting with Volume
8, 1996. This is the first newsletter venture of Library Specialists, a
library research and management firm.

President Jane Miller says, "The purchase of such a well-respected
publication is a natural addition to the information services provided by
our company. Our goal is for our clients to be able to obtain all their
information needs from one source."

Future topics to be covered include an update on copyright issues and using
commercial online services. Back issues also will be available from Library
Specialists. For more information contact Susan Flugman at 800-578-6200, e-
mail libspec@ic.netcom .com or 71501.3431@compuserve.com.

===============================
Marquis Who's Who vs. Who's Who

Are you confused by mailings from a company called Who's Who Worldwide
Registry, Inc.? Don't worry. A federal court for the Second Circuit Court
of Appeals in New York has affirmed an award of money damages of more than
$1.6 million to the real McCoy, Marquis Who's Who. Ironically, Who's Who
Worldwide Registry, from Lake Success, N.Y., has declared bankruptcy.

===================
Need SEC Documents?

After you've read this month's lead article on the variety of EDGAR
products springing up, note this additional source for SEC products: FDR
InfoCenters. In the past, researchers had to go to Disclosure, FDR's parent
company. The change was made to convenience FDR customers.

Look for other new products from FDR, including a biweekly fax newsletter
(free to clients) called FDR Facts. For more information on FDR
InfoCenters, call 800-874-4337.

============
Briefs . . .

The 1996 Directory of Law-Related CD-ROMs contains more than 1,000 titles.
Macintosh-based products have increased dramatically too. Contact 201-836-
7072.

IN SITE: New Internet Site Additions: A Current Awareness Fortnightly for
the Information Professional--this succinct Internet newsletter identifies
sites of interest to librarians. Arranged by topic, the newsletter lists
the site name and address. For a copy, send an e-mail message to the
editor, Gary Price at Libref@aol.com asking to be added to the list. At
this time the list is free.

A survey of attorneys at leading law firms revealed that keeping pace with
technology is a top priority. As for budget allocations, the largest will
be for high-tech spending. The survey was done by The Affiliates, a
temporary staffing service for lawyers. For more information, call 415-854-
9700.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

By Michael Saint-Onge -- Items on Internet Time Charges, Good Industry
Magazines, Owning Two Treatise Sets, Time Wasters, CD Recycling, Employee
Incentives, CLE Information Publication

===============================
Watch the Clock When on the Net

The Information Superhighway sounds great in theory, doesn't it? The
problem arises when actually trying to locate relevant material when you
need it. For example, if it takes you an hour to find something "for free"
on the Internet, but it was available for a minimal price on one of the
indexed commercial providers, it was not a bargain.

If you know exactly where something is located on the Internet and have
downloaded or printed such material from that site previously, it may be
worth your while to explore the Internet option before turning to
commercial providers. If it is unfamiliar information you need, now is
probably not the time to go exploring new territory--especially if you're
billing your time to the client. Later, after the information has been
passed along to the appropriate party, try looking on the Internet for it.
If you find it, you will know in the future where it is located. Also, when
you have questions about the source or doubts about accuracy, commercial
providers are always your best bet.

===============
Stay Up to Date

To find out what your users are most interested in, glance over magazines
such as ABA Journal, National Law Journal, or local bar association
journals. Since few of us have time to read these periodicals cover-to-
cover, nor do we want to, just scan them to see what topics are important
to your users. This can help alert you to upcoming trends and prepare you
for related questions. It also may help you when a patron asks, "I remember
reading something somewhere about . . ."

=======================
Keep Two Sets in Motion

Can't afford two completely up-to-date sets of a looseleaf treatise? If you
have two sets but stagger under the cost of keeping a second "convenience"
set current, try keeping the superseded pages of one set to interfile in
the older set. The older set then will be only one release behind in
currency, but may still be relied upon for quick reference. Caveat: Mark
the convenience copy prominently, and remind users of the importance of
checking the current set before relying on the information.

======================
Watch for Time Wasters

One of the biggest obstacles to working efficiently can be those subtle
time wasters. Here are some time wasters and ways to deal with them:

1) Being placed on hold. Use the speakerphone while you are on hold so that
you can work on other projects. Once the person on the other end picks up
the receiver, though, you should do the same. Most people feel that using
the speakerphone during one-on-one conversations is pretentious.

2) Friendly interruptions. It is difficult at times to find the proper
balance between being friendly and getting your work done, especially for
reference librarians who want to be available and approachable for work-
related inquiries, but not distracted or interrupted for chatting. If you
are working at your desk, try standing up when it becomes obvious that the
patron does not have a real question but just wants to talk. This often
signals to the individual that the conversation is drawing to a close. If
you are already standing, pick up a file or a book, or even the telephone
receiver. If none of these work, try simply saying, "Well, I guess I should
get back to work."

3) Meetings. Most meetings suffer from a lack of focus, thereby lasting
longer than they need to. Begin with an agenda. Gently bring people back to
the agenda when the conversation begins to wander. Set a clearly defined
time limit and stick to it. Such restrictions can help keep the focus on
the business at hand.

===========
Recycle CDs

If you feel guilty throwing away those superseded CDs, now you have an
option. As reported on law-lib, the listserve for law librarians, Digital
Audio Disc Corporation recycles old CDs. They may be sent to JADCORE, c/o
DADC Recycling Program, 300 N. Fruitridge Ave., Terre Haute, IN 47803.

Please follow these simple guidelines when sending discs for recycling:

*  All shipments must be prepaid and are the responsibility of the sender.

*  Send only the compact discs and plastic jewel cases, no cardboard
containers or other packaging components.

You might want to designate a storage box for superseded compact discs and
mail it off when it gets full rather than mailing one at a time. There are,
of course, postal charges associated with this program, but at least you
know you are doing your part for the environment.

======================
Inexpensive Incentives

The October/November 1995 issue of ALA News (from the Association of Legal
Administrators) suggests some quick and inexpensive gift ideas for
extending kudos to your staff members:

*  items with the institution's logo or name, such as t-shirts, water
bottles, coffee cups, fanny packs
*  movie passes or magazine subscriptions
*  lunch/dinner certificates
*  flowers, cookies, balloons, picture frames
*  free parking for a week or a month
*  time off or casual day
*  individual recognition, such as "Library Staff Member of the Month" on
the library's bulletin board
*  freebies from the AALL Annual Meeting
*  membership in an AALL Special Interest Section.

==========================
Additional CLE Information

In a previous column, I suggested routing MCLE seminar announcement
materials to interested individuals. Mark Carroll of ALI-ABA sent me a copy
of an excellent publication entitled The CLE Journal and Register. This
bimonthly publication lists CLE courses by date, by state, and by subject,
and also includes a listing of CLE Sponsors with addresses and phone
numbers, in addition to articles relevant to CLE issues.

If you oversee the CLE functions in your institution, you will find this
serial very useful. The cost is $75 and subscriptions can be obtained from
ALI-ABA, 4025 Chestnut St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Publishers' addresses and telephone numbers are listed in the "PUBLISHERS"
department.

Prices given are U.S. list prices, exclusive of postage, handling, and
shipping charges. Available discounts are not listed. Contact publisher
representatives for further details on multiple-user pricing and other
options, especially those pertaining to CD-ROMs and computer software.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EMPLOYMENT LAW --
Privacy in Employment Law

Matthew W. Finkin. 1995. BNA Books.
Hardcover. 477p. ISBN: 0-87179-883-2. $110.

Rapid advances in technology have made electronic eavesdropping a
possibility for an ever-increasing number of companies. Global competition
has only intensified long-standing employer interest in hiring the best
possible employees, monitoring their productivity, and ensuring that costs
are kept as low as possible (especially healthcare costs). These
developments have wrought conflict over privacy in the workplace.

For an emerging area of law governed by a tangle of state and federal
statutes, regulations, nonbinding administrative guidance, constitutional
provisions, and common law principles, a fully developed treatise would be
a welcome addition to any labor and employment lawyer's bookshelf.
Unfortunately, this is not the objective of Finkin's Privacy in Employment
Law, nor may it be a realistic ambition given the immaturity of this area
of law. The goal of his work is to offer a set of guideposts through the
maze of privacy rights in the workplace.

Privacy in Employment Law is a three-part work consisting of a primer,
state statutes, and sample business forms. The intended scope of the primer
is ambitious given its brevity. It covers medical, genetic, drug, alcohol,
tobacco and psychological screening; disclosure and access to records;
background and credit checks; monitoring employee performance through
surveillance, electronic interception, and eavesdropping; and employer
control of employee political, religious, and sexual conduct and
expression. Finkin does not seek to develop legal theories for testing the
law in the private employment sector. Nevertheless, because it is such an
unsettled area of the law, an author cannot help but indulge in speculation
on the shape of the law yet to be written.

Part 2 reprints state statutes on polygraph and lie detection, drug
testing, use of tobacco and alcohol, and access to personnel records from
BNA's Individual Employee Rights Manual. Part 3 comprises sample business
forms reprinted from BNA's Policy and Practice Series.

For individual attorneys and small firms with very limited labor and
employment practices, Finkin's Privacy in Employment Law will serve as a
handy and convenient finding tool. However, in these times of tight
budgets, it is not a best buy for libraries that support significant
employment practices and already subscribe to BNA's Policy and Practice
series and Labor Relations Reporter. The cost of this one-volume work is
competitive with the companion volumes published by Wiley, which consists
of Decker's Employee Privacy Law and Practice and Employee Privacy: Forms
and Procedure, but it also is largely duplicative.

--Linda Hauck, Schnader Harrison
Segal & Lewis, Philadelphia



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EMPLOYMENT LAW --
Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession

Bernard F. Lentz & David N. Laband. 1995. Quorum Books.
Hardcover. 256p. ISBN: 0-89930-928-3. $49.95.

Using the 1984 and 1990 National Surveys of Career Satisfaction/Dissatis-
faction administered by the Young Lawyers Division of the ABA, economists
Bernard Lentz and David Laband explore the complex dynamics of sexual
discrimination as experienced by women lawyers. This book is the result of
their effort to reconcile their 1991 study--which showed no significant
differences in salary and promotion between women lawyers and their male
counterparts--with those of two other earlier studies that came to contrary
conclusions.

The authors conclude that the earlier raw numbers showed an income gap
between male and female lawyers that can be explained by reasons other than
discrimination: primarily by the fact that women entered the profession in
large numbers relatively recently and were, therefore, less experienced and
less likely to be partners than men as a group. Because the experience gap
had narrowed by 1990, when Lentz and Laband undertook their study, that
factor had become statistically insignificant.

This book is an extended quantitative analysis of the data produced by the
ABA surveys; therefore, it may be heavy-going for attorneys without the
appropriate background. If nothing else, the book explores the complex
nature of sexual discrimination and demonstrates how little of the picture
can be seen through the simplest, usually evaluated, indicators, namely
earnings and promotions. Although there seems to be no significant
differences between the two groups based on these measures, the ABA surveys
showed a significant difference in the perceptions of the female attorneys.

How can we explain the discrepancy between the hard numbers and the
perceptions of the individuals within the profession? The authors postulate
that because attorneys are familiar with the law on sex discrimination,
they now make sure that there is no disparity on these measures. However,
the authors could not discount the convictions of the women surveyed that
such discrimination is still prevalent. This caused them to move beyond the
data in the surveys and discuss the multitude of ways that sex
discrimination can occur--whether by superiors, coworkers, clients, judges,
or juries.

Covert discrimination breeds intimidation and lack of trust, which causes
women to alter their behavior and thereby give employers the justification
they need to discriminate on performance grounds. The higher percentage of
women in the corporate, public sector, or small firm settings may be the
result of women choosing these settings due to the discrimination they
experience in other areas. Or, a client may complain to a woman's
supervisor that she didn't perform adequately when, in reality, the client
simply dislikes working with women.

Similarly, a jury may not reach a verdict for a woman's client due to
sexual bias on the part of some jury members. That adverse result may
consequently affect her standing in the firm, because that underlying bias
is not apparent to those judging her performance. It is because this third-
party bias is not always apparent to employers that the authors conclude
that the Title VII imposition of liability on employers for third-party
bias is probably inefficient.

Ironically, the authors ultimately conclude that the data's "objective
factors," such as earnings and promotion, don't tell the real story.
Therefore, they use the survey figures on individuals' perceptions of
discrimination to conclude that these feelings of discrimination cannot be
dismissed. For this reason, it may be unconvincing to those searching for
hard evidence. However, Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession is
invaluable in showing the gap between individuals' perceptions of men and
women lawyers, and in developing arguments of how the complex dynamics of
sex discrimination may belie the figures.

--Charlotte L. Bynum, Associate Librarian
for Reference Services, Detroit College of Law
at Michigan State University



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT --
ELR: The Environmental Law Reporter

Environmental Law Institute. 1995. Clark Boardman Callaghan.
CD-ROM service, monthly & ELR Update supplements, 36 per year. $2,295.

The Environmental Law Reporter, already one of the finest environmental
reporters on the market in its looseleaf format, will probably become one
of the finest environmental reporters in CD-ROM format. I say "probably"
because with each release, Clark Boardman Callaghan (CBC) improves the
product, even though they are three to four weeks late each month. We
subscribe to both the print and CD-ROM, and our preference is moving toward
the CD-ROM for its ease of use and accessibility on the Wide Area Network.

Using the popular Folio software, this product makes research easy to
accomplish. Printing documents, however, is another matter. Rather than
inputting each document as a record, CBC has made each sentence a record,
which necessitates blocking the text to be printed. CBC developers need to
correct this and I am sure they will. It also would help if documents could
be printed as they appear in the print product: in dual-column format.

Product features include providing access through 10 formal information
categories. The categories, which follow the printed materials closely,
include Administrative Materials, Cases, Code of Federal Regulations, News
and Analysis, Statutes, State Regulations, Federal Register, Litigation
Documents, International Treaties, and Index. Each category may be opened
and searched, and there are plenty of jump-links to other documents.

How mature is this product? Well, each release is a tighter, better-linked
product than the previous one. If one Folio CD-ROM product could be held as
a standard for its ease of use and maturity, in my opinion it would be
Lawyers Cooperative's United States Code Service. ELR: The Environmental
Law Reporter is not far behind.

I recommend this product for high-volume researchers trying to reduce
online costs. It also would be ideal for organizations moving into the
electronic library concept.

--Kevin Miles, Manager of Library Services,
Haynes & Boone, Dallas



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

HEALTH LAW --
When Life Ends: Legal Overviews, Medicolegal Forms, and Hospital Policies

Arthur S. Berger. 1995. Praeger Publishers.
Hardcover. 208p. ISBN: 0-275-94620-7. $59.95.

The Patient Self-Determination Act was enacted in 1990 to promote citizen
awareness of and participation in advance directives for health care.
Although its aim was to encourage individuals and families to thoughtfully
discuss and make healthcare decisions in advance; for most patients, the
introduction to options regarding treatment and advance directives comes
upon admission to a healthcare facility. At that time, patients are often
too sick, confused, or panicky to make thoughtful decisions; and family
members face, in addition to fear and stress, a bewildering paper blizzard.
One hospital study showed that less that one percent of the patients
surveyed later understood or were aware of the materials on advance
directives that they had received upon admission.

Obviously, better methods of communications are needed. Medical personnel,
healthcare administrators, social workers, and attorneys should all be more
familiar with advance directives in order to inform individuals of their
rights. These professionals also should encourage their clients to prepare
for these situations and work to ensure that the healthcare institutions
with the appropriate policies in place are prepared to honor the advance
directives of their patients.

In the first part of the book, author Berger discusses in plain language
six areas of concern: refusal of life-sustaining treatment, advance
directives, surrogate decision making, withholding/withdrawing life-
sustaining treatment, DNR orders, and PSDA. Berger clearly and succinctly
analyzes the legal, ethical, and medical questions involved--always
emphasizing the individual's rights. He ties in the landmark legal cases,
and points out the essential elements of institutional policies and
medicolegal forms for each topic.

In the second half, sample policies and forms--including optional clauses
for pregnant or minor patients and other exceptional situations--are
numerically keyed to the text. Berger suggests that using such forms and
policies--first, to ensure that patients' wishes are expressed and honored,
and second, to protect the medical personnel and institutions from
liability--also will promote patient-centered health care. A detailed
index, a table of cases, a bibliography, and a list of legal citations
provide access to both the contents and to other related materials.
Specific state statutes are not included.

Although written primarily for physicians and hospital administrators, When
Life Ends is certainly appropriate, and perhaps even essential reading for
attorneys (and their clients) working in health fields, estate planning,
and elder law, as well as for social workers, clergy, and private citizens.
End-of-life decisions will surely touch many of us either as caregivers,
relatives, or patients. When Life Ends provides an objective framework for
this often difficult, emotional subject. It is unreservedly recommended for
law libraries, medical libraries, and social services collections in
universities.

--Kelly Browne, Reference Librarian,
University of Tennessee Law Library, Knoxville



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --
BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM

1995. The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
CD-ROM. 2 discs. $1,750. Monthly updates.

BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM contains the full-text of
BNA's U.S. Patents Quarterly (USPQ), 1st and 2nd Series, which comprises
all intellectual property decisions of the federal and state courts and
administrative agencies, as well as U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit decisions.

The archival disc covers volumes 68 to 231 of the USPQ, 1st Series (1946 to
1986 cases). The subscription disc, which is updated monthly, covers the
Second Series of USPQ and the Federal Circuit cases. Each disc also
contains Finding Aids, Topical Index, Classification Outline, Conversion
Table, and Parallel Citations.

This is a Folio Views product that runs in the Windows environment. There
are hypertext links, easy-to-use pull-down menus, and the capacity to
manipulate and customize text, store the executed searches, download, and
print. BNA provides numerous helpful resources to facilitate use of this
CD-ROM. There is a "Quick Start Guide," a "Quick Reference Card," and a
complete looseleaf user guide. The user guide is updated each month by
online and print versions of CD News, which includes "User Hints" and "List
of New Cases." Online help, an online tutorial, and a 22-minute video,
"Getting the Most Out of BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM,"
round out a useful introduction to the product's features. BNA also
provides excellent telephone support and search assistance.

There are three customized query templates for conducting searches.
Template 1 searches by "Words of Phrases," template 2 by "Any Field
Combination," and template 3 by "Case Citation." Any Field Combination is
most useful because it allows searching by all of the following: attorney
name, case name, citation number, cited cases, classification number,
decision date, docket number, headnotes, judge, jurisdiction, particular
patents (by patent number or description), and words in the text of the
case. Intellectual Property Library also has the ability to expand or limit
your searches, for example, to include or exclude unpublished cases.

The Words or Phrases template is quite limited because the search logic
used in proximity searching is so unconventional. For example, to search
"trademark within 3 words of infringement," you enter "trademark
infringement"@3. Complex queries are very difficult because truncated terms
cannot be used within the proximity search.

It would be helpful if BNA added a time-tracker for accurate time-keeping;
as well as an opening-screen notice indicating the disc date and the latest
USPQ included therein. This information is provided in the print and online
versions of CD News.

Except for the phrase-searching limitations mentioned above, BNA's
Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM is a very useful product. It will
save research time as well as online research costs.

--Susan E. Gindin, Manager of Library and Information Services,
Lerner, David, Littenberg, Krumholz & Mentlik, Westfield, N.J.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --
Legal Research Guide to Mechanical Patent Litigation

Adam V. Floyd. 1995. William S. Hein & Co.
Hardcover. 95p. ISBN: 0-89941-906-2. $37.

This volume, the "culmination" of a student research project, is one of
many research guides published by Hein. According to the author, it
attempts to provide novice patent attorneys with methods and tips for
researching patent litigation. However, the guide is so well written, it
also is suitable for law students and the general public. New attorneys
will find the guide helpful, and those with experience in the area may want
to consult it as a refresher.

It is divided into three main sections: best, secondary, and primary
sources. The author also includes a people sources section, with
information on locating attorneys, judges, and associations that have
knowledge of mechanical patent law and litigation. This volume has a table
of contents (but no index), a table of abbreviations, and charts of patent
and patent-related databases on Westlaw and Lexis. The subsection on
locating books includes a brief discussion of Internet searching.

The research guide provides only cursory coverage of computer patent and
bio-technical litigation, pre-constitutional sources of patent protection,
and patent statutes before the Patent Act of 1952. Additionally, patent
prosecution sources and transactional aspects of patents are not included.
This research guide to mechanical patent litigation is appropriate for law
firms specializing in patent litigation, law school libraries, and
depository libraries that house patent information.

--Deanne Morgan, Legal Research Services,
Bloomington, Ill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --
Software and Intellectual Property Protection:
Copyright and Patent Issues for Computer and Legal Professionals

Bernard A. Galler. 1995. Quorum Books.
Hardcover. 224p. ISBN: 0-89930-974-7. $55.

Author Bernard A. Galler is not an attorney, but an expert witness on
computers who has participated extensively in some of the most influential
trials involving software disputes. In this book, Galler aims to inform
readers about copyright and patent issues that affect computer and legal
professionals.

Almost everyone uses computers in their homes or in their workplaces to
some extent, so almost everyone uses software and hardware. Having become
such an integral part of life in the 1990s, computers seem to have been
around much longer, but in fact have only come of age in the last 45 years.
Therefore, the body of law that developed to protect intellectual property
earlier in the century is inadequate to address the legal issues of today's
computer age. With the rise in importance of computers there likewise comes
a pressing need for laws that govern the intellectual property rights of
computer hardware and software inventors.

Galler has made every effort to make the current state of computer software
and intellectual property laws accessible to his varied intended audience
of business executives, legal professionals, and the general public. For
readers with little computer background, Galler has included an extensive
appendix, which details the basic fundamentals of computer technology.

The book begins with an overview of the laws governing computer
intellectual property, and the remainder of the book focuses on the common
law and judicial interpretation of the related statutes. Chapters 1 and 2
discuss the basic copyright issues; chapter 3, software-related patents;
and chapters thereafter involve the copyright issues and litigation that
have been influential in the software copyright arena.

In many respects Galler realizes his goal of writing a book that is
accessible to his wide audience. He does not use complex sentence
structures nor overuse technical terminology. He emphasizes understanding
the fundamentals of copyright law and goes forward from that established
foundation. A good example is his discussion of the difference between an
expression and an idea. "An idea that leads to a particular kind of
invention can be patented, while the expression of an idea must be
copyrighted to be protected."

A separate outline of the cases discussed allows interested readers to
grasp the courts' actions and roles in making the laws. In addition, he
includes an example of a patent and an excerpt from a court opinion. These
all help readers to visualize what the court is examining in trials and
what the lawyers are examining to determine that law. Numerous hypothetical
situations also convey the information in an understandable way. Galler
does not include many endnotes (which sometimes tend to discourage lay
readers)--unnecessary since most of his discussions are based on the cases.

Sometimes Galler's work becomes laborious--not the fault of his writing
style or technique, but of the subject matter. Often the decisions in
intellectual property cases involving computer hardware or software turn on
very technical details. Without an understanding or a basic explanation of
the technical issues at stake, the gravity of the decision and the
distinctions that the court draws will make no sense to readers.

This book is excellent for an academic collection, because it will help
those considering a career in intellectual property. It also is helpful for
lay readers who foresee becoming entangled in an intellectual property
dispute. Finally, for attorneys who do not typically practice in this area,
Software and Intellectual Property Protection provides a broad overview of
the current status of the copyright laws impacting software.

--Melinda Elder, Librarian,
Winstead Sechrest & Minick, Houston



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTERNATIONAL & FOREIGN LAW --
European Union Law Guide

Philip Raworth, ed. 1995. Oceana Publications, Inc.
Looseleaf. 3v. ISBN: 0-379-10175-0. $495. Quarterly supplements.

The continuing process of European integration, including the discussions
leading to a common European monetary system, has furthered an interest in
the documentation and legislative process of the European Union in both
academic and private sectors. A major component of this interest involves
the acquisition and use of the documentation generated by the Union. While
the Union generates voluminous amounts of material, researching Union law
has never been an easy process. The Union itself provides no subject
compilation of its law, and the indexes provided by private publishers
usually do not provide the actual documents. European Union Law Guide,
aimed at law firms and academic libraries, attempts to fill this breach.

The guide is essentially a collection of documents with little or no
narration or analysis. It is a worthwhile addition to experienced
researchers' libraries, especially if they do not have access to a
collection of the Union's Official Journal, since the majority of the
documents in the collection are from this source. The table of contents
checklist includes references to "all legislation of any importance," the
most important documents are reproduced.

Currently, the guide offers access to the commercial and constitutional
documents of the Union. Arranged in subject areas familiar to American
lawyers, the goal is to provide access to all applicable Union legislation.
Among the subject areas included are public procurement law; banking law;
and the law of gender equality. When completed, the series will consist of
five binders that will include materials on social as well as agricultural
policies. A binder on the history, politics, and institutions of the Union
is also planned.

The guide strives to provide "comprehensive legal and political coverage of
the Union." While this is a worthy objective, it does come at a hefty
price: $495. Four to five updates per years are planned at $150 to $170
each. As with many looseleaf products, the cost of maintenance will soon
exceed the cost of the basic subscription.

While this work does provide access to many important documents, it does
not provide the analysis and narrative needed to place them in context. In
comparison, Ralph Folsom's European Union Business Law, published by West,
includes both a volume of narrative analysis and a volume of source
material. Although not completely duplicating the European Union Law Guide,
the West product provides a similar breadth of source material along with
an index of authorities and subject index at a cheaper price.

This guide is useful for firm or academic institutions that need a
collection of Union documentation but do not have access to a collection of
the Union's Official Journal. For those with access to the Official
Journal, this is an expensive compilation of material already available.

--William T. Ryan, Foreign, International & Circulation Librarian,
Washington College of Law Library,
The American University, Washington, D.C.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

TAXATION --
OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide

RIA Group. CD-ROM. $400.

A question that recently appeared on the Internet is worth repeating here.
If vendors cancel their print products, forcing subscribers to purchase the
CD-ROMs, was the paper product of any value in the first place? During the
past 24 months I can recall this happening with the BNA Environmental
Reporter, the CCH Health Care Facilities Manual, and the RIA All States Tax
Guide. I have no answer to the question.

In either format, the RIA State and Local Taxes is a valuable resource
investment. In its CD-ROM format, OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide is
easy to use because of the Folio software. A one-year subscription can be
purchased as an option within the State and Local Tax Service of OnPoint
System for $375.

I reviewed this CD-ROM in the DOS format, which requires the use of the tab
key to navigate between the link tokens. The opening screen is divided into
51 states (including the District of Columbia), the Spidell California Tax
Letter, State and Local Taxes Weekly, What's New, User Support, and a
Catalog. For currency in state and local tax information, the What's New
section does a superb job. This screen is divided into three columns: the
link token to get to the full-text; the state and date; and a one-line
description.

The heart of the information, state and local taxes, is further divided
into 12 areas: corporate income, property, estate-gift, fuel and mineral,
general provisions, initial, sales use, licenses and other taxes, public
utilities, special local, chart-calendar, and search all. I found each of
these sections to be informative and easy to navigate.

While I found this product extremely useful and easy to use, I was somewhat
disappointed by the amount of information provided. Specifically--and this
is offered as a suggestion for improvement--I wanted to see state
Department of Revenue rulings in full-text.

Back to the Internet question: I wonder if products like this will have a
future if states begin to offer full-text documents on the Internet. As
with any CD-ROM product, librarians need to do a full cost-benefit analysis
to determine whether online or CD-ROM formats would provide maximum benefit
for the least cost. We determined that CD-ROM meets our needs and will
stretch our budget.

I recommend OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide to those firms whose
practices warrant having this information in this format. It also is an
ideal CD-ROM product for law schools.

--Kevin Miles, Manager of Library Services,
Haynes & Boone, Dallas



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Seminar and show dates for law librarians.

FEBRUARY 26-MARCH 1, 1996
11th Annual Computers in Libraries '96: North America's Largest Technology
Conference and Exhibition for Librarians and Information Managers. Hyatt
Regency Crystal City, Arlington, VA. Contact Information Today, 609-654-
6266, fax 609-654-4309.

FEBRUARY 29-MARCH 1, 1996
Procurement Law Research Workshop. George Washington University National
Law Center, Washington, DC. Contact the Government Contracts Program, 202-
223-2770.

MARCH 21-23, 1996
10th Annual TECHSHOW. Sheraton Hotel, Chicago. Contact the American Bar
Association's Law Practice Management Section, 312-988-5619, e-mail lpm@
attmail.com.

APRIL 14-20, 1996
National Library Week. Contact the American Libraries Association at 800-
545-2433 for a tip sheet.

MAY 14-16, 1996
17th National Online Meeting, "Online Retrieval in Transition," New York
Hilton. Contact National Online Meeting, Information Today, Inc., 609-654-
6266, fax 609-654-4309.

OCTOBER 17-20, 1996
Libraries Without Borders: Legal Information Partnerships in the 21st
Century, Third Northeast Regional Conference. Toronto Marriott Eaton Centre
Hotel. Contact Kathie Sullivan at 518-447-3266, or Anne Matthewman at 416-
327-6012.

======================
Seminars Also of Note:

Intellectual Property Seminar Series. One-day seminar held across North
America that focus on patent and scientific information provided by
Derwent. Contact Derwent, 800-451-3451.

The Public Records Seminar: Using Public Records for Informed Business
Decisions. One-day seminar held across the U.S. Helen Burwell, instructor.
Contact Information Professionals Institute, 713-537-8344, fax 713-537-
8332, e-mail 75120.50@compuserve.com.

Citation Checking and Using WESTCheck. One-day seminar held at West
Publishing's Information Centers across the U.S. Contact the information
center near you.

Family Law. One-day seminar held at West Publishing's Information Centers
across the U.S. Contact the information center near you.

Public Records on Westlaw. One-day seminar held at West Publishing's
Information Centers across the U.S. Contact the information center near
you.

WestCheck. One-day seminar held at West Publish-ing's Information Centers
across the U.S. Contact the information center near you.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

The following is the contact information for items reviewed in this issue.
Please mention the ALERT when inquiring about them.

BNA BOOKS
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
300 Raritan Center Pkwy.
P.O. Box 7814
Edison, NJ 08818-7814
800-960-1220
Fax: 908-417-0482
E-mail: info@bna.com
URL: http://www.bna.com

CLARK BOARDMAN CALLAGHAN
375 Hudson St.
New York, NY 10014
800-854-3926

WILLIAM S. HEIN & CO., INC.
1285 Main St.
Buffalo, NY 14209-1987
800-828-7571
Fax: 716-883-8100
E-mail: wsheinco@delphi.com

OCEANA PUBLICATIONS, INC.
75 Main St.
Dobbs Ferry, NY 10522
914-693-8100
Fax: 914-693-0402
E-mail: oceana@panix.com

PRAEGER PUBLISHERS
88 Post Rd. West
P.O. Box 5007
Westport, CT 06881
203-226-3571
Fax: 203-222-1502

QUORUM BOOKS
88 Post Rd. West
P.O. Box 5007
Westport, CT 06881
800-225-5800
Fax: 203-222-1502

RIA GROUP
90 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10011
800-431-9025 x4
URL: http://www.riatax.com

======================
Address Change to Note

Adams & Ambrose Publishing
P.O. Box 259684
Madison, WI 53725-9684



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>