
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B038-78</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te87.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050606 text/html 26423
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:04:15 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:56 GMT
Content-length: 26236
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te87.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>'96 WILL BE A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD FOR COMPETITIVE PROVIDERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(896 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>BROOKS FIBER SHARPENS ITS TEETH WITH CITY SIGNAL ACQUISITION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(491 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>TIME WARNER SEEKS PUCO AID IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH AMERITECH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(845 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>MARYLAND PUTS PERMANENT RULES IN PLACE & RATES ARE BEST AROUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(238 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>FAILED COMPETITION BILLS IN ARK. AND MO., LEAD LEGISLATIVE&nbsp;LOSSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(320 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>CABLE & WIRELESS ONE-STOP SHOP UP-AND-RUNNING IN NEW YORK CITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>AT&T WANTS TO OFFER LOCAL SERVICE THROUGHOUT WISCONSIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(52 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>RESELLERS CAN SIGN UP WITH AMERITECH MICHIGAN FEB. 1</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>NEBRASKA BEGINS HEARINGS ON IMPLEMENTING LOCAL COMPETITION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>BELLSOUTH FIGHTS RATE CUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(197 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>U S WEST PROPOSES RATE REBALANCING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

'96 WILL BE A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD FOR COMPETITIVE PROVIDERS

The new year is always a time to dream of endless possibilities,
but for competitive providers, 1996 could offer both the best
and the worst of times.

New entrants in the local exchange have an abundance of capital
available to them and will continue to forge ahead with
expansion plans.  But money must be spent wisely so that returns
on investment improve and profits grow.

Federal legislation - if it indeed passes - as well as number
portability and universal service trials, will play a key role
in hastening local competition's development.  But if a federal
law doesn't make it onto the books this year, and permanent
solutions for the technical details are not resolved, then it
could take almost two years for competition to become
widespread.

Pundits have said that if federal legislation doesn't pass this
year, it may not have another shot until 1997 or 1998 because
'96 is a politically charged presidential election year.

But as long as key congressional legislators make it known to
the industry that reform will come to the forefront again, it's
expected development of competitive markets will continue,
albeit slowly.

"As long as we have the impending threat, it will force
companies to strategize and negotiate a market position that is
good for us all," D. Craig Young, president of Brooks Fiber
Properties Inc., told Local Competition Report.

The industry is discouraged about the progress with federal
legislation.

"I'd like to say we're going to have legislation, but I don't
think so," said Heather Gold, president of the Association for
Local Telecommunications Services (ALTS).

Conferees still are trying to iron out a compromise that won't
get vetoed by the White House.

Top industry executives seem to agree on the odds of federal
legislation passing this session:  about 50-50.

It won't be the end of the world, though, if Congress fails in
its bid to reform the outdated 1934 telecom law.

"A national policy will speed things up...it would provide a
road map," Royce Holland, president and COO of MFS
Communications Co., told LCR.  "But from our standpoint, it's
not essential.  Things are happening so quickly in the states
and gaining momentum."

But without federal legislation, competitive providers will have
to continue fighting a state-by-state legislative and regulatory
battle.

States, however, will continue to advance telecom competition.
Even less progressive states, such as North Dakota and Montana,
may get caught up in the reform momentum.

States also will play a key role in developing permanent
interconnection rules and number portability, and will work to
establish a universal service funding mechanism appropriate for
competitive markets.

There are several active trials for number portability and a
permanent solution should be decided on by year's end.

"Policies may be in place [by '96], but implementation will take
until 1997," said Rick Kozak, president and COO of American
Communications Services Inc. (ACSI).

There will be a domino effect for instituting number portability
when permanent solutions exist.

"Once we get [number portability] in place in one state, the
others will fall," MFS's Holland said.

The issue needs to be forced through by regulators, Brooks'
Young, told LCR.  If not, "the local exchange companies will
keep trying to roll out number portability and pass unwarranted
costs to competitors."

The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) now is exploring
number portability in a notice of proposed rulemaking, but it is
doubtful the commission will devise more than an outline for
implementation.

The FCC needs to be more proactive in the development of local
competition, industry leaders believe.

"We need a higher awareness from the FCC" in order to establish
fair interconnection rates and slow down premature lifting of
RBOC regulation, said Robert Annunziata, chairman, president and
CEO of Teleport Communications Group.

1996 and beyond will see former competitive access providers
(CAPs) continue to layer on new services and add switches to
become new and improved local exchange companies - but that may
be costly.

"It's somewhat facetious for CAPs to say they will be one-stop
shops," said ACSI's Kozak.

Kozak believes CAPs should focus on their core strengths - such
as circumventing the RBOCs networks for long-distance providers
- rather than spreading themselves thin as a local exchange
company.

"More companies die from indigestion than starvation," Kozak
said.

But other companies believe their game plan must include
switches in order to become truly competitive.

"CAPs will have to offer switched services" to gain a
competitive edge, said J. Shelby Bryan, president and CEO of
IntelCom Group Inc.

IntelCom and others plan to move into the switched mode in '96
and beyond.

"All of our switched services will not be put on by 1997," said
Brooks' Young.

It's likely today's budding local exchange companies will be
swallowed up by some of the market's big fish.

For instance, there has been speculation as to whether MCI will
buyout companies such as ACSI to help jumpstart it's local
subsidiary MCImetro with existing operations.

And MFS long has been touted as a prize to be acquired - but it
could be MFS that does the buying.

The first move in this direction already has been made by Brooks
Fiber Communications, which bought City Signal early last week.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

BROOKS FIBER SHARPENS ITS TEETH WITH CITY SIGNAL ACQUISITION

Brooks Fiber Properties is starting its new year off with a bang
- with acquisitions, co-carrier agreements and hitting a
milestone in number of networks.

Local Competition Report has learned that Brooks has signed a
letter of intent to buy City Signal.

At press time, no details had been released about the price
Brooks paid for the Grand Rapids, Mich.-based competitive
provider, which operates a 25-route-mile Michigan network
extending through Grand Rapids, Holland, Zeeland and Traverse
City.

Speculation has run high through the industry about what would
become of City Signal since its parent company, US Signal, sold
its long-distance subsidiary Teledial last fall (LCR, Oct. 30,
1995).

At the time of the $115 million sale, City Signal said it was
planning to use the proceeds to fuel its expansion throughout
western Michigan and possibly beyond state borders.

The Brooks/City Signal deal is only the beginning of a trendy
shakeup in the competitive access industry, analysts believe.

"There's going to be a definite wave of consolidation," Darrell
J. Edmonds, associate managing director of Bear, Stearns & Co.,
told Local Competition Report last week.  Edmonds sees Brooks,
as well as other competitors such as MFS, swallowing up the
smaller guys in order to enter a market more quickly.

This move is definitely in line with Brooks' strategy, according
to Stuart Conrad, vice president of C.J. Lawrence/Deutsche Bank
Securities.

Brooks will continue to swallow up smaller competitive access
providers (CAPs) on their way to becoming one of the largest
providers in second- and third-tier markets.

The company has an aggressive game plan and met its goals for
1995.

Just under the wire, Brooks Fiber Properties captured the last
two cities to reach its goal of being in 20 cities by the end of
the year.  Brooks plans to invest more than $20 million to build
and operate fiber-optic networks in Stockton, Calif., and
Jackson, Miss.

And with the purchase of City Signal, Brooks brings the tally of
cities it's in up to 24 after the first week of 1996.  By the
end of this year, Brooks expects to be in more than 30 markets.

A co-carrier agreement Brooks made with Nynex last week removed
the last hurdle for providing local service in Massachusetts.
Brooks will install a switch in Springfield, Mass., and plans to
offer competitive dialtone services in the first quarter of '96.

In other acquisition moves, Brooks Fiber merged with its parent
company, Brooks Telecommunications, and the parent company's
primary operating company GLA International.  The move was
designed to bring GLA's capabilities of telecom engineering and
consulting activities to Brooks Fiber.

"Our new relationship will allow us to leverage the technical
expertise and industry experience of GLA in all areas of
telecommunications to facilitate the rapid expansion plans of
Brooks Fiber," said Jim Moffit, GLA's managing director.

The surviving company will be Brooks Fiber Properties.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

TIME WARNER SEEKS PUCO AID IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH AMERITECH

Time Warner Communications sent out an SOS to the Public
Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO) for help in finalizing an
interconnection agreement with  local incumbent Ameritech.

But Ameritech claims that the cable company-turned-competitive
phone provider is engaging in a war of words intended to keep
the telco out of the cable business.

Time Warner had hoped to have a deal sealed by Dec. 31, 1995,
but the deadline passed without one.

With the PUCO's help, Time Warner hopes the last few economic
details can be worked out by Jan. 15.  If a deal can't be
reached, Time Warner said it will have to delay its plans to be
a competitor in the local switched service arena.

In its second required 60-day report to the commission on the
status of negotiations, Time Warner said all the technical
details of interconnection have been fleshed out in the good-
faith negotiations, but now comes the sticky part.

There are costs, for things such as interim number portability
and other items that neither company would comment on, that must
be ironed out before Time Warner can begin providing service.

The PUCO's staff most likely will sit in on final negotiations
between the competitors.  "We haven't made an offer yet," Kerry
Stroup, assistant directors of the PUCO's utility department,
told Local Competition Report at its deadline.  But he said that
doesn't mean one isn't in the making.

Time Warner could have filed a complaint with the PUCO, but has
not yet done so because it felt a compromise could be reached
with the commission's assistance.

"We didn't file a complaint because we're trying to keep this
below the level of a nuclear war," Marsha Schermer, regulatory
vice president for Time Warner's mid-West region, told LCR.

But the A-bomb may drop anyway.

Ameritech vehemently believes Time Warner is engaging in a
negative publicity campaign that will sway Columbus, Ohio, city
officials to delay or deny a cable franchise to the telco.

Time Warner's Schermer calls that "fascinating speculation."

In November, Ameritech and Time Warner apparently reached an
agreement on several key points.  But, in mid-December, Time
Warner came back with a new list of demands, according to James
C. Smith, Ameritech Ohio vice president.

These new demands are what has caused the delay, Smith told LCR.

"We didn't put on the table anything that looked new late in the
game," Schermer said.

Schermer said Ameritech has willingly negotiated the details
thus far, but believes Ameritech Information Industry Services
(AIIS) - the unit involved in negotiations - may not able to
make the final decision.

It is possible that another of Ameritech's seven business units
will have to get involved before all is said and done.

Smith noted that AIIS has been the lead negotiator for several
interconnection deals in Illinois and Michigan.  AIIS has final
authority to approve all aspects of the deal.

"It is especially ironic that Time Warner has chosen to use this
tactic when their own representatives have admitted that
Ameritech's cooperation has gone beyond what they have
experienced in other non-Ameritech states," Smith said.

Optimism remains that a deal can beworked out by Time Warner's
Jan. 15 deadline.

"If Time Warner is serious, one can be worked out," said
Ameritech's Smith.  "The question is do they want one."

Ameritech's Smith said he feels that Time Warner believes lack
of an interconnection agreement may keep the telco out of Ohio's
cable market.

Time Warner is seeking a regional agreement so it can hook up
with the incumbent local exchange company (LEC)  in the three
Ameritech states it has operations:  Ohio, Wisconsin and
Indiana.

Unfortunately for competitors in these three states, Ameritech
does not have the same willingness to interconnect as it does in
Illinois and Michigan.

In these two states, Ameritech is seeking acceptance of its
Customers First plan, which would allow the local provider into
the long-distance market.

"Does Ameritech want to be the leader  in supporting local phone
competition, like their ads say?" Schermer said.  "If it is such
a good idea [in Illinois and Michigan], why not in Ohio,
Wisconsin or Indiana?"

MFS Communications, one of the other certified competitors in
Ohio, just entered into negotiations with Ameritech Ohio.  And
though progress is being made, MFS predicts it will not have an
easy time of it.

"Ameritech has different motivation there than in Chicago," said
Dan Caruso, vice president of MFS's local services
implementation group.

MFS already has an interconnection deal with Ameritech in
Illinois and hopes it can transcend state boundaries.

"Some aspects can be regionalized, but for others it will be
necessary to treat them on a state-by-state basis," Caruso said.

IntelCom Group, which has an application pending in the state,
also said it expected to initiate interconnection talks with
Ameritech this week.

MCImetro, which has been approved by state regulators, has yet
to seek out an interconnection deal, Ameritech said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

MARYLAND PUTS PERMANENT RULES IN PLACE & RATES ARE BEST AROUND

Maryland's got a good deal on interconnection rates.

In its permanent rules regarding local competition adopted last
week, the Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC) has set up
interconnection rates of .5 cents a minute - lower than even
those rates of between .5 cents and .75 cents a minute set up by
trendsetting states like Illinois.

"This was a dramatic improvement over the interim rates (2.1
cents a minute)," Gary Ball, MFS Communications' director of
regulatory affairs for the Eastern Region, told Local
Competition Report.  "This sends a strong signal that the
commission is looking for companies to come in and compete."

Issues such as number portability and universal service will
have to be addressed in additional rulemakings, said Larry
Bugden, vice president of Teleport Communications Group's
Maryland network.

Development of universal service is one of Bell Atlantic's
primary concerns.

In addition to setting interconnection rates, the PSC set forth
the terms by which new local exchange companies can buy dialtone
lines from Bell Atlantic, either whole or in part.

The commission's order also ensured customers will have access
to "911" services and, thanks to an interim number portability
plan, they will be able to keep their current phone number even
if they switch providers.

Under the ruling, new competitors will be able to establish
their own local calling areas or use the same area set up by
Bell Atlantic.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

FAILED COMPETITION BILLS IN ARK. AND MO., LEAD LEGISLATIVE
LOSSES

Among the unsuccessful legislative initiatives in 1995 were
legislative attempts in Arkansas and Missouri to open all local
services to competition and allow price-based alternative
regulation systems.

In both states, Southwestern Bell and GTE mounted a successful
lobbying campaign that squashed all attempts from moving
forward.  Southwestern Bell reportedly spent more than $5
million on its lobbying just in Missouri to stop the state's
local competition bill.

Other unsuccessful legislation included a Washington state bill
that would have prohibited intraLATA toll dialing parity until
1998.  Although the bill passed the legislature, Washington Gov.
Mike Lowry vetoed it as being contrary to the general pro-
competition direction of state telecom policy.

Another casualty included an Indiana bill that would have
required state certification of any provider of two-way video
services.

This seemingly-simple bill was withdrawn by sponsors in the face
of massive lobbying by cable TV interests that claimed it would
require them to obtain state territorial certificates in order
to provide interactive video services to schools or libraries,
and would give telcos a way to thwart commercial development of
interactive cable TV services until the telcos were able to
enter that market.

Nebraska was unable to pass a bill that would have given the
Public Service Commission jurisdiction over cable TV video
service quality and the power to resolve certain types of
consumer complaints involving cable TV video services.

Telephone companies, eyeing eventual entry into video services,
had pushed for the bill in hopes of consolidating handling of
video quality issues and customer video-service complaints at
the state level, rather than leaving these with scores of local
governments.

A North Dakota Senate bill to raise the maximum size for a
deregulated small telco to 50,000 lines failed to win passage,
although backers managed to push through a House bill raising
the size limit for deregulated status from 3,000 lines to 8,000
lines.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

CABLE & WIRELESS ONE-STOP SHOP UP-AND-RUNNING IN NEW YORK CITY

Add Cable & Wireless Inc. (CWI) to the growing list of long-
distance providers getting their fingers in the local service
cookie jar.

But according to industry watchdogs, CWI may not be as
formidable of an opponent as the big three interexchange
carriers.

"I would be more concerned if companies said they weren't
getting into new markets," said Brian Adamik, an analyst at The
Yankee Group.  "Now we're going to see solely communications
services companies rather than local telephone and long-distance
carriers."

Although CWI is the first long-distance provider to offer resold
local service to customers in New York City, it seems that its
initial scope will be limited.

CWI will market its UniLink package of local and long-distance
service to its current business customers, which total more than
100,000 nationwide.

But the company plans an aggressive attack on the market.

CWI received authority in November to be a local exchange
provider in Connecticut and awaits word from commissioners in
California, Illinois and Texas.

"Our intent is to go national, [but] driving that is the
regulatory environment," Alan Stiffler, director of strategic
operations at CWI, told LCR last week.

CWI initially will resell local service from the networks of
incumbent LECs, competitive access providers or cable companies,
depending on what's available in various markets.

"Once we reach critical mass, we intend to be a facilities-based
provider," Stiffler said.

UniLink is up and running in New York City now after a nine-
month beta test ended last month.  The company would not say how
many customers currently use the package of services in the Big
Apple.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

AT&T WANTS TO OFFER LOCAL SERVICE THROUGHOUT WISCONSIN

AT&T told the Wisconsin Public Service Commission (PSC) that it
hopes to become a local service provider in the state.

The long-distance giant could enter the local loop to challenge
Ameritech and GTE this year, depending on the speed with which
the PSC finishes its work on local competition rules.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

RESELLERS CAN SIGN UP WITH AMERITECH MICHIGAN FEB. 1

Ameritech filed a resale and network interconnection plan in
Michigan, similar to the one it debuted in the Chicago area in
November (LCR, Nov. 13, 1995).

If approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, the plan
will offer a host of Ameritech services and basic local exchange
components to companies licensed as local phone companies in the
state.

Enhanced features such as Caller ID, voice mail, Centrex and
ISDN also will be offered, discounted on a term and volume
basis.

Ameritech expects to have the resale options available Feb. 1.

GST Revenue Up 211% In 1995

GST Telecommunications reported revenue of $18.7 million for the
year ended Sept. 30, 1995, up from $6 million the previous year.

The Vancouver, Wash.-based telecom provider experienced a net
loss of $11.3 million (78 cents a share) for the year, up from a
loss of $3.5 million (33 cents a share) in 1994.

Losses are attributed to the significant number of sales,
marketing and management employees added to handle expansion of
networks.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

NEBRASKA BEGINS HEARINGS ON IMPLEMENTING LOCAL COMPETITION

The Nebraska Public Service Commission will hold hearings
throughout the state in late January and early February to
receive testimony on opening the state to local competition.

Local exchange competition is set to begin in the state July 1,
1997. Interested providers will be able to file applications for
local authority Jan. 1, 1997.

A few of the issues to be discussed in the hearings will be
intraLATA dialing parity, number portability and the definition
of basic service.

For more information on hearing locations, dates and times,
contact the PSC at (402) 471-3101.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

BELLSOUTH FIGHTS RATE CUT

BellSouth wants the South Carolina Public Service Commission
(PSC) to reconsider a recent order requiring the telco to cut
its rates by $42.2 million

In what could be the last Bell rate case decision in the state,
the commission set the company's return on equity at 12.75
percent instead of the previous 13 percent.

The PSC told BellSouth to reduce carrier access charges by $12
million, and cut rates for line hunting and PBX trunking
services by a total $15.8 million.

The order also requires BellSouth to reduce intraLATA toll rates
by $5 million, and lop $1.3 million from rates for direct
inward-dialing service.

The remaining $8 million must be applied to basic exchange
service rates, according to the rate design plan to be submitted
by the company later.

BellSouth said the ordered rate cut is more than twice as large
as is supported by the rate case evidence.  The company said
it could support a rate reduction of about $17 million.

BellSouth has proposed adoption of an indexed price cap plan as
a permanent replacement for earning-based regulation in South
Carolina.  A decision on that plan is expected soon.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
LOCAL COMPETITION REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

U S WEST PROPOSES RATE REBALANCING

U S West has asked the Arizona Corporation Commission to approve
a revenue-neutral rate rebalancing plan that would shift about
$20 million in revenue away from intraLATA toll and onto local
exchange service.

The company estimated the change would increase local service
rates by an average of $1 a month.  U S West said it needs to
rebalance rates to cost in order to meet the expanded toll
competition expected this year following the April 1 date to
begin implementation of intraLATA toll dialing parity in
Arizona.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>