
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B32-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B024-149</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec99.html 205.156.212.5 19970114221549 text/html 20484
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:14:04 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:16 GMT
Content-length: 20297
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec99.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
LAN PRODUCT NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>NEW RECORDS ESTABLISHED FOR PC LAN SERVERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1039 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NEW PRINTERS HAVE LAN CONNECTIVITY VIA OPTIONAL INTERFACE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(638 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SWITCH INTERCONNECTS MOST LAN-BASED E-MAIL SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1163 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LAN PRODUCT NEWS via NewsNet
January 1996

NEW RECORDS ESTABLISHED FOR PC LAN SERVERS

Digital Equipment Corporation and Microsoft Corporation has
unveiled audited transaction benchmark results that establish
new records in the highly competitive market for database,
application and PC LAN servers. The results further
demonstrate the companies' leadership in providing customers
the industry's most powerful, most cost-effective open server
platforms.

Breakthrough results of 3194.4 transactions per minute (tpmC)
at $196/tpmC, based on the TPC-C(2) benchmark Revision 3.0,
were achieved on the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 64-bit SMP system
running Microsoft Windows NT Server operating system V3.51 and
Microsoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database management
system. No other Microsoft SQL Server platform from any system
vendor delivers such impressive results.

The 3194.4 at $196/tpmC result is the industry's best price/
performance using any system, any database, or any operating
system. In fact, no other system has ever come close to
breaking the less-than-$200/tpmC barrier.

With a total system cost of $626,102, the AlphaServer 2100
5/300 delivers transaction performance and price/performance
superior to any other system priced below $1 million -- 24%
better throughput performance and $46/tpmC less than its
closest competitor, the Intel-based Compaq ProLiant 5/133

Model 2. It also provides better performance and price/
performance than many systems costing much more than $1
million (see charts below).

The Digital/Microsoft combination even outperforms a Tandem
Himalaya K10000-16 system with 16 processors and costing $3.5
million. And compared with competitive systems from IBM, HP,
Sun, Bull, AT&T, and others, these results are far superior.

"These independent benchmark results again demonstrate the
breakthrough performance and affordability of the Alpha
architecture," said Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of
the Alpha Server Business Segment. "For customers, this
represents the industry's best value in high-performance
server capabilities. It also further demonstrates the
engineering achievements of our strategic alliance with
Microsoft."

The TPC-C benchmark is the industry-standard test for
measuring database transaction processing performance and
price/performance. The $/tpmC result reflects the cost of
acquisition and ownership of the system over a five-year
period, including hardware and software maintenance, software
upgrades, and extended warranties.

"Today's news is one more way Digital and Microsoft are
bringing to customers computing solutions that offer
unprecedented value and flexibility," said Rich Tong, general
manager of the Business Systems Division at Microsoft.

"These TPC results demonstrate the power of the Microsoft SQL
Server and Digital Alpha platform for transaction- and
compute-intensive business applications in heterogeneous
environments."

Heterogeneous Computing Environment

The AlphaServer 2100 5/300 benchmark was conducted using three
CPUs and 2 gigabytes of memory. These results were achieved
in a heterogeneous computing environment, using Visigenics
ODBC client software for SCO UNIX running on Digital's
Intel-based Prioris PC systems.

"No longer must customers limit themselves to a single
operating system to get interoperability, performance, and
affordability," said Nist. "With these results, Digital has
proved that one of the best ways to solve business problems
can include a heterogeneous environment. Digital demonstrates
that a customer can leverage the strengths of both Windows NT
and UNIX to provide a cost-effective high-performance
solution." Competitive Comparisons

PRICE PERFORMANCE tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 $196 $626,101

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Digital AlphaServer 8400 5/300 9414.06 316 2,972,726

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/100-1 1516.77 319 484,108

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 364 1,384,763

TRANSACTION THROUGHPUT tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 $364 $1,384,763

Sun SPARCCenter 2000E 3534.20 495 1,751,004

AT&T 3555/4-XP 3312.70 587 1,942,593

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 196 626,102

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

Tandem Himalaya K10000-16 3043.49 1160 3,529,520

Bull ESCALA Deskside D401/8 2660.03 530 1,409,965

Compaq ProLiant 45005/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Customers Deploying Enterprise Database Solutions

The Potomac Group, of Nashville, Tenn., provides doctors and
hospitals in 20 states instant on-line access to Medicaid
subscriber data. According to Bill McClary, executive vice
president of operations, "Our AlphaServer 2100 / Microsoft SQL
Server solution enables us to compete and win in a market
dominated by giant companies with multi-million dollar legacy
systems."

At Ruben H. Donnelley Corporation, the world's oldest
publisher of Yellow Pages, AlphaServer 2100 systems and
Microsoft SQL Server are greatly expanding the company's
Interactive Yellow Pages, with new features such as
FAX-on-demand and sophisticated database manipulation.

And at the Los Angeles Times, the third largest newspaper in
the country, AlphaServer 2100 systems and Microsoft SQL
Server, together with Autologic for Windows NT, are powering a
rastor image processing (RIP) systems that enables the Times
to product more pages faster, with more graphics and higher
resolution, at lower cost.

300MHz Processor Upgrade, Special Pricing

In announcing the benchmark results, Digital also unveiled a
processor upgrade program for the AlphaServer 2100 and 2000
systems, raising the performance of the Alpha 21164 CPU used
in this system to a blazing 300MHz. The Alpha 21164
microprocessor is still the industry's fastest and only BIPS
(billion instructions per second) chip.

Through December, this upgrade is specially priced at only
$4,000. Complete 300MHz AlphaServer 2100 systems will be
generally available in Q1 of CY1996.

60-Day Payment-Free Leasing Offer

Digital also announced a limited-time leasing offer on all
Alpha servers and workstations. Through June 1996, Digital
Financial Services, a division of GE Capital, is offering
customers who migrate to Digital from competitors' systems a
60-day payment holiday on all 36-month leases. The program is
available to all direct and partner channels worldwide.

The Digital/Microsoft Alliance

Digital's AlphaServer systems provide a highly scalable
enterprise platform for the Microsoft BackOffice suite, which
includes Microsoft Windows NT operating system, Microsoft SQL
Server, Microsoft Systems Management Server, Microsoft SNA
Server, and Microsoft Mail Server. In June, Digital announced
an OEM agreement with Microsoft to bundle the Microsoft
BackOffice server suite with Digital AlphaServers and
Intel-based Prioris servers.

In August, Digital and Microsoft announced a major alliance,
the Microsoft-Digital Alliance for Enterprise Computing,
which will help customers implement and support Windows-based
computing in the enterprise. The enterprise level performance
numbers announced today demonstrate the results of the joint
efforts of Digital and Microsoft to deliver Windows NT-based
solutions to the enterprise.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LAN PRODUCT NEWS via NewsNet
January 1996

NEW PRINTERS HAVE LAN CONNECTIVITY VIA OPTIONAL INTERFACE

LG08plus, LG12plus and LA30N Printers Meet User Demand for
Mission-Critical, High-Volume Printing Solutions

Digital Equipment Corporation has reinforced its position as a
leader in printing solutions with the announcement of the
LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers and the LA30N dot
matrix companion printer. These three new impact printers, all
of which will be demonstrated at the Digital Equipment
Corporation User Society (DECUS) trade show in San Francisco,
enable unparalleled connectivity in open office or industrial
computing environments. Offering unsurpassed openness and the
lowest cost of ownership in their respective classes, the
printers are ideal for users seeking mission-critical,
high-volume printing solutions.

"Not only does Digital continue to support its customers with
a new generation of ANSI printers, but is committed to
ensuring these products are compatible in open system
environments," said Jeb Hurley, acting vice president,
Printing Systems Business. "Digital uniquely offers users the
ability to distribute printing throughout the enterprise and,
because of our wide range of products, enables them to select
a printer with just the right price, speed and performance to
meet their needs."

LGO8plus and LG12plus Line Matrix Printers

The LGO8plus and LG12plus printers expand Digital's successful
LGplus family of high-speed line matrix printers (first
launched in May, 1995, with the LG04plus printer). These
printers are ideal for a variety of mission-critical
applications such as bar coding, multi-part forms, accounting
statements and internal reports -- in many cases supplanting
the need for more costly laser printers for these types of
applications.

Benefits of the LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers
include:

* unsurpassed reliability with an unlimited duty cycle and
10,000 hour mean time before failure (MTBF)

* high-quality output and the lowest cost per page in its
class

* support for a variety of platforms including OpenVMS, UNIX,
Windows NT and Windows '95

* compatible with a number of emulations including ANSI,
ProPrinter, LP, LG, Epson and P Series protocols as well as
optional emulations (including Magnum Code V [VGL] and
Printronix Graphics Language)

* maximum flexibility in multi-user environments with both
serial and parallel ports

* high-speed 800 line per minute and 1,200 line per minute
printing (for the LG08plus and LG12plus printers,
respectively)

* allows users to upgrade their printing speed with the use of
an upgradeable printhead for LGplus series printers

* backward compatibility with software applications written to
support existing LG models

* LAN connectivity via the RapidPrint 200 interface box, an
optional Ethernet interface device supporting TCP/IP, LAT, and
Novell network protocols

LA30N Dot Matrix Companion Printer

As a third generation product in Digital's ANSI dot matrix
printer family, the powerful LA30N dot matrix companion
printer is designed to withstand rigorous use and provide
outstanding performance for customers in a wide range of
industries. The LA30N printer supports not only Digital's ANSI
printing protocol, but also the IBM Proprinter X24E and Epson
ESC/P2 protocols, enabling it to function in workstation as
well as

Specific benefits of the LA30N dot matrix companion printer
include:

* outstanding reliability and performance with a 3,500
page-per-month duty cycle and 8,000 hour MTBF

* high-quality print output at speeds up to 330 characters per
second

* superior flexibility with two user-selectable configurations
as well as auto-switching serial and parallel interfaces

* advanced paper-handling capabilities that allow for either
rear or bottom paper feed as well as push or pull tractor feed

Pricing and Availability

Pricing and availability for the LGO8plus line matrix printer,
the LG12plus line matrix printer and the LA30N dot matrix
companion printer will be announced in January, 1996. All
three products will be available through Digital's worldwide
network of reseller and distributor partners. For more
information within the U.S. call 800-777-4343, or your
authorized Digital representative.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LAN PRODUCT NEWS via NewsNet
January 1996

SWITCH INTERCONNECTS MOST LAN-BASED E-MAIL SYSTEMS

Corporate America's growing dependence on E-mail to facilitate
high speed communication in the workplace, and the use of
different platforms to perform different tasks has given rise
to a new problem: Multiple, incompatible E-mail systems that
cannot communicate with each other. With fast, reliable and
cost-effective communication being essential to maintaining a
competitive edge in today's global marketplace, the inability
to communicate with clients, vendors, distributors, and other
employees can hinder growth and stifle profits.

With increasing frequency, companies are finding that they
have a mix of E-mail programs that don't communicate with each
other installed on PCs, Macintoshes, UNIX workstations and
legacy mainframes. When E-mail systems can't communicate with
each other, savings gained by effective communications cannot
be realized.

At some point, senior management wakes up to the fact that in
the "paperless office", corporate-wide E-mail is essential.
The task of integration is usually assigned to the corporate
Information Systems (IS) group who are faced with the
challenge of integrating the various existing departmental
E-mail systems.

This is a complicated task that involves making systems
interoperate, share directory information and documents across
different platforms.

This does not mean, however, that a standardized,
corporate-wide E-mail system needs to be purchased. Mail
integration technology is widely used to connect disparate
systems. The numerous benefits of integrating existing systems
make the concept a sensible alternative.

First, businesses preserve their initial investment. This
investment is not limited to the cost of the original E-mail
system packages, but includes the cost of servers needed to
run the system and the training of users.

These users often have limited computer experience and are
reluctant to give up their favorite E-mail system after
spending hours getting accustomed to its features and
capabilities. By switching E-mail systems in an effort to
standardize, users are taken out of their friendly computer
environment and placed into an unknown one.

Mail integration software solves this problem by allowing
users to seamlessly communicate with a variety of other mail
systems in a "friendly" manner. The address and message is
"switched" to make it appear as if users are communicating
with a computer on their very same E-mail system!

Second, mail integration can buy a company time to implement
an enterprise-wide migration strategy to wean users off older
legacy based mainframe systems and prepare them for a
standard-based information system. Additional benefits depend
on the particular features offered by the mail integration
software they select.

The technological demands of integration are extensive.
Choosing a mail integrator requires a careful examination of
features, benefits and reputation. Integration vendors
approach the issue differently and the results differ. Alisa
Systems has long been an industry leader in mail systems
integration. They have a reputation for being the best in the
business according to high tech computer publications and
other independent sources whose job it was to compare
integration systems.

Alisa offers a complete mail integration package called
AlisaMail. AlisaMail is a full-featured E-mail switch that
interconnects the most popular LAN-based electronic mail
systems. It provides seamless and transparent exchange of
electronic messages, fully editable documents and binary files
between WordPerfect GroupWise, Microsoft Mail, Lotus cc:Mail,
CE Software QuickMail, X.400, SMTP and Digital VMSmail,
ALL-IN-1 and Message Router. This includes spread sheets, word
processing documents, graphic and binary files. Most
importantly, AlisaMail is built on a relational database,
Sybase, that makes the system extremely flexible. "The really
strong point of the system is it's easy to customize how
information is presented." said Don Cole, president of Alisa
Systems.

The OpenDirectory, Automatic Directory Synchronization and
Message Switch are the strengths of the system and separate
AlisaMail from the competition.

The OpenDirectory is implemented using a Sybase SQL relational
database and can be used as a corporate directory service.
OpenDirectory, a unique AlisaMail feature, eliminates
complicated addressing schemes by maintaining a common address
book synchronized with each mail system.

This "master" directory can include an address book of
customers, employees and vendors that contains information
such as their title, organization, department name, E-mail and
postal address, telephone and FAX number, as well as a
photograph. The OpenDirectory provides a centralized address
book for all the E-mail users in their company. It is accessed
by either the user's E-mail client or an Alisa client/server
application called PeopleFinder.

PeopleFinder supports quick and easy on-line searching of the
AlisaMail Open Directory. Users may search specific fields in
the database such as Name, Title, Organization and Location.
Available for Windows, Macintosh and DEC VMS, PeopleFinder
allows users to browse the OpenDirectory and its contents to
display information not accessable in the user's address book.

Existing desktop client/server development tools and
applications can also be used to access the OpenDirectory.
With Sybases's openserver technology you can even connect to
other corporate databases.

Auto Directory Synchronization works hand in hand with the
OpenDirectory and is the key to mail systems integration.
Without Auto Directory Synchronization, the Open Directory
would be useless. Open Directory creates and maintains a
master directory of all E-mail users in by requesting
directory updates from each separate mail system. When changes
are made in one E-mail system such as adding, modifying or
deleting an E-mail address, the information is then
transferred to the master directory and then used to update
all the other directories.

In medium to large companies where there can be many changes,
AlisaMail allows the updating to be performed automatically.
The superior performance of our Auto Directory Synchronization
is made possible by the flexibility of the SQL database. "In
essence, AlisaMail makes each mail system's directory an
aggregate of all the users. It represents the entire
population and there is no distinction in where these people
live." said Cole.

AlisaMail utilizes a multi-port gateway which connects the
different E-mail systems to the AlisaMail Message Switch.

The gateway and Message Switch act as a store-and-forward
message hub and also handle the conversion of message formats
as required by the E-mail systems. The Message Switch
preserves the functionality of each mail system because it
stores the message in its unaltered format. The format of the
message is then converted only if the recipient mail system
requires conversion. If the receiving mail system does not
support all the functionality of the sender's, the Message
Switch will preserve as much functionality as possible.

Alisa Systems takes full responsibility for the success of
your E-mail integration. Alisa Systems will conduct on-site
surveys to determine your specific mail integration needs and
provide a customized solution. They will even install
AlisaMail on site for you, train you and help you fine-tune
the system to maximize performance in your environment.

"There's lots of bits and places for information to be stored
in a corporation and people need access to it," says Cole,
"There is a technology out there that can help you run your
business and save money."

For more information, call Alisa Systems at (800)628-3274.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>