
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B035-82</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te143.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044624 text/html 41462
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:57 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:28 GMT
Content-length: 41275
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te143.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
February 23, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>FCC Clarifies Rules on Use of BNA Information</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(845 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CTIA's Cibernet Adapting to New Wireless Billing Requirements</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1015 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Kenan's Arbor B/P To Support Prodigy </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(290 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Building a Blueprint for Convergence</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1699 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Convergence Demands Holistic 'Revenue Stream' Approach to Billing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1239 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>CSG Goes Public Amid Market Uncertainty</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(266 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CYBERCASH IPO </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>STERLING APPOINTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ELECTRONIC CONFERENCES SCHEDULED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(209 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>CSC CONTRACT </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

FCC Clarifies Rules on Use of BNA Information

     The FCC on Feb 1. adopted a third order for reconsideration in
Common Carrier docket no. 91-115 in which it upheld a series of
earlier rulings that require local exchange carriers (LECs) to
provide billing name and address (BNA) information to
telecommunications service providers (TSPs) under tariff. The
Commission also clarified its rules regarding the use and
disclosure of BNA information.  The third reconsideration order is
the latest in a long-running docket proceeding.  

     That docket has produced numerous orders, clarifications, and
reconsiderations stemming from a 1989 petition by Capital Network
Systems, Inc., and the Competitive Telecommunications Association
asking that the FCC require LECs to provide BNA information to long
distance carriers and competitive access providers so that they
could properly bill for their services.  

     This latest order for reconsideration responds to two
petitions from U S WEST Communications, Inc., which it filed in
1993 asking the Commission to reconsider its second report and
order of that year covering the use and disclosure of BNA
information ("BNA order").  The third reconsideration order also
addresses concerns raised by other carriers, including operator
service providers.  

     U S WEST asked the Commission to reconsider again rules that
require LECs to notify customers that their billing information
will be made available to TSPs under certain conditions.  

     The order also set out a series of deadlines for notification,
which generated a series of petitions from LECs and the United
States Telephone Association asking for more time.  In subsequent
orders, the FCC extended the deadlines for those disclosures.  

     All the deadlines have now passed, and like other LECs, U S
WEST has completed its notification process but asked the FCC to
consider that the process was harmful to the carrier.  Throughout
the docket proceeding, the FCC has upheld its original conclusion
that providing BNA information for third-party, calling card, and
collect calls, is "a common carrier service which must be offered
under tariff."

     Petitions for reconsideration by U S WEST and others arguing
against this judgment were repeatedly denied.

     The FCC's third reconsideration order, released Feb. 9,  deals
with issues raised by U S WEST in two separate petitions that the
FCC reconsider its first and second orders for reconsideration.  In
its first petition, U S WEST argued that its First Amendment right
to remain silent was violated by the BNA rules and that it had been
done "irreparable harm" by Commission requirements that it notify
its customers of the status of their billing information.  

     The Commission denied that petition on the grounds that the
carrier had already made that argument in earlier proceedings. 
(The Commission found in 1986 that BNA information falls into a
category of "legal notifications" that are excepted from First
Amendment protection.)  In its second petition, U S WEST claimed
that the FCC had earlier misjudged the carrier's argument on First
Amendment grounds and that in the course of the FCC's orders for
reconsideration U S WEST had been denied due process.  The
Commission found that the carrier's rights to due process had "not
been abridged" by its earlier orders.  

     Further, the Commission ruled that privacy protections that
prohibit disclosure of BNA information on calling card,
third-party, and collect calls apply only when a customer
"affirmatively withholds consent for BNA disclosures."  In its
original BNA orders, the FCC required LECs to notify customers that
their BNA information would be disclosed to TSPs for these types of
calls.  The notification process included an option for customers
to request that such information not be disclosed.  

     The BNA orders also set out rules restricting the use of BNA
information for marketing purposes.  The prohibitions were opposed
by several carriers and operator service providers, such as Oncor,
Inc., that rely on that information for their targeted marketing
activities.  In the third order for reconsideration, the Commission
upheld its earlier finding that direct marketing activities, such
as those that might involve the use of BNA information, can be a
"nuisance" to consumers.  

     The Commission also clarified that the prohibition on usage of
BNA information is applicable to all types of calls, even though
requirements for providing BNA information on a tariff basis apply
only to third-party, calling card, and collect calls.

     Acting on additional U S WEST arguments, the Commission said
BNA information on calls that do not involve calling cards, third
parties, or collect charges could be supplied to TSPs under tariff
or contract "to the extent [that] provision. . .is not prohibited
by our rules." 

     Specifically, the Commission clarified that BNA information
may be provided to interexchange carriers in association with
"10XXX 1+" calls--those in which an alternative long distance
provider is chosen by the customer.  The use of such dialing codes
was not in evidence at the time of the original BNA order, the
commission said, but it found that calls requiring dialing codes
have similar billing requirements to calling card and other toll
calls.  Further, the Commission said LECs are not required to
notify customers of the disclosure of BNA information when dialing
codes are used.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

CTIA's Cibernet Adapting to New Wireless Billing Requirements

     As wireless carriers continue to increase their calling
traffic and the diversity of their services both in the U.S. and
abroad, it is becoming increasingly necessary to devise newer,
flexible billing systems to accommodate their needs, according to
Cibernet Corp.'s Dawn M. Brodman, Manager-industry standards, and
Jennifer Nowak, Product Manager-CORD.  Cibernet is a subsidiary of
the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, the
standard-setting body for the U.S. wireless industry.  

     The Cibernet subsidiary grew out of the CTIA's Roamer
Committee, which was "commissioned to support network settlement
agreement standards," among wireless carriers, said Ms. Nowak.  In
the mid-1980s that group developed the CIBER (cellular information,
billing, exchange, and roaming) standard, now in use throughout
U.S. cellular networks.  Cibernet was created in 1988 to administer
the CIBER standard and to provide network settlement services to
cellular carriers.

     CIBER is based on CTIA's IS-124 standards for wireless call
data, said Ms. Brodman.  "We dynamically update our standard based
on technology requirements, among other things."  CIBER is a
batch-oriented standard, designed to aggregate information over a
set period of time.  Under the batch system, Ms. Brodman explained,
"There are time provisions [within the transmission protocol] that
automatically kick out a message that is over 30 days old.  But
there may be times when a cellular customer won't see a roaming
bill for 45 to 60 days."  

     Analysts have noted that such delays in bill reporting lead to
needless expenses for the service provider and confusion for the
customer (CBR, Nov. 17, 1995).  The proliferation of personal
communications service (PCS), advanced cellular services, and
international transmission protocols--all of which require more
flexible and responsive billing systems--has led Cibernet to
replace the CIBER standard.

     "Consider CIBER to be our legacy standard," said Ms. Brodman. 
Cibernet has formed working groups to develop two new standards,
one for billing and support functions and another for fraud
detection systems.  "The goal is to get down to a 60-second
turnaround time" between the time a roaming call is made and the
time it is recorded in the service provider's billing system, she
noted, adding, "This isn't real-time billing, but it's close.  We
expect most carriers will still retrieve their billing information
in some kind of batch form."  But, she said, carriers could
retrieve information in batch form several times a day, rather than
weekly or monthly, which is more common now.

CORD Project Aims for Paperless Management

      Another effort to streamline wireless carrier billing
interoperations is the CORD (Cibernet Online Roaming Database)
project.  CORD is an automated, shared database for the exchange
and maintenance of billing information and roaming data among
wireless carriers.  Ms. Nowak told CBR the system is due to be
released this year and that Cibernet expects it to become the
standard platform for interoperator roaming agreements.

     When wireless carriers enter into roaming agreements today,
they must record the details of the agreement on paper and
distribute them to all the parties involved for entry into
proprietary billing systems.  This leads to a lag time between the
conclusion of the agreement and its actual implementation within
the wireless networks, said Ms. Nowak.

     CORD stores the details of roaming agreements worked out
independently between carriers with adjoining cellular coverage
areas.  Parties that have formed a roaming agreement enter relevant
data (e.g., interconnection rates) jointly into the CORD system. 
Only the original carriers, or others that they jointly designate,
have access to the information.  Access is controlled by a system
of user identification profiles and verification procedures,
explained Ms. Nowak.  The carriers are then able to connect their
in-house billing platforms to CORD in order to update vendor tables
and other records used to track calling data.

     In addition, authorized carriers can make modifications to an
agreement at any time. The changes are automatically reflected in
the database and in the systems of all the parties that have access
to the agreement.  Ms. Nowak said this eliminates the need for
system operators repeatedly to "key in" the details of the roaming
agreement (at each vendor location).  

     This reduces the time to market for new services and the risk
of human error in the billing systems.  CORD's database and
communications protocols are based  on the CIBER standard for the
sharing of billing information--a standard already in use by most
the wireless carriers in the U.S. said Ms. Brodman.  When other
standards are adopted, Cibernet will change CORD to accommodate
them, she said.  

     "CORD is not commercially available yet," said Ms. Nowak.  But
she expects it to be released this year after beta testing is
completed.  CORD will be organized as a subscription service,
similar to the network settlement agreement services Cibernet
currently offers.  

     Cibernet maintains itself as an "independent neutral body,"
not only as a back office go-between for CTIA members and clients,
but also in its support of competing technologies.  Both Ms. Nowak
and Ms. Brodman said they expect that the need for an independent
party only will increase as the proliferation of technologies and
wireless companies continues.

MCI, AMEX Offer Consolidated Billing

     In another move to capture shares in the business telephony
market, MCI Telecommunications Corp. announced an agreement with
American Express Travel Management Services, Inc., to consolidate
out-of-office long distance calling charges on American Express
corporate card billing statements.  

     The service works in conjunction with MCI's virtual private
network offering, "V-Net," and American Express corporate card
accounts.  For each call placed from a designated "V-Net" location
(e.g., a home office) to any other "on-net" location, MCI will
transfer call detail records to American Express, which matches the
originating location with the proper credit account--acting
essentially as a rebiller for MCI, according to an MCI spokesman. 
 In addition, long distance calls placed from cellular phones
(pointed to the MCI network) and credit card calls from pay phones
also are billed through AMEX.  

     All calls are priced based on the customer's prearranged VPN
rate, regardless of the originating location, the spokesman said. 
The AMEX bill will include detail reporting such as call duration,
origination, termination, and cost per minute.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Kenan's Arbor B/P To Support Prodigy 

     Kenan Technologies, a unit of Kenan Systems Corp., announced
that online service Prodigy will be the first customer for Arbor/BP
4.0, the latest version of its UNIX-based distributed billing and
customer care platform released last fall (CBR, Nov. 3, 1995). 
According to Kurt Silverman, Kenan Technology Executive
Director-product development, Prodigy's "highly distributed"
network architecture is complimentary to Arbor's client/server
configuration.  Unlike other installations, he said, "We did not
have to customize our platform at all to meet Prodigy's needs." 
Kenan expects to turn on service with Prodigy by March.

     Arbor B/P is a "customer-centric" billing and customer care
system, said Mr. Silverman.  It employs an SQL database and
customizable bill formats allowing bill generation in any language. 
The system also includes an online image server that delivers a
reproduction of billing statements to customer service
representatives.  The images also can be compressed and
transmitted, an application that looks forward to customer access
to bills over the Internet.

     The Prodigy installation does not include functions for
Internet-based billing, said Mr. Silverman, but he said some of its
functions "are not incompatible" with electronic billing
activities.  "Kenan is looking forward to the Internet as the next
platform for electronic transactions," he said.  Possible
applications for Arbor B/P include connecting a retailer's or
service provider's Internet site to clearinghouses for real-time
processing of credit card payments. 

     Kenan has created a developer environment for Arbor that
allows Prodigy and others to create application program interfaces
for customized functions.  Combined with the SQL database, Mr.
Silverman said, Arbor can be "optimized" for specific data queries. 
Prodigy, for example, will be able to identify which users are
using specific services, rather than having transaction data
supplied only on a "volume and number" basis.  



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Building a Blueprint for Convergence

By Rick Brown

     The recent passage and signing of the new telecommunications
law by President Clinton is expected to accelerate the demand for
convergence billing and customer care capabilities in the telecom
industry, as organizations implement offensive strategies for new
markets to enter, and develop defensive tactics for combating
encroachment on their turf.

     Convergence billing and customer care capabilities help
competitors "brand, bond, and bundle," in the words of one
organization with a major convergence effort under way.  Branding
establishes, or leverages, a single brand name for all of the
services a company offers.  Bonding builds strong ties with
customers by offering them "frequent talker" and other incentive
programs that cross lines of business.  Finally, bundling allows
the packaging of multiple services into compelling offerings or
special promotions.

     Convergence billing and customer care provides the capability
of offering combined bills, a single view of the customer, and
product and service offerings that cross lines of business (e.g.,
offering a free pay-per-view movie if a customer makes more than
$25 per month in long distance calls).

     It is by no means clear that convergence billing and customer
care are for every organization--or every customer.  It is part of
the folklore of convergence billing, for example, that consumers
may rebel when confronted with a large bill that includes costs of
several services, rather than several smaller ones.  It may be that
customer care with multiple bills is the best strategy for consumer
marketing, allowing branding and some amount of bonding and
bundling.

     On the other hand, one of the best things about convergence
billing is that, potentially at least, only one bill is being
mailed and only one payment is processed.  With low-revenue
consumer bills, mailing four or five remittances every month can
become expensive quickly.

     For business customers, convergence capabilities can provide
a significant advantage for competitors that offer them.  To date,
local exchange carriers and wireless carriers have, in many cases,
fallen far from meeting the billing needs of business customers,
particularly large ones with operations in multiple states.  

     The inevitable emergence of increased competition in these
markets will make billing capabilities a key differentiator, much
as it now is in the long distance market.  Business customers will
find favor also with competitors that can offer discounts for
bundling all their local, long distance and wireless service into
a single arrangement.

     Building or integrating a convergence billing and customer
care capability can be an arduous and expensive undertaking for an
organization, and it has a number of traps and pitfalls.  These
issues should be addressed when an organization is planning the
transition to convergence billing and customer care.

     Each organization will have its own set of business goals and
objectives for convergence; its own timetable for achieving them;
and its own set of current hardware, software, and data that must
be transitioned.  For these reasons building a detailed plan is
essential.

1.  Work Out the Business Issues First

     Convergence billing and customer care open up a whole raft of
business issues that should be dealt with before technical issues
are approached.  If the plan is to issue RFPs to vendors, having
some idea of how the converged businesses will be run will help
greatly in specifying what the vendors need to provide in its
solution.  If applications will be built or modified internally,
answers to the issues will aid internal information systems
organizations in the same way.  Some examples of common business
issues include the following:

     *    What organizational changes will be needed?

     *    How will sales, order processing, and customer support be
handled across the lines of business?

     *    Who will have ownership of the customer relationship
across the multiple lines of business?

     *    How will revenue be allocated in situations where
multiple lines of business are bundled under a single price to the
end customer?  How will the profitability of individual services be
assessed?

     Ideally, this should be a time when an organization can
explore new ideas about sales and support, like customer
self-provisioning and self-maintenance over the Internet, or the
elimination of billing altogether by offering fixed-price items
that are purchased at retail outlets or by credit card.  Increased
competition likely will lead to increased creativity in these
areas.

2.  Assess the Current Situation

     Once a set of working requirements for the convergence billing
and customer care environment have been developed, an organization
can evaluate the current system's ability to fulfill the
requirements or be modified to meet them.  "System" in this sense
is more than just software, it's also the people, organizations,
and procedures that surround the software.  Common items to assess
include the following:

     n  Do the current software applications and platforms merit
further investment, even if they are capable of being modified to
meet the requirements?  Since applications tend to bed in a wide
variety of states, this is unlikely to be a black-and-white issue. 
In fact, no large organization should expect to replace multiple,
large legacy applications in a short period of time, nor expect to
be able to replace them all at once.

     *    If the application is provided by a vendor, can the
vendor assess the ability to modify the package to meet the
requirements?  Issuing a convergence RFI is guaranteed to get the
incumbent vendor's attention, and it is useful in determining how
other packages might meet an organization's specific needs.

     *    Does the support infrastructure need to be addressed? 
For example, if the organization operates call centers, are they
equipped to meet the needs of the converged business?  Do they need
desktop PCs and wide-area network access?  Do they need more
sophisticated automated call handling systems?  For a large
organization, the cost of the support infrastructure can easily be
a substantial portion of the cost of a convergence project.

     *    Are there issues related to the location and staffing of
support centers?  For example, organizations that currently run
unionized call centers may not want to integrate new lines of
business into the current centers in order to keep the new
businesses non-unionized.  If the organization is entering markets
outside its traditional operating areas, the internal network may
need to be expanded to new areas and new support centers and
offices established.  If new lines of business will be integrated
into existing operations, how much training will be required for
current employees?

     *    If current lines of business will be converged, what are
the major issues related to merging customer information into a
common data store?  How are customers identified across lines of
business?

3.  Build the Blueprint

     The key items to building a detailed plan for implementing
convergence capabilities are the overall business plan, the
requirements for new capabilities, and the assessment of the
current situation.  If the business plan is extremely aggressive,
it is likely the same significant amount of the new capabilities
required will not be achievable on "opening day" for the new lines
of business.  In these cases, either the business plan must be
changed to match the reality of what is deliverable, or the
capabilities must be delivered in stages.

     Typically, a short-term strategy is devised to handle the
launch while minimizing risk and cost.  This may include putting a
proven existing application in place, with no convergence
capabilities initially, then integrating the billing and customer
care at a later date when the line of business has been established
and requirements have been better defined.

     If the addition of convergence capabilities is the main point
of the plan (for example, integrating the billing and customer care
for existing wireless and wireline lines of business), a
combination of short-term and long-term strategies may still make
sense.  

     A single customer data repository may be the highest priority,
or the production of a combined bill.  A short-term strategy would
focus on the highest priority items, while delivering the
longer-term solution in stages.

4.  Don't Promise the Impossible

     It is somewhat ironic that while business plans for
telecommunications often recognize the amount of time needed to run
fiber optic cable to every neighborhood in a city, or build
wireless cells to cover a region, software is often treated as
something that is simply expected to be ready on an arbitrary date. 
A few years ago one EDS customer announced internally that it would
completely reengineer its billing and customer care business
processes and systems within 18 months.  

     This carrier had taken more than five years to implement its
latest mainline billing application and hadn't yet fully
implemented it at the time it was making plans for the new systems
and processes.  Why were they sure it would be done in 18 months? 
Because they were told it had to be.  Within a year the effort had
been largely abandoned, a victim of a schedule with no connection
to reality.

     A common variation on this theme is to get a vendor to promise
to meet the arbitrary date, then blame it when the project fails. 
(Vendors sometimes have a pathological aversion to telling
customers no.)  Unrealistic schedules not only play havoc with
business plans, they prevent organizations from taking a fresh look
at how problems can be solved short term, while longer-term
solutions are put in place.  If the ideal solution can't be put in
place in six months, it's better to say that at the beginning, then
make plans to support the business that recognizes that fact.

5.  Keep Your Eyes on the Prize

     Customers do not care what kind of software generates their
bills or keeps track of their names and addresses, as long as it
works.  There should be some notion of proportionality to the
expenditures made for billing new services; it doesn't make sense
to spend tens of millions on changes to current applications to
support small amounts of revenue.  The objectives of convergence
billing and customer care initiatives should be to meet the needs
of the business and to do so cost-effectively.  Having a realistic
plan in place from the beginning that addresses the business issues
will help ensure both.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Convergence Demands Holistic 'Revenue Stream' Approach to Billing

By Vince D. Shaw, Deloitte & Touche

     An understanding of the importance of convergence issues on
billing and customer service is rapidly sweeping through the
telecom industry.  A new mindset, however, will be required to view
a customer's bill as the product of a series of systems and
processes that depend on many things not commonly understood to be
part of the billing process.  To understand billing effectively in
a world of telecom convergence, the revenue stream infrastructure
must be viewed as an integrated, interrelated whole.  Included are
processes to do the following:

     *    Establish service,

     *    Provide bills, and

     *    Collect revenues.  

     This concept has some important implications that are rarely
recognized.  Traditionally telcos have used the term billing system
to refer to message processing, rating, and bill assembly. 
Although this never was an accurate definition--even in the POTS
(plain old telephone service) environment--the damage was not too
severe since there were only a few, relatively simple products for
which to bill.

     This traditional definition, however, is no longer viable for
the array of products and services that even low-end customers now
expect to receive.  Nevertheless, the connotation persists that the
billing system is predominantly responsible for the bill itself. 
This perspective leads to misdirected efforts, confusion, and
frustration for customers and service providers alike.

     To realize the strategic potential of the billing system's
direct link to the customer, telcos must design their billing
capabilities with an eye toward numerous systems and procedures
outside the traditional billing process.  

     In fact, many of the things that determine whether a bill
reflects what the customer actually ordered--and whether the
customer's expectations are consistent with the bill--are linked to
information that the billing system assembles but does not create. 
Billing system designers, for example, must work very closely with
front-line customer service staff in order to appreciate the
aspects of billing that generate customer inquiries.

What is the 'Revenue Stream Infrastructure'?

     The revenue stream infrastructure includes not only the
traditional elements of billing but also the systems and processes
that support the following:

     *    Order entry and customer management,

     *    Accounts receivable, 

     *    Collections, and 

     *    Decision support and data warehouse functions derived
from the data contained in these systems.  

     Additionally, the infrastructure may include some elements of
provisioning and sales support, depending on the preference of the
provider and the degree to which these functions are integrated
with order entry.  

     The common thread among core functions is that they share a
common data model that describes the customer account structure as
well as all products and services.  The revenue stream processes
and systems, therefore, encompass the actions necessary to provide
services, bill for services, and collect revenues.

How Is the Revenue Stream Infrastructure Different?

     As billing issues become substantially more complex and
inseparable from overall customer service issues, telecom providers
must adopt a holistic revenue stream perspective in order to
survive.  This must be manifested both in terminology (e.g., don't
refer to "billing systems") and in organization (e.g.,
responsibility for billing quality must be assigned to someone at
the revenue systems level).

     "Billing" systems always have been dependent on the data
provided by order-entry and other related systems.  But the rapid
increase in the complexity of telecom products and services, and
the growing interdependence of the customer service and billing
functions, have made billing an inseparable part of the revenue
stream infrastructure.

     Reengineering of the billing function alone is unlikely to
succeed.  Any notion of reengineering that includes radical
redesign and major process improvements requires a broader focus
than that embodied in a billing-only scope.  While incremental
improvement can be achieved, radical improvement is unlikely.  That
is because billing systems traditionally are not a substantial
enough part of the revenue stream infrastructure.  

     Nevertheless, the cry, "We're reengineering our billing
process!" continues to be heard without a corresponding focus on
the wide range of issues that affect billing.  (Other impacts of
the revenue stream "perspective" are summarized in the table titled
"Interpreting the Revenue Stream," p. 10.)

What Specific Actions Are Dictated for Providers?

     Management responsibility must reflect the integrated nature
of the revenue stream.  If possible, a process "owner" must be
defined who has control across all of the revenue stream process. 
Designating separate managers for the systems that support billing
and order entry, for example, is virtually guaranteed to produce a
low-quality bill because there is no single point of accountability
for the various functions necessary to create the bill.

     A customer-driven focus to defining billing requirements is
needed.  While significant lip service is given to responding to
customer needs, the necessary actions often regress to the
traditional "We already know what the customer wants" approach.  A
recurring, objective process for monitoring customer requirements
is needed.  

     This means understanding  customer concerns and how billing
characteristics affect them.  For example, systems must be designed
to give customer service representatives a complete view across the
spectrum of available products.  The ability to quickly and
accurately answer a question is part of the overall billing
interaction in the customer's mind.

     Also, meaningful incentives should be offered for accurately
assessing customer expectations during the marketing and sales
process.  Sales people must understand that a bill is part of the
product being purchased; expectations regarding the bill must be as
clear as those regarding the rest of the product.

     Billing systems are a convenient target of criticism that
often is more appropriately directed at confusing policies
regarding pricing, proration, information display, or other things
that may generate customer queries.  Customer dissatisfaction with
such policies should not be confused with dissatisfaction about the
billing system.

     Service providers also must develop a core competency in
analyzing new billing requirements.  The bewildering array of
potential requirements often leads to the conclusion that
flexibility is the single necessary characteristic of a billing
system. 

     While system flexibility is critical, there is a practical
limit to the amount of flexibility that can be achieved.

     Flexibility should be supported in other ways, however, by
better preparing to handle the inevitable stream of new system
requirements.  This may entail establishing a formal process for
identifying new billing features that will provide a competitive
advantage.  

     Or if a company plans to outsource revenue stream processing,
it should focus on the degree to which the outsourcing contract
facilitates rapid, cost-effective response to new requirements as
it does on initial capabilities and costs.

     Finally, confusion about the underlying business reason for a
billing feature is, in our experience, the most common reason
implementation of billing requirements breaks down.  

     Therefore, focus on the process of correctly translating
business requirements into system requirements.  This is equally as
important as investing in flexible systems.  Prototyping, extensive
end-user involvement in design reviews, and early user involvement
in test planning will benefit this process.  Only by focusing on
complete revenue stream systems, rather than on traditional billing
systems, can companies resolve the billing issues raised by telecom
convergence.

     (Mr. Shaw is a Senior Manager in the Telecommunications and
Electronic Services industry practice of Deloitte & Touche
Consulting Group.  He is based in Washington, D.C., and specializes
in the implementation of information technology to support
telecommunications revenue stream functions.  He can be reached at
202/955-4173.  Mark Bishof, AnnaMarie Kluzak, and Robert Mayer also
contributed to this article.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

CSG Goes Public Amid Market Uncertainty

     Billing services vendor CSG Systems International, Inc., will
offer 2.9 million shares of its stock in an initial public offering
for $13 per share.  The shares represent about 11.5 percent of the
company, which is valued at $382 million.  In 1994 the company was
purchased from First Data Corp. by its executive employees for $137
million.

     CSG is a leading provider of billing services for the cable TV
industry, with clients serving more than 16 million subscribers. 
It is facing the loss of major clients, however, as cable companies
increasingly opt to perform their own billing functions.  Among
these is CSG's second-largest customer, Tele-Communications, Inc.
(TCI).  

     The drive among cable TV companies to pull billing services
in-house is being driven by the desire to offer telephony and new
interactive services over coaxial cable networks, analysts have
noted.  These services require incremental billing and rating
capabilities that current billing platforms for cable TV cannot
handle.  

     In addition, large-scale billing outsourcers are facing
increasing completion from smaller processors that are much easier
for service providers to manage.  

     To counter the loss of outsourcing business, CSG has developed
"Phoenix."  The company had said the system is the first major
billing system based on client/server architecture and open
standards (CBR, Jan. 12).  

     Phoenix's first customer is Continental Cablevision, based in
Boston, which is also building an in-house billing and customer
care system dubbed "Concert."  Phoenix will be a major component of
the new system, but CSG will not finish installation until sometime
in the second quarter, and service is not scheduled to begin until
fall. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

CYBERCASH IPO 

     CyberCash, Inc., a Reston, Va.-based maker of electronic
commerce software, conducted an initial public offering of common
stock last week.  On the first day of trading, Feb. 15, CyberCash
stock (symbol: CYCH) rose 60 percent to $28.25 on the Nasdaq stock
exchange. 

     At CBR's news deadline this week, CyberCash stock continued to
rise, closing at $30.75 on Feb. 20.  The company is vying to
provide a viable secure transaction method for electronic commerce
over the Internet.  

     It offers "Cyber Wallet" software, which creates a system of
"virtual money" to be used for online transactions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

STERLING APPOINTMENT

     Mark J. Havlik has been named Marketing Director-electronic
commerce products for the Banking Systems division of Sterling
Software, Inc.  Mr. Havlik is a cash management and electronic data
interchange (EDI) expert formerly with Shawmut Bank and Chase
Manhattan Bank.  He will oversee the application of EDI and
electronic funds transfer technology to the banking industry.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

ELECTRONIC CONFERENCES SCHEDULED

     IMA:  The Interactive Multimedia Association (IMA) has
rescheduled its "Electronic Commerce for Content" forum for March
7 in Crystal City, Va.  (The original event was cancelled in
January because of inclement weather.)  The forum will focus on
preserving intellectual property rights on the Internet. 
Presenters include the Association of American Publishers, the
Electronic Rights Management Group, the European Commission, and
the U.S. Copyright Office, which is co-sponsoring the event.  For
more information, contact Martin Gerich at 410/626-1380 or browse
the IMA World Wide Web site at http://www.ima.org/forums/ip/ip--
meet.html.

     DISA:  The Data Interchange Standards Association, Inc. (DISA)
will hold its ninth annual conference April 1-3 in New Orleans. 
Seminar topics will include the Internet and the consumer
marketplace, corporate case histories, electronic commerce in the
next century, vertical market applications for electronic commerce,
and "the coming of the global electronic commerce age."  For
reservations and information, call Steve Cook at 202/289-0133 or
Carmella Baccari at 703/548-7005, extension 188.

     IDG:  International Data Group (IDG) will launch the "Internet
Commerce Expo" Sept. 9-12 at the Anaheim Convention Center.  The
convention will include a vendor exposition and a conference
focusing on the use of Internet technologies for communications and
electronic commerce within companies.  For registration
information, contact Ronald Milton at 508/820-8661.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

CSC CONTRACT 

     Computer Sciences Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., has won a $20
million contract to supply CommNet Cellular, Inc., with
customer-care and billing services.  The contract renews a previous
agreement between the companies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>