
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B10-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B023-99</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040527 text/html 69067
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:03:23 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:27 GMT
Content-length: 68880
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/pb10.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>*  THE COVER STORY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>TV NATION&nbsp;On-line program listings have potential for publishers and viewers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(716 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*  THE INSIDE STORIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ON-LINE TV LISTING SERVICES NOW AVAILABLE FOR BBSES AND WEB</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3122 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>DATELINE DAYTON: ON THE WEB, SOMETIMES THE LITTLE GUY WINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>PHOTOJOURNALISTS TO CHRONICLE CYBERSPACE FOR CD, BOOK, WEB</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1176 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HOW CONSULTANTS CAN PLAY KEY ROLES IN PLANNING BIG PROJECTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1290 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>AS LONG AS IT ISN'T ILLEGAL OR IMMORAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(394 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*  HELLBOX</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CHAPCHAL OUT AT ISGI AFTER MERGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(708 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>P.INK GERMANY ENTERS CHAPTER 11</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(732 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>MARK YOUR CALENDARS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Bit bucket ...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1551 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

TV NATION
On-line program listings have potential for publishers and viewers

For the true television aficionado, the weekly listings printed in a book
distributed over the weekend are not enough.

Canceled shows, vague sports listings ("If the playoffs go to seven games,
then none of these programs will air.")  and the whims of station managers are
not accurately reflected.

The listings in the daily paper are marginally better, but they're usually
still 48 to 72 hours out of date.

For those with cable, there is usually a "preview" channel that has a window in
which specific programs are advertised, along with a "crawling" listing. The
problem is that for a 50-channel service, the "crawl" is literally that, taking
three to four minutes to get through all 50 channels.

No, the true TV aficionado wants his or her listings on computer -- in theory.

That theory has been adopted by the two major providers of TV listings. Both
Tribune Media Services and TV Data Technologies have built systems that allow
readers to access listings on-line, either through bulletin board systems
(BBSes) or the World-Wide Web.

Our resident TV aficionado, Pete Wetmore, who edits an award-winning TV book in
real life, takes a look at the two products (Tribune's is in operation in a
couple of places; TV Data plans to unveil its offering next month).

Wetmore comes away impressed with the technology, but a bit puzzled as to why
people would spend lots of time in front of their computers just to plot their
existence in front of the TV.

Nonetheless, this new technology does give one a chance to pause: With a good
on-line TV listings service and a mailroom that can handle "tailored"
newspapers, a publisher could stop sending the weekly TV book -- or even the
daily TV listings page -- to subscribers who partake of the on-line version.
That's quite a lot of newsprint.

Another example of how new technology can save newsprint comes from the Dayton
Daily News in Ohio. As the "local" paper for the Proximity Peace Talks -- held
to discuss the future of the former Yugoslavia at nearby Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base -- the paper was able to score a scoop: It acquired a complete copy
of the peace accords just after they were initialed.

Inside, we reprint a column Dayton Daily News Editor Max Jennings wrote for the
paper because it explains that in a newsprint-only world, he would not have
been able to adequately leverage the scoop. But with a World-Wide Web site, the
Dayton paper was able to reproduce the entire accords -- and make them
available to people around the world.

Jennings' point is that this new medium not only gives him the opportunity to
do new things, it also gives him the opportunity to give readers what newsprint
would have never allowed him to provide.

Our next stop is also new media-oriented: Rick Smolen, a photojournalist with a
long history at National Geographic as well as the Day in the Life coffee-table
books, pushes the envelope he pretty much personally created in photojournalism
CD-ROMs, with Alice to Ocean and Passage to Vietnam, with a new project: 24
Hours in Cyberspace.

Kurt Foss, electronic photojournalism expert (he's a big part of the digital
efforts of the National Press Photographers Association), talks to Smolen and
his merry band of picture takers about how they plan to move beyond CD-ROMs and
into the World-Wide Web for this new venture (Foss is a participant as well).

A shifting of thought patterns is also the basis for a piece by Cole Group
Consultant Mike Middlesworth, who talks about what a publisher should look for
when attempting to move into new technology -- and, specifically, what a
publisher should seek when retaining a consultant.

And, lastly, in the Hellbox we have news from P.INK and ISGI -- the two
German-based front-end suppliers have encountered rough patches recently, and
we take a look at what's going on.

Yes, so far we are a TV nation (though the Michael Moore show by that name was
recently canceled by its second network; your printed listings might reflect
it), but it seems like in a very short time we might become a PC nation.

-- David M. Cole



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

ON-LINE TV LISTING SERVICES NOW AVAILABLE FOR BBSES AND WEB

Digitized TV listings are a thing of the present.    The two major suppliers of
television program listings -- Tribune Media Services of Chicago and TV Data
Technologies of Queensbury, N.Y. -- introduced electronic listings last June at
NEXPO '95 in Atlanta.

Since then, Tribune has moved into the newspaper marketplace and TV Data has
taken its entry back to the drawing board.

In theory, digitized listings provide an easy way to find out what's on TV in
the 500-channel world the cable industry says is lurking just around the corner
-- an impossible task in the print realm, unless a publisher wants to make his
or her TV book a loss leader with capital "L"s.

By providing a PC-equipped television viewer with access to a database and a
slick GUI, the suppliers reasoned, newspapers could open a new revenue stream
-- through subscriptions and on-screen advertising -- and spend less time
keeping up with changes on the local cable systems.

And maybe one day, it was suggested, newspaper subscribers who took digitized
listings could be stricken from the print distribution list, saving the
newspaper old money while making new.

Both Tribune and TV Data have products now, and in the works, that deliver
listings (and ads) via either a BBS or a home page on the World-Wide Web.
Tribune has TV Week Interactive running on two web sites and a third is ramping
up to go on-line this month. TV Data plans to roll out its Internet version of
TV Data Online at the Interactive Newspapers conference Feb. 21-24 in San
Francisco.

Each iteration offers grids 10 or so channels deep, program details, search
engines for tracking down that elusive movie from the 1940s you're dying to
tape, customizable listing displays and the fun of playing with the future
now.

But having seen both suppliers' efforts in some form, this TV book editor has
to pose a $64,000 question: Who's going to use it?


Many viewers soon may have four ways to find out what's on TV:

*Their friendly, reliable, home-delivered weekly TV book. Compact, portable and
recyclable, the printed guide's contents are accessed with a flick of a thumb
and finger.

Occasionally, it arrives damp (or not at all), but it's cheap (as little as 35
cents, if the book is distributed any day but Sunday), it doesn't have to be
downloaded or dialed into (no phone charges), and it doesn't require a tribute
to Bill Gates to own one.

*On-screen guides. Many cable systems have set aside one channel to display
continuous, rolling listings. As cable has advanced, these displays have become
interactive, provided the subscriber has a box and a remote from the cable
company. Thus, a click on-screen changes channels to the desired program.

*The off-line PC application (no Macs need apply). Dial up the local
franchise's modem, set your software to receive and in a matter of minutes, a
week's worth of listings (two, if the franchise is Tribune's) are on your hard
drive.

Click on the application and, if you've done this before and have set up your
own customized view of TV land, you have tailored listings for on-screen review
or output to a printer.

*The on-line web source. Dial up the WWW, go to your local source (for that
matter, go to a distant site) and start asking for shows you want to see, or
click a button to see the grid for what's on right now, or scan the features
text for best bets, or -- Hey! Don't get too involved -- you're taking time
away from watching TV!

And that may be the telling issue with digitized listings: No matter how easy
they are to access, will viewers want to take the time to go to one video
screen to see what's on another? Or, even worse for broadcasters, will they
become so enchanted with surfing the listings that they forget why they went
there in the first place?

Perhaps there won't be a fair test until the 500-channel age dawns. For now,
we'll quit questioning the value of these packages and take a look at what they
do.

To get a sense of how non-print listings work, we screen tested the off-line
application TV Data Online (which is to be joined by a 'Net version shortly)
and visited three sites using Tribune's TV Week Interactive.

TV Data provided a phone number and password in order to download a demo of TV
Data Online. The Windows-based program (there are no plans for a Mac version
from either TV Data or Tribune) was a hefty 2.2 megabytes big, which took a
while to bring in at 9600 bps.

Listings downloads are much smaller, 250 kilobytes and up, depending on the
number of channels and cable systems in the subscriber's area.

When the app was kicked into gear, it first announced that new data were
available, and given permission, it brought in new material for movies,
features and grids a day at a time. Updating each day, on a Compaq '486 without
any special goodies, took about 30 seconds.

With TVDO, the user can set depths and widths for grid entries. Keep clicking
on a down arrow and soon five lines of text are displayed for each channel --
and "ABC" in a half-hour box becomes ABC World News This Morning. Similarly,
the width per box can be expanded and "ABC" again grows to its full title.

To see details about a program, just click on its box and a text window opens,
showing a synopsis of the show, who stars in it and other air times. (This last
bit of info is certainly a step ahead of the printed guide, aside from movie
logs.)

By going into a channel lineup dialog box, Mr. or Ms. Viewer can create a
user-specific lineup. Channels can be chosen from the master list for the cable
system being referenced, then sorted by channel, call letters or random (to add
an element of surprise, we presume).

When the setup is done, the user tells the app to store the new order, and a
data sort is performed -- taking another few seconds.

TVDO's grid is white with colored lettering, giving a visual cue as to the
nature of the program's content. Some time segments get pretty bright and
cheery, and perhaps too dazzling to be meaningful. But the visually intuitive
may find the idea practical.

One welcome feature in TVDO is keyboard commands. Menu choices can be keyboard
driven; at the right side of the screen are buttons with the same choices for
the mouse-and-click crowd. Among the buttons are days of the week, for quick
access to daily grids.

Two other screens give access to program details. One, Best Bets, opens a
screen with four buttons -- Best Bets, Soap Talk, TV Q/A and TV Trivia. A click
on Best Bets brings up text, with paragraphs alternating black and blue. The
text is identical to features copy provided to print clients of TV Data
Technologies.

Fortunately, we had a good look at TVDO before calamity struck -- the
application bombed. On restart, it asked whether to process new data again. We
declined, not wishing to spend the time, and found that our channel lineup
preferences had been saved.

When TVDO bombed a second time, it came back devoid of grid info, just a
garden-variety spreadsheet grid (from BaseCode) -- and no evident way through a
menu to tell it to go find the data it had refreshed before.

Upon reflection, we concluded that the curse we cast on suppliers at NEXPO
booths, where we're renowned for causing demos to explode, had visited yet
another supplier. Sorry about that.

(To get a static gander at TVDO, you can surf over to TV Data's web site,
http://www.tvdata.com/.)


Tribune's truly on-line product can be seen at three web sites -- Tribune's
demo home page (http://www.tmstv.com), Continental Cablevision of New England
(http://www.continental.com/) and Arizona Central (http://www.azcentral.com/),
the recently started web service of Phoenix Newspapers that also has a presence
on America Online.

On a first visit, the viewer is asked to designate which state and city in
which he or she lives. A multi-digit code is assigned to the user for future
use, or more simply, the viewer can bookmark a page past the initial sign-up to
provide rapid access the next time around.

A tour of these three sites shows the advantage to having 'Net access: no
lengthy download (we were running on a Mac Quadra 650 through a 28.8 kbps modem
to a local Internet provider), no strange interface (we are partial to Macs, we
admit) and fairly good response time.

Totally mouse-driven, Tribune's interface varies from site to site except for
its grids, which are color-coded click-maps.

On Arizona Central, movie titles appear in green, sports in yellow,
news/talk/special affairs in magenta, gray for everything else. Continental
uses a wider range: red movies, green children, blue drama (although talk
appears to be the same color), magenta comedy, green-on-gray news, a darker
green for documentaries and cyan for sports.

It makes for quite a display -- probably useful for some programming executives
plotting their next season, but near overkill for the common Joe, who has to
read the program block title to know just what's what anyway.

While Continental goes with grids and program searches right off, Arizona
Central features a color pic of the week's cover story, with a link to the
text. As with TVDO, the content is drawn from the print-oriented product. (One
drawback: The picture remains even after the program has aired.)

The Tribune search screen is simple but comprehensive, with fields for program
and/or episode title, and description. Click on the category field and a pop-up
menu provides so many choices, they stop at the letter "H."

The search can be narrowed by date, including those gone by, to the last day in
the data cycle (from Saturday through the second Friday hence). One of four
time blocks can be selected to further narrow the search.

Once done, the search returns a list of programs, with name, date, time,
channel number and service, program category and a few words about its content
(movies get stars). After one search on Arizona Central, we printed out 12
pages -- 45 items -- of "educational" programs airing for a one-week period.

And there you have it -- literally. Go take a look at the Tribune sites, and
drop by TV Data in a few weeks to see its 'Net offering when it becomes
available.


How does all this play in Peoria? Dunno, but several score miles west, a few
folks in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, have found it to their liking.

One of the first Tribune customers to go live was the company that publishes
the Cedar Rapids Gazette, which put the bulletin board version up for
subscribers early in the fall on FYIowa, a collection of electronic services
run by Interactive Media.

"Interactive Media basically is coordinating the efforts of all of the Gazette
companies," said Administrator Jim Debth. "When you go to FYIowa, FYIowa is the
umbrella for the Gazette, Iowa Farmer Today and Kcrg-TV."

FYIowa is overseen by Interactive Media, with two full-time people and a
half-time graphics person. One full-time person from the Gazette works on it as
well, Debth said, while one person at Iowa Farmer Today spends part of his time
at it, as do two people at Kcrg.

FYIowa also has a home page (http://www.infi.net/fyiowa/) through Internet
provider InfiNet of Norfolk, Va. In January, it will offer TV Vision, named
after the Gazette's weekly TV book. Now, subscribers to FYIowa's BBS can
download TV Vision for off-line use.

It's one of the first -- perhaps only -- instance where TV listings have
generated a revenue trickle. About one BBS user in 10 downloads the listings,
Debth said. Rates are $5.95 a month for 10 hours, $7.95 for 20 hours and $10.95
for 30 hours. Subscribers to the Gazette get $1 off.

"We actually have some reasonable response," Debth said about subscribers' use
of the BBS listings. "It'll be much more easy to get on our web site because
you won't have to download files."

While FYIowa will use the print name TV Vision, on-line "it'll be a much more
'Net-looking graphic," Debth said. Working with Tribune to prepare a web
version has been a snap, he said.

"Fortunately, we haven't had to do any of it ourselves, other than the graphic
we've provided them," Debth said. "We just kind of tell them this is how we'd
like the page to look."

That's the idea, according to Barbara Needleman, a marketing executive at
Tribune Media Services.

"We put up a site for them and design some wallpaper for it," said Needleman,
then wait for the client to ask for modifications. "If you put something on it,
they know what they want to change."

While Interactive Media may gain a smidgen of income from TV Vision off-line,
most publishers continue to feed the 'Net while not taking money back from the
content bottom-feeders.

"I don't think anyone is pricing it," Needleman said -- except, of course,
Tribune. While declining to provide a dollar figure for its fees, Needleman
indicated that TV Week Interactive was priced attractively, especially since
four tiers of service were available.

"There's different functionality in each of the tiers," she said, so costs and
benefits can be correlated well. "We've made it so that it's affordable for
papers who want to put something out but don't want to spend a lot of money
now, all the way to papers who want to do very cable-specific products."

At TV Data, pricing is not the immediate concern -- getting the product ready
for prime time is. Going back to the digital workbench was a marketing and
design decision, according to Mike Laddin, vice president for marketing and
product development.

"Frankly," Laddin said, "we felt there was some additional work we needed to do
on the product. We took some more time to make sure we did it right."

So he turned to Kevin Joyce, who had to look at his business card to find his
latest title: interactive and on-line services product manager. ("Maybe it
should be 'whatever is hot' product manager," he joked.)

Describing the NEXPO iteration of TV Data Online as "a very young product,"
Joyce said TV Data wanted to improve search times and screens.

"We cleaned up the user interface to the point that we threw out some things
that were confusing -- too many buttons, too many layers, too many menu items,"
he said of the CodeBasic-driven product. The result: "We reduced the amount of
steps for an action to take place, and made it easy to navigate."

Joyce said that last summer, TV Data also realized it had to contend with
several ways of delivering the data, not just through a BBS. "The Web, I think,
caught everybody by surprise," Joyce said. "It proves people are thirsty for
information and visual information."

As Prodigy was the first to show an interest in digital listings from TV Data,
it was natural to prepare for distribution through an on-line service -- but
also a proprietary bulletin board service, in this case Worldgroup from
Galacticomm of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., for localized dial-up delivery, and
eventually on the Internet.

"There are a lot of flavors and ways that newspapers are setting up their
on-line services," Joyce said. "We didn't want to be tied directly or
intimately to any one style."

Hence, TV Data had to back up a bit from its ties to Galacticomm to make sure
that preparing for distribution via that route did not shut off other avenues,
such as a BBS already running at a newspaper that simply wanted to add TVDO to
its menu.

"We needed this product to work on a variety of delivery platforms," Joyce
said, although it is "totally a Windows-based product" in terms of the
end-user, unless you're running Win95. Cranking up for Win95 is undecided, as
"we're going to look and see what kind of a lifespan these off-line
applications have in general."

Is Laddin worried that Tribune has the jump on TV Data? Not hardly.

"In terms of the market overall and where we stand," Laddin said, "it's a new
media and it's an emerging marketplace for everyone -- Tribune, ourselves, the
newspapers."

"Everybody is very interested," he said. "There's a lot of activity, but the
papers are moving at a very deliberate way because everybody in the market is
still trying to figure out how they're going to make money. Short term,
nobody's making any money at this, at least up to now."

Compared to Tribune Media Services, TV Data has an enormous client base: more
than 2500 print clients, and a burgeoning role in providing data to on-screen
providers, such as cable companies and a new enterprise called VideoGuide Inc.
(http://www.vgi.com).

With backing from the Japanese trading firm Marubeni and consumer electronics
giant Sanyo, VideoGuide has set up a delivery system that uses the radio
frequencies of wireless pagers and presents listings on-screen (freshly
downloaded overnight). The viewer can click -- using VideoGuide's remote -- to
view or tape a program.

The product is being marketed through Tandy Radio Shack stores and other major
retailers in selected areas.


And so, as they say in TV land, stay tuned. How and when -- not whether --
digital listings end up in your home is the question.

More importantly, whether your newspaper will make any money off them is an
even more open question than it was last summer, when TV Week Interactive and
TV Data Online were rolled out.

The challenge lies ahead for publishers, while the suppliers have their part of
it well under way. For all, it's a big time learning experience.

What's it like, developing an on-line product? Kevin Joyce can tell you:

"Sometimes you end up reinventing the wheel. Sometimes you do it the right way
or a better way. At the very least, you do it the way you wanted it to be
done."

Tribune Media Services, (312) 222-4444, e-mail: tmc@tribune.com; TV Data
Technologies, (518) 792-9914, e-mail: tvdata@tvdata.com.

-- Pete Wetmore



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

DATELINE DAYTON: ON THE WEB, SOMETIMES THE LITTLE GUY WINS

(This article ran as a column in the Dayton Daily News on Dec. 3, 1995, and is
reprinted here with permission.)


The story of how a midsize Midwestern daily scooped the world begins on the
blustery night of Nov. 22, the day the historic Bosnia peace plan was signed at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base outside Dayton, Ohio.

Most of the stories had been written and edited at the Dayton Daily News when a
couple of editors who rarely get to leave the office decided to go to the base
and have a look-see themselves.

John Thomson, the assistant managing editor, and Kevin Riley, a news manager,
decided this night that there might be some map information they could get
their hands on that could be used in our package on the complex agreement.

As they drove toward the base, their conversation turned philosophical.
Thomson, who has been in the business for more than 20 years and therefore
should know better, turned to Riley and said something to the effect that "the
only difference between the New York Times and us is our heads."

"We can do anything they can do," Thomson said, "if we just get our minds
right."

In that frame of mind, the pair sauntered into the press center, where a
three-star general was briefing a cluster of tired reporters.

During the briefing, they noticed a couple of out-of-town journalists had a
phone book-sized document no one else seemed to have. Thomson and Riley set out
to get their own copy, which they did. (How, dear reader, is a professional
secret.)

Closer inspection revealed that the document was, in fact, the complete
156-page version of the peace agreement.

The highly technical, precise language spelling out the details of the land
division was not grist for the local Ohio paper, but it certainly would be
fascinating stuff to the residents of the former Yugoslavia and their
neighbors, as well as to academics and other experts from around the world.

"What if," Riley asked Thomson, "we went back right now and scanned this into
our web site? Hey, we could scoop the world."

They headed back at flank speed to the office while alerting Newsroom Systems
Manager Jeff Adams that he had work to do. By 2 a.m., most of the pages had
been scanned in to the newspaper's Access Dayton web site on the Internet
(http://www.access-dayton.com).

Our web site had been the primary creation of another newsroom computer
enthusiast, Joe Cunningham. He set it up soon after the announcement that the
historic peace talks would be at Wright-Pat. Every bit of reporting we did on
the subject went onto the site, along with our photos, cartoons and the content
of a special 12-page section we produced on the opening day.

As was appropriate, our coverage was more comprehensive and detailed than
anyone else's we saw, and even before the latest caper with the final
agreement, the web site had become known to thousands, if not tens of
thousands, of people all over the world.

The technology allows easy tracking of how many hits a site gets, and from
where; in the first few hours, 525 people requested information from our
Bosnian web site.

We were astonished at what we had wrought. We had our data accessed and
downloaded from all over Eastern Europe, Russia, Canada, a dozen countries in
Latin America, the United Arab Emirates, Hong Kong, Sweden, Singapore,
Australia -- every point of the globe.

We also found our reporting subjected to international review and criticism.

Vladimir Vuksan from Sarajevo sent a scathing e-mail to us that began: "I was
thoroughly disgusted to read the article (from the Dayton Daily News) in regard
to the rescue of an American airman by Serbian Chetniks. In those two pieces,
Serbian Chetniks are glorified as if they were the freedom fighters fighting on
the side of the Allies.

"Nothing could be more false. Serbian Chetniks were on the side of the Axis
through the most of the World War II and have done horrendous crimes against
Croatian and Muslim populations."

The next day, I received a personal e-mail from another unexpected source. It
began, "I read your column in Sunday's paper on all of the troubles you have
had telling foreign media representatives that Dayton is a place with qualities
not to be missed and to be taken into account.

"As one of those most deeply involved in all of these negotiation issues during
the past months, I can confess to having been somewhat surprised and even
skeptical when Wright-Pat and Dayton emerged as one of the alternatives.

"But that is now past us. After close to a week here, I can assure you that we
all feel that the choice of location was a good one. ... I can assure you that
we have all found Dayton much more to our liking than I believe any one of us
expected would be the case. And we appreciate seeing the world through the
prism of the Dayton Daily News!"

It was signed by Carl Bildt, who identified himself as co-chairman of the
Proximity Peace Talks, European Union special representative. To my knowledge,
Bildt was unavailable to the hordes of journalists covering the talks, yet here
he was writing me like an old school chum.

It's amazing stuff, this Internet. Which brings me to the conclusion of our
worldwide-scoop story.

The world knows now that a little paper in the middle of the United States is
the repository of the complete peace agreement. Accesses in early December hit
7000 in one day, again from every point of the globe, especially central
Europe.

And our list of admirers continues to grow. Our latest e-mail was from none
other than the U.S. State Department itself, which acknowledged it was the
Dayton Daily News -- not the federal government -- that disseminated the
information first.

Debi Guido-O'Grady, from the State Department's bureau of public affairs,
wrote: "Congratulations on an excellent site on the peace talks. You certainly
beat us in getting the full text of the agreement up on the Web.

"How long do you expect to keep the Dayton site active? While we are not
supposed to link to nonofficial sites, I was thinking of bringing up a 'reading
room' for other great resources for information (like yours) on Bosnia, on the
U.S. Department of State's official home page
(http://dosfan.lib.uic.edu/dosfan.HTML)."

Thank you, State Department. It just shows you what can happen when you come up
against some of us Midwestern hayseeds.

-- Max Jennings



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

PHOTOJOURNALISTS TO CHRONICLE CYBERSPACE FOR CD, BOOK, WEB

For more than a decade, photojournalist Rick Smolan and a roving band of
camera-toting friends have been steadily breaking new ground by combining the
power of great images with the changing tools of publishing.

Next month, he and his aptly named production company, Against All Odds, take
on their biggest challenge to date: documenting the worldwide impact of the
Internet.

Smolan began his series of popular Day in the Life coffee-table picture books
in the early '80s. For each, Smolan and 100 or so of his colleagues would
document one 24-hour period of life in a single country; each successive entry
has sought to be more technologically ambitious than the last.

His highly acclaimed From Alice to Ocean coverage -- photographed in the '70s
on assignment for National Geographic -- detailed a woman's solo trek across
the Australian Outback and became the first combination picture book
(Addison-Wesley, 1992, $49.95) and interactive CD-ROM.

Most recently, a similar but more sophisticated book-and-CD, Passage to
Vietnam, were the product of 70 photojournalists spending a week documenting
life throughout the nearly forgotten southeast Asian country, which has changed
considerably since the end of the war two decades ago.

Smolan's multimedia company, based in Sausalito, Calif., has gathered awards
hand-over-fist for Passage (Against All Odds, 1995), which skillfully blends
outstanding still images, maps, text, sound, video and related materials into
an awesome educational production.

Innovative features include a three-dimensional navigational device called the
Quebe, which gives a user a multitude of ways to experience the graphics-rich
content; several Forrest Gump-like appearances by a digitized Smolan, who drops
into several still images to narrate, and a gallery where selected
photographers stroll in and out of the scene while describing their
photographic portfolios and philosophies.

Sounds like a project that may be difficult to top, right? Wrong, at least if
Smolan's Feb. 8 project -- dubbed "24 Hours in Cyberspace: Painting on the
Walls of the Digital Cave" -- comes anywhere close to expectations.

"We have spent the last 12 years traveling around the world, documenting
different cultures," said Smolan. "For us, cyberspace is another culture and
place that we are going to, with the goal of documenting it during a typical
24-hour time period. But this time around, because of the nature of the new
medium itself, people can actively take part in the project, and respond with
their own point of view."

As with previous efforts, Smolan and his project team will hire and dispatch
100 of the world's top photojournalists around the globe to bring back stories
that reveal the myriad ways global telecommunications technologies are
affecting the professional and personal lives of people.

After soliciting story suggestions via the Internet and several commercial
services for the last few months, and screening digital-savvy photographers for
potential participation, the Cyber24 project team is putting in long hours this
month making final connections and arrangements that should make this one of
the largest on-line events ever conducted.

Karen Mullarkey, a free-lance visual consultant and former director of
photography at Newsweek, Sports Illustrated and Rolling Stone, leads the story
development team. Affiliations with a number of media, military, government and
business organizations will supplement the work done by the project
photographers.

Tentative plans include live support from the Associated Press and Reuters, the
Department of Defense (including peacekeeping photo coverage from Bosnia), the
Smithsonian Institution, Nasa, the United Nations and Disney. In addition,
millions of people on-line are being invited to submit their own stories of how
the digital revolution is affecting their lives.

J. Carl Ganter, an assignment editor for the project, is a veteran photographer
for several of Smolan's Day in the Life projects. But this time, he's on the
other side, just one member of the team that's trying to pull this daunting
project together.

"The cooperation between cutting-edge firms (and project underwriters) like
Adobe Systems, Sun Microsystems and Eastman Kodak is exciting," he said.
"Imagine importing a digital picture and running Photoshop in the blink of an
eye. To do this, the tech team has put together an amazing high-speed network
to handle the huge blocks of text, digital pictures, audio and video generated
on the day."

Ganter, who's also coordinating and editing audio for the project, says web
cruisers (http://www.cyber24.com/) will be able to hear photographers' comments
about their subjects -- minutes after the pictures are published.

"After photographers transmit their images to headquarters, we'll debrief them
by telephone, edit their recorded comments and include them in the site,"
Ganter said. "So visitors to Cyber24 will have a chance to be virtually on
assignment with the team. There will be a lot of other exciting, cutting-edge
multimedia surprises as well."

One of the newest photo technologies to be used is a method for creating
interactive, 360-degree photographs called PhotoSpheres by merging two separate
still images with software developed by Knoxville-based Omniview Inc.. Ten or
12 world landmarks will be photographed and published as spherical scenes on
the project's web site. A special free downloadable OmniView viewer will be
needed to view and navigate inside the images.

Mission Control for the project will be in San Francisco's China Basin, where
all photos and stories will be transmitted throughout the "day," a 48-hour
period as Feb. 8 moves across the world's time zones.

On that date, an instant web site will be updated every 30 minutes or so --
beginning at midnight Pacific Standard Time -- as new content is received,
cataloged into an Illustra database and uploaded to the web pages designed by
Clement Mok, the former art director of Apple Computer and the designer
responsible for the look of the Microsoft Network.

After a few days, the project home page will close. Around March 15, after a
team of editors has had a chance to review all content captured by its select
photographers and other participants, a permanent "time capsule" web site will
open with additional materials (it will also be a showcase for the latest in
web publishing tools).

A picture book and CD will be released in the fall.

Faculty at the Rochester Institute of Technology are coordinating "the world's
largest photo classroom," a parallel, collaborative project for journalism
educators and students worldwide. The best stories will be added to the
project's main web site, while the schools also will maintain their own home
pages with additional materials related to 24 Hours.

Prizes donated by corporate sponsors will be awarded for the top student
entries.

Global participation on the date is being strongly encouraged; specifications
and submission details are available on the web site. Entries may be
transmitted via the Internet or one of several commercial on-line services,
including America Online, CompuServe and PressLink.

The project will be the featured event at the grand opening of the Internet
1996 World Exposition (http://park.org/fair/), a world's fair for the
information age.

Against All Odds (415) 331-6300; e-mail: aaopr@aol.com

-- Kurt Foss



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

HOW CONSULTANTS CAN PLAY KEY ROLES IN PLANNING BIG PROJECTS

One day recently a friend said to me, "I know you're a consultant, but what do
consultants do and why do people hire them?"

I gave him what was essentially a non-answer and we went on to other things.

Later, after I'd thought about it a bit, I told him I'd kind of kissed off his
question and that, if pressed, I'd have to say this:

Consultants help businesses improve profits by helping solve problems, and
there are as many reasons for hiring them as there are problems in running a
business.

Newspapers, for example, hire consultants for a variety of reasons.

Sometimes, a specific problem requires technical expertise not found among
those on the payroll. Planning a computer network, for example, is often a
one-time job where a consultant can come in, examine the problem and make
recommendations in a much shorter time than it would take someone on the staff
to get up to speed.

Often a newspaper can benefit from having a problem looked at by "a fresh eye,"
someone who's not too close to the situation -- a person who is not involved in
internal turf wars, nor carries any baggage as far as relationships are
concerned.

Remember, too, that many attempts to solve problems end up in finger-pointing
and attempts to place blame. An outsider doesn't deal in reward and punishment;
he or she is there to focus on fixing the problem.

Independent consultants usually get openness from managers and others involved
in a problem simply because they're not involved in the normal office
politics.

Independent consultants often come to you with broader experience and more
industry contacts than people on your staff, especially at newspapers where few
managers attend trade shows or are sent to seminars at such places as the
American Press Institute.

An independent consultant can be of greatest benefit, in my view, when a
newspaper is going to undertake a major project.

Newspapers are rarely overstaffed. All the managers work hard at their
day-to-day responsibilities with barely enough time to work on next year's
budget, let alone take on a major project.

These problems multiply when the project -- say, pagination -- is one that
involves many departments of the newspaper and affects processes, personnel and
equipment in all of them.

Working hand-in-hand with the executive assigned to spearhead the project, a
consultant can give it his or her full attention, uninterrupted by the phone
calls that start, "I know you're working on that project, but this little
problem has come up and can you just take a few minutes to ...?"

Also, few newspapers have people on their payroll with the knowledge of
interdepartmental relationships needed for many major projects.

Yes, you can set up a committee, then charge it with studying the issue and
coming up with a recommendation, but unless you have an exceptional group, each
panelist will view it from his or her own narrow perspective.

They need help in seeing the big picture.

In pagination projects, for example, newsroom managers more often than not see
only that it is going to take them longer to deal with pages in the newsroom.
What they don't see is the reduction in time, overall, to get the paper on the
press.

Part of a consultant's role is to provide that big-picture view. Along with it,
a good consultant will also try to make all participants fully aware of how
everyone benefits from a major project. There are benefits for all departments
of a newspaper from pagination, although sometimes they're hard to see, or
attain, without understanding the entire process.

When do you need a consultant? When you look around and don't see anyone with
the expertise needed to solve the problem at hand. Or, if you do have someone,
you recognize that the enterprise would suffer if you assigned the task as a
full-time responsibility.

There are times when a consultant can serve as a referee and help you decide
who's right when two department heads make very good cases for doing something
their way.

Or, frankly, you might want to bring in a consultant if you'd like to have
someone from out of town to blame if things go wrong.

How do you find a consultant and what should you expect?

Talk to other newspapers, talk to suppliers -- they know who's knowledgeable in
their fields. Check out the trade publications. Those are all good places to
start.

I've always believed, as does Dave Cole, that consultants do a better job for
newspapers if they are independent and do not also work for or represent
suppliers. That's not to say that those who do are necessarily wrong; it's just
that old business of not wanting to appear beholden to anyone.

Once you've hit upon a likely prospect, outline your problem and ask for a
proposal. You should get -- in writing -- an initial action plan which most
often will prescribe a day or two of on-site evaluation, discussions with your
managers and the promise of a written report with recommendations.

The proposal should also include information about fees and expense
reimbursement for the initial visit.

Suppose you do find someone, you get a proposal and you accept it. Then what?

First, tell everyone in your plant that the consultant is coming and why. The
last thing you want is everybody wondering why there's a stranger poking around
the plant for a couple of days.

Then, gather those directly involved and ask for their full cooperation. Tell
them you expect them to be candid with the consultant, and that they must clear
their calendars as much as possible so as to be available while the consultant
is in the plant.

You're going to be spending a fair amount of money, so you want to be sure that
the consultant gets the information needed.

Arrange for a manager to serve as host, and to use time to best advantage, ask
that lunches be arranged with people involved in the project.

It's always nice, from the consultant's point of view, to have a place in the
building to use as a base. Perhaps the office of the person most involved with
the project or problem would serve best.

You should meet privately with the consultant at the beginning and end of the
visit. Be sure that the opening discussion includes your view of the problem
and some agreement on expectations.

Be candid. If there are personnel problems or peculiar situations to be
factored in, discuss them. Ask for and expect discretion. If you want appraisal
of personnel, this is the time to ask for it so the consultant can take the
measure of people while assessing the situation from the start.

Make it clear that you'll be available should problems or questions arise.

It can be beneficial to gather your troops for a session with the consultant
just prior to your end-of-visit interview. That's when any second thoughts can
be aired, or promised information delivered.

Expect a reasonably detailed report of findings and recommendations within a
few days of the on-site visit. If called for, you'll probably get a proposal
for an ongoing relationship involving oversight, project management or hands-on
problem solving.

If a long-term relationship ensues, ask for regular progress reports, both oral
and written. Be sure that your people are cooperating fully, and that everyone
understands your goals.

None of this will insure success, of course, but it will certainly improve the
odds against failure.

-- Mike Middlesworth



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

AS LONG AS IT ISN'T ILLEGAL OR IMMORAL

Shortly after I started consulting six years ago, I read somewhere that
consultants who specialize in technology break into two distinct groups:

*Those who come into your office, take off their coat, roll up their sleeves
and start writing code or plugging computers into the network.

*Those who come into your office and never take off their coat.

Because my consulting practice has always used the "we'll do it as long as it
isn't illegal or immoral" credo, we have ended up not breaking into either of
these categories.

The no-coat consulting has always been fairly straightforward: you write the
code, you hook up the wires, you make sure it all works and then write some
documentation about how you did it, so that the newspaper doesn't have to hire
you again to make a minor change.

The coat consulting, on the other hand, is rife with the possibility for
misunderstandings and bruised feelings. On more than one occasion I've had to
tell a publisher that his or her biggest problem falls in the personnel
category: the wrong people in the wrong jobs can be as big a problem as a
misprogrammed computer.

Another big problem is to be hired to solve one problem but to find a bigger
one looming of which the staff is unaware. A couple of times I've been called
in to talk about pagination, only to find ancient classified or business
systems that would be an impediment to any pagination project. When the
publisher is confronted with having only enough money to buy a pagination
system or a new classified system, it's not fun to be the one to say the paper
has to postpone pagination until the other systems are brought up to snuff.

For me, the hardest part was coming to grips with the situation where the
publisher brings me in, gives me the run of the shop for a couple of days, gets
a verbal report before I leave, nodding all the while. And then I phone the
paper six months later to find that nothing has changed.

When I was a full-time newspaper employee, I learned to have my advice ignored;
I just thought that when I was a consultant that wouldn't happen any longer.

But I forgot: this is the publishing business.

-- dmc



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

CHAPCHAL OUT AT ISGI AFTER MERGER

Danny Chapchal keeps reaching for the brass ring of publishing system supply
firms -- and keeps missing.

The man who put together the deal to buy Atex from Kodak (and who subsequently
lost Atex to the Norwegian software company Sysdeco) had almost built a new
publishing systems powerhouse late in 1995, only to lose control at the last
minute.

After turning Atex over to Sysdeco last year (see The Cole Papers, January
1995), Chapchal worked out a deal with Integrierte Systeme Grafische Industrie
(ISGI) of Eschborn, Germany.

ISGI was developed in the early '90s as a publishing systems research
consortium funded by Siemens Nixdorf and Hell Graphics. Last spring, Chapchal
became a consultant for what had become Siemens Nixdorf-owned ISGI and put
together some Siemens Nixdorf PC-based publishing systems products that were
shown at NEXPO '95 in Atlanta (see The Cole Papers, September 1995).

The products were well received. ISGI took orders from the New York Daily News
and the 25,000-circulation evening Reading (Pa.) Eagle.

In the latter part of the summer, Chapchal was named chairman of ISGI and
immediately set about finding a partner to build up the company. He found one
in Italian investor Tullio Ponzi, who in recent years had built International
Publishing Associates Holding Ltd.

IPA Systems is a holding company that owns Monotype Publishing Systems of
Rolling Meadows, Ill., and the United Kingdom; H. Berthold of the United
Kingdom; Freedom System Integrators of Wichita, Kan.; QED Technology Ltd. of
Cheltenham, England; GB Techniques of Prestwick, Scotland, and Scangraphic
PrePress Technology of Wedel, Germany.

IPA Systems was created by Ponzi and longtime industry executives Peter Purdy
and Charles Crocker in 1992 and '93. Crocker left the business in 1993. Purdy
died in October 1994.

On Nov. 8, Siemens Nixdorf transferred ownership of ISGI to Scangraphic (a
legalistic nicety -- Scangraphic would not take over ISGI's business, and each
would operate separately).

The plan was that Chapchal would be in charge of the new ISGI, which would
incorporate the resources of Freedom Systems, QED and GB Techniques.
Specifically, the deal gave Chapchal a presence in the United States, along
with a sales force.

But within days of finalizing the deal, Ponzi and Chapchal had a falling out.
Although Chapchal remains a consultant to ISGI, he is no longer chairman.

Along with Chapchal's leave-taking, his lieutenants Ian Anderson and Rod
Fenwick -- who had both worked extensively with Chapchal at both Atex and
previous projects -- also left ISGI.

While no plans for the future of ISGI have been announced, the installation at
the Reading Eagle is going forward.

As an executive with Linotype in the '70s and early '80s, Chapchal was
president of its World Systems Inc. division, with corporate responsibilities
in the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom.

In 1984, Chapchal returned to England, where -- in addition to being the chief
fund-raiser and chairman of QED Technology -- he was managing director of
Applied Research of Cambridge Ltd., a supplier of turnkey CAD systems.

Within two years, Chapchal became chief executive of Xenotron Holdings Plc.
Xenotron, a publishing systems supplier emphasizing display advertising makeup
systems, was shortly thereafter sold to the Hell publishing systems group in
Germany.

Hell ultimately killed Xenotron and most of its innovative technology.

Chapchal then orchestrated the sale of QED to Maxwell Communications Corp. and
took a position with Fifth Wave Technology Ltd., a division of Maxwell.

He left the publishing systems business in 1991 to run SQL Systems
International of Surrey, England, a supplier of asset management software.
Insiders indicate that within 18 months, Chapchal turned SQL from a company
that lost millions of dollars into a multimillion-dollar money-maker.

In 1993 Chapchal began discussions with Kodak about acquiring its Atex
division, and put the deal together that December. Chapchal used investors who
had been involved in the SQL restructuring.

In the course of his running Atex, those investors lost faith in Chapchal, and
in 1994 Sysdeco convinced the Atex board of directors to give it an equity
position in the company and a management contract.

Chapchal then began work on the ISGI project.

-- dmc



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

P.INK GERMANY ENTERS CHAPTER 11

P.INK, the Macintosh-based editorial front-end system whose history has been
mixed at best, has hit another stumbling block: bankruptcy.

The German company that developed the software -- P.INK Software Engineering
GmbH of Hamburg -- has filed Vergleichsbeantragung, the German version of
Chapter 11 reorganization. This type of bankruptcy filing allows a company to
keep its creditors at bay while it negotiates for better repayment plans and/or
the injection of working capital from new investors.

Reports from Germany indicate that P.INK had been planning on a fresh round of
financing from Scitex Corp. Ltd. of Herzlia, Israel -- one of its four owners
-- which was not forthcoming.

Speculation has implicated Scitex's 1995 third-quarter loss of more than $36.4
million as the reason it didn't make the investment. The loss might have left
the company cash-strapped and incapable of honoring its commitment to buy out
two of the other three owners of P.INK.

Scitex America executives did not respond to numerous phone and e-mail queries
regarding the P.INK situation.

Scitex, which markets the P.INK product line outside of Germany, Austria and
Switzerland, bought 25 percent of the company in February 1994 with an
agreement to acquire another 50 percent of the company over a two-year period.
The remaining 25 percent of P.INK would remain with its founder, president and
chief executive, Andreas Poliza.

The 50 percent of the company that Scitex was scheduled to acquire has been
owned by the German newspaper publishing group Madsack and a German software
company called Rechenzentrum Sdwest. Rechenzentrum has owned its 25 percent for
only a year.

The acquisition of P.INK was engineered by Scitex America Corp. executive Bob
Holt, a former editor at the St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Holt, based in Bedford,
Mass., spent much of 1993 in Hamburg, stopping off on his way to and from
Israel to work with Poliza to improve the software and iron out the long-term
relationship.

Scitex -- both in Israel and the United States -- has gone through massive
reorganizations recently. The head of Scitex America, George Carlisle, left the
company last summer. In November, Arie Rosenfeld, the president and chief
executive of Scitex Corp. Ltd. resigned amidst the fallout from the company's
sizable third-quarter loss.

Part of the reason for that loss was an $18 million charge for employee
termination benefits; many longtime Scitex executives have recently left the
company, including Scitex America's marketing executive Ken Hurtabise and
corporate communications executive Paul Thiele.

In addition, Scitex America announced in August the establishment of a
publishing division that would be responsible for the P.INK product line as
well as other Scitex products.

Scitex has sold the Mac-based P.INK system to two newspapers -- The Sun of
Bremerton, Wash., a 41,000-circulation evening daily, and the
63,000-circulation morning Evansville (Ind.) Courier. Both papers are owned by
Scripps-Howard.

In addition, Scitex smoothed the installation of P.INK at the Toronto Sun and
other Sun Publishing Corp. properties (which include the Calgary Sun, Edmonton
Sun and Financial Post), even though the Sun papers had purchased the product
directly from P.INK in Germany.

Executives at these papers were reluctant to be quoted about the situation, but
indicated that Scitex had told them, as one said, "not to worry."

"We've been told that the worst-case scenario is that Scitex will get the North
American rights to the P.INK code," said one newspaper executive.

Despite generally upbeat comments coming from customers, and published reports
that the staff has "expressed full support for the company," sources in Germany
indicate that P.INK programmers are extensively circulating their resumes.

The P.INK story in North America is not a happy one: Demonstrated under the
P.INK Software banner at ANPA/Tec 1990, the North American marketing rights for
the product were acquired in 1991 by the Time Magazine Group division of media
giant Time Warner.

For the next two years, P.INK America attempted to sell its software to its
sibling divisions -- magazines such as Time, People and long-time Mac user
Entertainment Weekly -- and newspapers and other magazines as well.

The potential customers, inside Time or not, were decidedly uninterested. In
1993, Time shut down P.INK America. It was another year before Scitex made its
deal, and despite the Scripps-Howard sales the company has had problems
building momentum for the product line.

-- dmc



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

MARK YOUR CALENDARS

Attending industry-related conferences, expositions and meetings frequently
requires more advanced planning than our monthly listings can take into
account. For those executives who would like to plan to attend the leading
meetings of 1996, we present this list of key events:

*NAA/IFRA International Newspaper Operations Conference: Feb. 6-8, Granada,
Spain. (703) 648-1315.

*Digital '96: Feb. 21-24, Denver. (513) 728-4671.

*Interactive Newspapers '96: Feb. 21-24, San Francisco. (609) 921-7200.

*Seybold Boston: Feb. 27-March 1. (415) 578-6990.

*Newspaper Operations SuperConference: March 3-8, Miami Beach, Fla. (703)
648-1223.

*Magazine Management Conference (M2): March 18-20, Orlando. (203) 358-9900.

*Folio Mideast: March 20-23, Chicago. (203) 358-9900.

*America East: March 26-28, Hershey, Pa. (717) 234-4067.

*Folio West: April 16-19, Los Angeles. (203) 358-9900.

*Pre Show/West: April 25-26. Los Angeles. (203) 358-9900.

*Pre Show/Midwest: May 21-22. Chicago. (203) 358-9900.

*PANPA '96: April 30-May 3, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. (011) {612} 959-4396.

*NAA Classified Conference: June 2-5, San Diego. (703) 648-1275.

*NAA Connections XI: June 14-15. Las Vegas. (703) 684-1173.

*NEXPO '96: June 15-19, Las Vegas. (703) 648-1212.

*Seybold San Francisco: Sept. 10-13. (415) 578-6990.

*IFRA '96: Oct. 14-17, Genf, Germany. (011) {6151} 7005-0.

*America West: Oct. 23-25, Reno, Nev. (916) 443-5991.

-- dmc



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/pb10.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
THE COLE PAPERS via NewsNet
January 1996

Bit bucket ...

"We want them to pay enough money [to license Java] that it hurts a little bit.
It has to be something that you take seriously. For a company like Microsoft,
you charge them a couple of hundred thousand dollars, they don't even notice.
They blow that much on the fruit for one of their press events."

-- Sun Microsystems' John Gage, quoted in Investor's Business Daily

AP on the Web: The new AP Multimedia Services department, which will provide
programming to AP members via the World-Wide Web, will be started by: James
Kennedy, who joined the AP in 1987 and has been business news editor since
1988. In 1992, he also assumed responsibility for AP's financial market
services and directed the editorial and technical team that developed the Grand
Central Stocks service for customizing newspaper stock listings. He joined the
AP from the Tampa (Fla.) Tribune, where he was business editor. ... Ruth Gersh,
who joined the AP in Richmond, Va., in 1978. She was named correspondent in
Norfolk, Va., in 1980, and returned to Richmond as a state capitol reporter two
years later. She was promoted to news editor in Louisville in 1986 and became
chief of bureau in Des Moines in 1988. She was named assistant to the AP
president five years later. ... Mark Berns, who joined the AP in Indianapolis
in 1982 and transferred to Detroit later that year. He became an editor on the
AP general desk in New York in 1984, and in 1990 was named a product manager in
communications, working on AP's financial market services. He became director
of product development in 1992. ... Hank Ackerman, who has specialized for the
last two years in on-line issues, working closely with AP member newspapers who
were building their new systems. Before coming to New York in 1993, he headed
AP bureaus in Atlanta; Detroit; New Orleans; Cleveland; Lima, Peru, and
Caracas, Venezuela. He joined AP in New York in 1972 in the World Services
Department, and was transferred to Buenos Aires as news editor in 1973. ...
Also at the AP, Kelly Smith Tunney has been named assistant to AP President
Louis Boccardi; Tunney, who had been on a leave of absence, is the news
cooperative's former chief of bureau in Korea and the first director of
corporate communications. ...

New media mavens: At the Knoxville (Tenn.) News-Sentinel, Jack Lail has been
named manager of on-line publishing; Lail, the paper's former metro editor, is
the longtime manager of the Society of Professional Journalists' mailing list.
 ... At Durand Communications Network Inc. of Santa Barbara, Calif., Joe
Barletta has been named head of the company's interactive community and
publishing division. Barletta, the former general manager of the New York Daily
News, president of the San Francisco Newspaper Agency, head of Freedom
Communications' newspaper division and, most recently, publisher of TV Guide,
will oversee the company's efforts to develop on-line areas for newspapers....

Real bits: At Thomson Newspapers of Stamford, Conn., Steven Strout has been
named vice president of information technology. Strout is the former director
of publishing technologies at the Ocala Star-Banner and director of information
technology at the Gainesville Sun, two Florida newspapers owned by the New York
Times Regional group. ... At Thomson's Los Angeles Newspaper Group, Mark Loundy
has left as a photo assignment editor to become picture desk manager at
Allsport of Santa Monica. ... At Ziff-Davis Publishing of Foster City, Calif.,
Maggie Canon has been named editor-in-chief of Computer Life magazine. Canon's
previous job, editor-in-chief of Macuser, is now held by Pamela Pfiffner, who
had been the magazine's desktop publishing section editor. ... At the
Star-Ledger in Newark, N.J., M.J. Crowley has been named head of the library;
Crowley is the longtime chief librarian at the Philadelphia Newspapers. ...
And, at the Houston Chronicle, Glenn Carvel, the paper's manager of pre-press
implementation and support, is retiring after 43 years with the paper. Taking
Carvel's spot: Paul SoRelle, the longtime newsroom systems guy. ...

Vendor vicissitudes: At Advanced Technical Solutions Inc. of North Andover,
Mass., Jon Daly becomes a sales representative. Daly, who had handled the
Tecs/2 line at both Publishing Partners International and Information
International Inc., was once West Coast sales chief for Atex, where one of his
charges was Ray Toothaker. Where's Toothaker today? President of Advanced
Technical Solutions. ... At ECRM of Tewksbury, Mass., Irene Leung has been
named Far East regional sales manager; she'd been with Cosa Liebermann Hong
Kong Ltd. Also in the Far Eastern office, Raymond Chiu has been retained to
handle technical support and training; he'd been with Canon Hong Kong Trading
Co. Ltd. And back at the main office, Anthony Manifold has been named to the
international trade committee of Npes, the Association for Suppliers of
Printing and Publishing Technologies; Manifold is ECRM's director of sales,
developing markets. ... At Gannett Media Technologies International of
Cincinnati, Kurt Dressel has been named vice president of sales and marketing.
Though most recently a vice president of the Bank of Ireland, Dressel had held
senior sales positions with Screen USA, Du Pont and Eastman Kodak. ... At
PressLink of Reston, Va., Lisa King leaves to take a marketing management
position at an educational on-line software company based in Philadelphia. ...
At System Integrators Inc. of Sacramento, Jennifer Mitchell has been named
director of worldwide marketing; most recently, Mitchell was director and
principal analyst of Dataquest's Digital Documents Research Service. ...

Confabs: The humongo MacWorld Expo is Jan. 9-12 here in beautiful downtown San
Francisco. Keynote speakers include Apple Evangelism Fellow Guy Kawasaki, Adobe
Senior Creative Director Russell Brown, MetaTools Co-Founder Kai Krause and a
panel moderated by Newsweek Technology Editor Steven Levy that will include
Machttp creator Chuck Shotton and CD-ROM muse Robert Winter. Also included are
a booth or a thousand and more MacHeads than you can imagine. Call (617)
361-8000. ... The Linotype-Hell Users Group annual meeting is Jan. 10-13 in
Phoenix. Included are two "Great Debates": Print vs. The Internet, and Mac vs.
Windows vs. UNIX (what, no CP/M?). Details are available by dialing (518)
371-4790 or by e-mailing LHUsers@aol.com. ... Networks for Newspapers, an IFRA
Symposium, will be Jan. 16-17 in Rome. Call IFRA in Germany for details (011)
{6151} 7005-0. ... Tutorials including "Building Internet Firewalls" and
"Creating a World-Wide Web Site" are being offered Jan. 18-19 in Austin, Texas,
by Great Circle Associates; more information is available by calling (415)
962-0841. ... HTML and Internet Publishing and SGML Management Strategies are
being offered Jan. 22-23 in Phoenix by the Graphic Communications Association;
details are at (703) 519-8160. ... Usenix, the technical conference on UNIX and
advanced computing systems, is Jan. 22-26 in San Diego. Among the "14 reasons
to attend": 21 tutorials; 28 refereed papers; Internet access until 2 a.m.
throughout the week; the keynote by Van Jacobsen on Nature and Nurture, the
interplay of UNIX and Networking; San Diego in winter. Dial (714) 588-8649 or
e-mail conference@usenix.org. ... The Photoshop Conference will be Jan. 22-24
in San Francisco; call (206) 285-0305. ... The annual Harris Executive Seminar
on pagination and new media will be Jan. 24-25 in Melbourne, Fla. Speakers
include Grady Cooper of Alameda Newspaper Group; Jim Haggarty of the Western
Producer in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Randy Jessee of the Virginian-Pilot in
Norfolk, Va.; Fred Mann of Philadelphia Online; Joycelyn Marke of the Houston
Chronicle's Interactive Division; Barry Mechanic of the New York Post; Dennis
Melnick of the Pottsville (Pa.) Republican; Bill Pruitt of Tampa Bay Online,
and Bob Ryan of San Jose's Mercury Center. Appearing in a familiar role -- as
moderator -- is some guy named Cole. More information is available by calling
(800) 832-3932. ... The Michigan Press Association holds its winter meeting
Jan. 27-28 in Grand Rapids. Call (517) 372-2424 for more information. ... The
Digital Publishing Symposium is Jan. 29-30 in New York. Speakers include
William Rosenblatt of Times Mirror; Susan Riker of U.S. News & World Report,
and Carl Crothers of the Tampa Tribune. Call (212) 661-8740 or e-mail
us002506@interramp.com. ... ComNet '96 will be Jan. 29-Feb. 1 in Washington.
Keynote speakers include Nicholas Negroponte of the MIT Media Lab, James
Barksdale of Netscape Communications Inc., Edward Bennett of Prodigy Services
and Eric Schmidt of Sun Microsystems. And our old friend Richard Hart (who is
billed as the only person to win both an Emmy award for comedy and a Du
Pont-Columbia Journalism Award for investigative reporting, and is the co-host
of C/Net) will make a presentation called "The Electronic Mall of Ideas --
People Convergence." To converge with these guys, call (617) 551-9800. ...
Managing the Digital Document '96 will be Jan. 30-31 in San Francisco. Call the
sponsoring Association for Information and Image Management International at
(301) 587-8202 for details. ... The 1996 Audiotext Forum will be Jan. 30-Feb. 1
in Los Angeles. Keynote speaker is that audiotext (and weight) expert Tommy
Lasorda. Call (310) 724-6500. ... And if you want to attend the best conference
and trade show put on by newspaper executives for newspaper executives, try
Digital '96, this year Feb. 21-24 in Denver. Lots of good breakout sessions,
lots of hands-on training and Tim Gill of Quark as a keynote speaker. Call
(513) 728-4671 or e-mail planners@plink.geis.com for more information. ... #



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>