
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B09-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B021-35</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035544 text/html 48891
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:53:47 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:53 GMT
Content-length: 48704
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/me17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>D NJ JURY FINDS NO DEFECT IN ABSENCE OF KEYBOARD WARNING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(391 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>D RI PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL CITES REASONS FOR MISTRIAL MOTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(789 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DC FED. COURT CONSIDERS PLAINTIFFS' PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION&nbsp;OBLIGATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(859 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ND GA JUDGE SAYS PLAINTIFF NEEDED TO CITE ALTERNATIVE DESIGN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1045 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>CAUSE OF ACTION DID NOT ACCRUE FROM SYMPTOM ONSET, ARGUES&nbsp;PLAINTIFF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1012 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>D NJ DECLINES TO APPLY DISCOVERY EXCEPTION TO CAUSE OF ACTION&nbsp;ACCRUAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(624 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>EEOC SAYS RSI SCREENING TESTS VIOLATED ADA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>MANUFACTURERS GROUP REPORTS ON RSIs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(496 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>8TH CIR.: EVIDENTIARY ERROR WAS OF APPELLANT'S MAKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(459 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>MO CT. APP. FINDS INSURER AT TIME OF DISABILITY LIABLE FOR&nbsp;BENEFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>PHYSICIAN'S INPUT TO DISABILITY RATING DEEMED INADMISSIBLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(612 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

D NJ JURY FINDS NO DEFECT IN ABSENCE OF KEYBOARD WARNING

     A 10-member federal district court jury in Trenton, NJ, on
Dec. 22 found that a plaintiff had not shown that the defendant's
keyboard was defective due to the absence of a warning that using
it could cause repetitive stress injuries.  Oliver v. AT&T
Teletype Corp., No. 93-1806 (D NJ).

     Plaintiff Janet C. Oliver, a service representative with New
Jersey Bell, had used an AT&T keyboard in her employment since
1980.  She filed a complaint in New Jersey Superior Court, Mercer
County, on Dec. 18, 1992, maintaining that AT&T was negligent in
failing to warn "of the dangers and hazards of the [keyboard],
and the dangers posed to the health and welfare of those coming
in contact with or using the [keyboard]."  Oliver also advanced a
theory of strict products liability, claiming that she suffered
her injury "[a]s a proximate result of the defective, unfit,
unsuitable, unsafe and unreasonably dangerous condition of the
[keyboard]."  Oliver sought compensatory and punitive damages.

     The litigation was removed to the U.S. District Court for
the District of New Jersey on April 26, 1993.  The trial went to
the jury before Judge Garrett E. Brown Jr. on Dec. 5.

     The jury, in reaching its verdict, answered "no" to the
question, "Do you find that AT&T's keyboard was defective due to
the absence of a warning that the product could cause the type of
injuries claimed by the plaintiff?"  Apparently the jury did not
accept the testimony of Oliver's expert witness, Dr. Sandra Mohr,
linking repetitive stress injury to keyboard use.

     In a May 30, 1995, order, Magistrate Judge John J. Hughes
barred evidence in the nature of Bureau of Labor Statistics data
regarding the proliferation of repetitive stress syndrome
excepting through testimonial reference.  Judge Hughes opined
that the prejudice to AT&T resulting from the admission of such
evidence far outweighed its probative value.  Judge Hughes did
allow evidence pertaining to workers' compensation claims filed
by AT&T employees based on keyboard use, as well as evidence of
alternative keyboard designs and warnings utilized by other
manufacturers.

     Oliver was represented by Moshe Maimon of Levy Phillips &
Konigsberg in New York City; and by Bill Mathesius of Szafer,
Lakind, Blumstein, Walter & Bader in Lawrenceville, NJ.  AT&T was
represented by Ira Greenberg and Andrew Fishkin of Edwards &
Angell in New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

D RI PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL CITES REASONS FOR MISTRIAL MOTION

     Citing the lack of a "level playing field" in the
presentation of the parties' cases, counsel for an RSI plaintiff
whose jury trial ended with a verdict adverse to her cause filed,
on Dec. 11, an affidavit supporting his motions for a new trial
and a mistrial.  Piester v. IBM Corp., No. 94-470 (D RI).

     Counsel for plaintiffs Patricia and Richard Piester, Steven
J. Phillips, based his motion on his belief that "the Court at
critical junctures displayed what appeared to be an animus toward
plaintiffs' cause generally, and toward [plaintiffs' counsel]
especially."  Furthermore, Phillips asserts that Judge Raymond J.
Pettine evidenced "an unmistakable approach of extreme liberality
favoring all proofs and scheduling needs desired by defendant and
harsh restrictiveness with respect to plaintiffs' proofs and
scheduling needs."  These "simply cannot be squared with any
notion of basic fairness," Phillips argues.

     For example, Phillips cites what he alleges is a disparity
in the approach taken by Judge Pettine to the parties in pretrial
proceedings.  Phillips asserts that Judge Pettine "promptly
forgave" IBM's failure to timely file a pretrial memorandum.
Judge Pettine reopened discovery and otherwise let IBM "prepare
for trial at a time after plaintiffs had already filed their
pretrial memo," Phillips says.  Phillips avers that this
contrasts greatly with Judge Pettine's order finding inadmissible
the testimony of plaintiffs' expert witnesses, Dr. Laura Welch
and Dr. Laura Punnett.

     Phillips asserts that IBM ignored Judge Pettine's
admonishment to raise "serious" issues in limine prior to trial
by not raising the admissibility issue until after the trial
began.  "This tactic was richly successful, without once the
Court questioning why IBM had waited so long without waiving its
rights," Phillips says.

     Phillips cites a number of examples of what he claims were
Judge Pettine's unequal treatment of the parties during trial
proceedings.  Phillips says that he was told by Judge Pettine
that there would be no time set for openings, yet he asserts that
Judge Pettine suddenly imposed a time limit while his opening was
in progress.

     Phillips also avers that he was frequently admonished to
"get to the point" while he was trying to lay the foundation of
the plaintiffs' case.  "In essence, the Court was mercilessly
rushing plaintiffs and preventing the careful laying of
foundations and bases for opinions on the one hand and then
sustaining objections for failing to lay such foundations on the
other," Phillips says.

     This contrasts with the latitude given IBM in its
questioning of Patricia Piester, Phillips says.  He says that
"the record will reveal that IBM counsel was given an
unbelievable and unfettered freedom to make speeches and testify
rather than ask questions throughout these proceedings."

     "It is not plaintiffs' belief that the Court intended [to
deny a fair trial] or consciously acted with any impropriety,"
says  Phillips, but he argued that that is precisely what
occurred.

     According to the original complaint, Patricia Piester used
an IBM keyboard in her employment as a medical secretary for a
Providence medical practice.  She began to experience numbness
and tingling in her upper extremities in August 1990 and
underwent carpal tunnel surgery in January 1991.

     The jury in the Piester trial said on Oct. 20 that the
plaintiff did not prove that a computer keyboard manufactured by
IBM was a proximate cause of her repetitive stress injuries.

     On Oct. 16, prior to the jury's verdict, Judge Pettine ruled
on the admissibility of the testimony of Welch, a medical doctor,
and Punnett, an occupational epidermologist and ergonomist.
Judge Pettine ruled that Welch had sufficient knowledge and
scientific foundation, under the standard of Daubert v. Merrell
Dow Pharmaceuticals, 113 S.Ct. 2786 (1993), to testify on the
cause of Piester's injuries and on whether IBM's keyboard was
unreasonably dangerous.  However, the judge found her not
qualified to opine on the value of keyboard warnings in
preventing injury or on the desirability of alternative keyboard
designs.

     As to Punnett, Judge Pettine said that her testimony "lacks
the required scientific reliability mandated by Daubert and
presents the conundrum of how you bridge the gap from subjective
symptoms and objective signs to a defined disease."  Judge
Pettine found Punnett's testimony inadmissible, observing that
"Dr. Punnett is not an M.D. and yet she jumps from symptoms to
disease.  I find that bridging this hiatus is dependent on
medical expertise."

     Attorneys for Piester were Steven J. Phillips of Levy
Phillips & Konigsberg, New York City; Robert Corrente of
Corrente, Brill & Kusinitz, Providence; and Mark C. Hadden of
Gidley, Sarli & Marusak, Providence.  IBM was represented by
Michael A. Cerussi Jr. and Joseph A. D'Avanzo of Cerussi &
Spring, White Plains, NY; and by Matthew F. Madeiros of Flanders
& Madeiros, Providence.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

DC FED. COURT CONSIDERS PLAINTIFFS' PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION
OBLIGATIONS

     The defendants in a repetitive stress injury product
liability action filed separate briefs Dec. 11 opposing the
plaintiff's motion to compel further discovery.  Fort et al. v.
IBM et al., No. 95-20 (D DC).

     The defendants say that the plaintiff has no ground for
further discovery in light of her failure to provide required
specific product identification information to the defendants.

     In its brief, defendant NEC Technologies points out that to
date "no product identification information concerning NEC
Technologies has been produced by [Fort]."  This is so despite
Fort's being ordered by Judge Norma Holloway Johnson to present
this information by June 30, 1995, says NEC.  NEC says that it is
not obligated to respond to Fort's interrogatories because the
disputed facts at issue had not been alleged with particularity.
NEC argues that Fort's latest filing is nothing more than an
attempt to forestall court action on the defendants' Sept. 7
motion to dismiss based on Fort's failure to produce product
identification information.

     NEC maintains that FRCP 26(a)(1) is inapplicable to the
instant litigation, pursuant to Local Rule 207(a), since it had
been assigned to the "complex track" by mutual consent of the
parties.  Under Local Rule 207(a), the burden is on the parties
"to make specific discovery requests to obtain the information
and material that is truly relevant...," says NEC.  Fort has not
demonstrated how additional discovery will help it meets its
product identification burden, adds NEC.

     The opposition filed by IBM largely echoes the sentiments of
its co-defendant NEC on the applicability of FRCP 26(a)(1), the
validity of Fort's interrogatories and Fort's delays in providing
product identification information.  In addition, IBM asserts
that Fort seeks "to shift the burden of product identification to
IBM in an attempt to avoid the results of the failure of their
own efforts."

     IBM and NEC filed their briefs in response to Fort's Nov. 29
motion to compel discovery.  In that motion, Fort argued that the
defendants have done "nothing to meet their obligations under
Fed.R.Civ.P. 26(a)(1) to disclose information within their
control which would permit the identification of the keyboards
and terminals used...."  Fort maintained that the defendants,
even accounting for Local Rule 207(a), were obligated to disclose
information pertaining to, among others things, (1) the types of
equipment sold to her employer, the Chesapeake & Potomac
Telephone Co. (C&P); (2) sales information relevant to the
products; and (3) sales and maintenance contracts with C&P.

               Fort noted that she had served a second set of
interrogatories in an attempt to moot the defendants' refusal to
comply with FRCP 26(a)(1), but that the defendants have filed
objections to these interrogatories.

     In the alternative, Fort asked that should the court find
the defendants exempt from FRCP 26(a)(1), and from responding to
the second set of interrogatories, that she be granted leave to
file more interrogatories and requests for production of
documents.  "Otherwise, plaintiffs will effectively have been
denied any discovery on product identification because an oral
determination by the Court placing the case on a complex track
had the unintended retroactive effect of terminating discovery
which the Federal Rules contemplate plaintiffs should have as a
matter of right," Fort said.

     On Dec. 18, Fort filed a reply in support of her motion to
compel discovery, disputing IBM's and NEC's categorizations of
her obligation to provide product identification information.
Fort says that the order issued by U.S. Magistrate Judge John L.
Caden of the Eastern District of New York, the court from which
the instant litigation was transferred, called for her to provide
product identification information only to the extent known.
That order clearly rejected the defendants' argument that product
identification must include model and serial numbers, Fort said.
Fort argues that "[t]he model and serial numbers of [defendants']
19th century-style keyboards is irrelevant or at best marginally
relevant to repetitive stress/carpal tunnel syndrome injuries."

     Most recently, on Dec. 29, IBM filed a motion to strike
Fort's reply of Dec. 18.  IBM argues that the memo should be
stricken because it did not address Fort's earlier motion to
compel discovery, but instead raised issues that were immaterial
to that motion.  IBM contends that Fort improperly used the reply
memo "to oppose the defendants' motion to dismiss " even though
that opposition had already been filed on Sept. 21, 1995."

     Fort filed her complaint in the U.S. District Court for the
Eastern District of New York on March 25, 1993, seeking
compensatory and punitive damages for the repetitive stress
injuries she allegedly incurred while using certain typewriter
and computer equipment while working for C&P.  The complaint
named IBM as the manufacturer of the typewriter equipment and NEC
and AT&T Corp. as the manufacturers of the computer equipment.
The case was transferred to the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia on April 20, 1994.

     Counsel for Fort is Bardyl R. Tirana, Washington DC.
Counsel for IBM are J. Hardin Marion, John B. Isbister and
Stephen Weissman of Tydings and Rosenberg, Baltimore.  Counsel
for NEC are James E. Gray and Colleen Rathbun of Goodell,
DeVries, Leech & Gray, L.L.P., also in Baltimore.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

ND GA JUDGE SAYS PLAINTIFF NEEDED TO CITE ALTERNATIVE DESIGN

     U.S. District Judge Frank M. Hull of the Northern District
of Georgia on Dec. 7 granted summary judgment in favor of the
manufacturer of a check encoding machine in the product liability
case brought by a bank employee who asserted that the machine had
caused her repetitive stress injuries.  Little v. NCR Corp.,
No. 93-1555 (ND GA).

     Gwenette Little began working for Wachovia Bank in December
1986 as an encoder operator.  According to her complaint, she
began to experience pain and swelling in her hands in
August 1991.  She was diagnosed with overuse syndrome in January
1992 and with carpal tunnel syndrome in December 1992.  Little
attributed her condition to her use of the encoding machine
manufactured by NCR.  In her job, Little fed a check into a
machine track with her left hand while typing on a keypad with
her right hand.

     Little's July 8, 1993, complaint alleged seven causes of
action: (1) breach of implied warranty of merchantability;
(2) breach of implied warranty of fitness for a particular
purpose; (3) breach of express warranty; (4) strict liability;
(5) negligent design; (6) failure to warn; and (7) gross
negligence in the failure to warn.  Little sought actual and
punitive damages as well as special damages in the amount of
$1 million.

     First, Judge Hull agreed with NCR's argument that Little's
complaint was time-barred under Georgia's two-year statute of
limitations.  While Little argued that her cause of action did
not accrue until she was diagnosed with overuse syndrome in early
1992, Judge Hull noted that "Georgia law requires only that
[Little] knew or should have known through reasonable diligence
that she was injured and that [NCR's] conduct caused the injury."
Since her doctor had suggested that her problems with her hands
were likely related to her job, Little was aware of the likely
cause of her injuries more than two years prior to filing her
complaint, said Judge Hull.

     In addition to lack of timely filing, the judge indicated
that there were other grounds to grant NCR's motion for summary
judgment.

     Judge Hull said that summary judgment in favor of NCR was
appropriate with respect to Little's strict liability and
negligent design claims, since Little failed to meet her burden
to show defect and causation.

     The judge agreed with NCR that the testimony of Little's
expert witness, Dr. Ruston M. Hunt, was inadmissible because it
was not reliable under the U.S. Supreme Court's teaching in
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 113 S.Ct. 2786, 2795
(1993).  Judge Hull said that Hunt's testimony "suffers from not
just unreliable methodology, but the complete absence of any
discernible methodology."

     The judge noted that Hunt: (1) had no experience with
encoding machine design; (2) had never conducted original
research into overuse syndrome nor had he published or testified
on that topic; (3) had spent only 10 to 12 hours on forming his
expert opinion prior to being deposed; and (4) had never met
Little or her physicians nor had he seen her workstation.

     Judge Hull rebuffed Little's attempt to support her claim
with statistical evidence showing a purportedly high incidence of
overuse syndrome among encoder operators.  She stated that
Little's use of statistical evidence "does not raise a genuine
issue on the elements of (1) defect in the check-encoding
machine, and (2) causation between a defect in the check encoding
machine and [Little's] injury."

     Judge Hull granted NCR's motion for summary judgment also
with respect to Little's claim of breach of express warranty.  He
noted that under Georgia law, "an express warranty extends only
to the original purchaser, unless the warranty 'makes it clear
that it is also intended to extend to some identifiable third
party or parties'" (quoting Stewart v. Gainesville Glass Co.,
Inc., 131 Ga.App. 747 [1974]).  Here, there is nothing in NCR's
sales agreement with Little's employer, Wachovia Bank, "that any
warranties extend to [Little], as an employee," said Judge Hull.

     Little's failure to warn theory of liability also fell
victim to NCR's motion for summary judgment.  Judge Hull found
summary judgment in favor of NCR to be appropriate, as Little
"has not produced evidence on defect and causation."  Further,
Judge Hull noted that Little's suggestions on an appropriate
warning, i.e., "maintaining proper posture," did not relate to
the encoding machine but related to Little's job.

     Judge Hull offered yet another basis to enter summary
judgment in favor of NCR.  He found that Little failed to meet
her burden, under Georgia law, to "produce proof to a reasonable
degree of medical certainty that [her] injury resulted from her
use of [NCR's] machine."

     Finally, Judge Hull said that Little's suit must fail due to
her failure to propose an alternative design for the encoder.
Following the "risk-utility analysis" set forth in Banks v. ICI
Americas, Inc., 264 Ga. 732, 734-37 (1994), an alternative design
is one factor in determining whether a product's utility
outweighs the risks inherent in its design, noted Judge Hull.
Absent an alternative, Judge Hull concluded that Little did not
show that NCR's "design choice" was unreasonable.

     When contacted by the Repetitive Stress Injury LR, NCR's co-
counsel, Max Hess, opined that adoption of the "alternative
design" requirement would make it much harder for RSI plaintiffs
"down the road."

     Little's breach of implied warranty claims were dismissed by
an earlier order filed by Judge Hull on Feb. 22, 1995.  He ruled
that Little's lack of privity to NCR's sales contract with
Wachovia barred recovery under breach of warranty.  Also
dismissed at that time was Little's allegation that NCR was
grossly negligent in its duty to warn and, by extension, Little's
claim for punitive damages.  Judge Hull noted that, under Georgia
law, punitive damages are available only for "willful misconduct,
malice, fraud, wantonness, oppression, or that entire want of
care which would raise the presumption of conscious indifference
to consequences."

     While Little alleged that NCR "intentionally failed to
warn," Judge Hull observed that Little's allegations "do not rise
to the level of conscious indifference of the consequences so as
to support [her] prayer for punitive damages."

     Representing Little was Armando Rois-Mendez, Duluth, GA.
Representing NCR were Max Hess and John Taylor of Vincent,
Chorey, Taylor & Feil, Atlanta.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CAUSE OF ACTION DID NOT ACCRUE FROM SYMPTOM ONSET, ARGUES
PLAINTIFF

     The question of whether her action is time-barred is not
proper for summary judgment, repetitive stress injury plaintiff
Bernice Bush says in her Dec. 18 memorandum in opposition to
defendant IBM's motion for summary judgment.  Smith et al. v.
Memorex Corp. et al., No. 94-1163 (D DC).

     In her Dec. 21 response to IBM's motion to dismiss for
failure to allow complete discovery, Bush maintains that she "has
not deliberately failed to respond."

     Bush argues that since she "continued to use [IBM's]
products during the three-year period prior to filing her action,
and because she has sustained new injuries caused by her use of
those products in that three-year period, her claim is timely
under New York law."

     Bush rejects IBM's argument that her cause of action accrued
from the date she first experienced symptoms of injury.  This
issue is not settled in New York, Bush says, citing cases pending
before New York courts.

     Bush also argues that summary judgment is inappropriate in
this case.  Quoting Ford v. AT&T, 154 Misc.2d 894, 586 N.Y.S.2d
721, 724 (NY Sup. Ct., New York Cty. 1992), Bush asserts that the
question of whether symptoms noticed before a diagnosis was made
"were indications of the existence of the diagnosed [injury]," is
purely a question of fact to be resolved by a jury.
Additionally, Bush claims that she "did not experience a single
injury, but rather an accumulation of injuries through the period
of her use of the defendant's equipment."  Each of these
subsequent injuries "gives rise to a new cause of action," Bush
contends.

     Bush also cites "the aggravation of pre-existing injuries
during the same period" in support of the timeliness of her
action.  "It is well-settled in New York that defendant may be
held liable to plaintiff not only for causing injury, but for the
aggravation of a pre-existing condition," Bush says.

     Bush discounts IBM's reliance on Wallen v. AT&T,
No. 12336/91 (NY Sup. Ct., Bronx Cty., Sept. 17, 1992), and its
progeny in support of its proposition that a cause of injury
accrues from the onset of symptoms.  "In Wallen, onset of
symptoms were never discussed and only uncontested dates of
diagnoses were considered for accrual purposes," says Bush.  In
this case, "where diagnosis and symptom onset are explicitly
different and unlinked," Wallen is not controlling, Bush says.

     Finally, Bush asserts that her claim is timely under New
York's discovery statute, C.P.L.R. Section 214-c, which states,
in pertinent part:

     ...the three year period within which an action to
     recover damages for personal injury or injury to
     property caused by the latent effects of exposure to
     any substance or combination of substances, in any
     form...shall be computed from the date of discovery of
     the injury by the plaintiff...

     Bush maintains that this statute applies because she "did
not discover, and should not have discovered, the nature or cause
of any of her new injuries until she was diagnosed with them
during the three-year period prior to filing suit."

     Anticipating IBM's possible response to her statutory
argument, Bush denies that C.P.L.R. Section 214-c is applicable
only to injuries stemming from exposure to toxic substances.
Bush cites the court in DiMarco v. Hudson Valley Blood Services,
147 A.D.2d 156, 542 N.Y.S.2d 521 (1st Dept. 1989) as emphasizing
that it applies to injuries from the "latent effects of exposure
to any substance or combination of substances, in any form."

     In her response to the motion to dismiss, Bush contends that
she has answered all questions regarding her medical history to
the best of her ability.  In addition, she maintains that she has
provided IBM with medical records and information about her
medical expenses and wages lost.

     Bush further asserts that an upcoming expert report "will
provide a basis for establishing IBM's liability."  IBM, says
Bush, has been in possession of an affidavit that lists
"documents that support [her] claims for punitive damages, strict
liability and negligence."

     "The documents set forth...were either produced by IBM
itself in other litigation or provided to IBM in other
litigation," says Bush.  "IBM, therefore, is fully aware of the
facts set forth in those documents and their relationship to its
liability in this matter," she adds.

     Bush was one of several individuals to file product
liability actions against a number of computer equipment
manufacturers in the Eastern District of New York on April 5,
1993.  Bush seeks compensatory and punitive damages, alleging
that her repetitive stress injuries were caused by her use of
computer equipment manufactured by defendant IBM and others while
she was employed by the Potomac Electric Power Co.  Her claim, as
well as that of lead plaintiff Joan P. Smith and another
plaintiff, was transferred to the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia on May 27, 1994.

     IBM moved for summary judgment on Dec. 6, arguing that
Bush's complaint was untimely filed.  IBM asserted that New
York's three-year statute of limitations is controlling and,
citing to Wallen and In re New York County Data Entry Workers
Litigation, No. 499000/93 (NY Sup. Ct., New York Cty., Aug. 17,
1994), argued that a repetitive stress injury plaintiff's cause
of action accrues from the onset of symptoms.  IBM argued that
both Bush's medical records and her own deposition indicate that
she had symptoms of repetitive stress injury as early as March
1985, some eight years prior to filing suit.

     IBM also filed a motion to dismiss, maintaining that Bush's
response to Magistrate Judge Deborah A. Robinson's order to
compel Bush to respond to discovery was "woefully inadequate."
In the motion, IBM argued that it still lacked "(1) any evidence
of wrongdoing on the part of IBM; (2) a complete medical history
of the plaintiff; and (3) an itemized list of the damages at
issue."

     Counsel for Bush are Marc P. Weingarten and Kim Palavoy
Kutler of Greitzer and Locks in Philadelphia; and Bardyl R.
Tirana, Washington, DC.  Counsel for IBM are John B. Isbister and
Jennifer Holmes of Tydings & Rosenberg in Baltimore.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

D NJ DECLINES TO APPLY DISCOVERY EXCEPTION TO CAUSE OF ACTION
ACCRUAL

     In a letter opinion filed Dec. 12, U.S. District Judge
Nicholas H. Politan of the District of New Jersey granted summary
judgment in favor of manufacturers of the computer equipment
cited as the cause of a plaintiff's repetitive stress injuries.
Sprueill v. NCR Corp. et al., No. 94-2233 (D NJ).
               The judge held that the complaint was time-barred under New
York's three-year statute of limitations.

     In their motions for summary judgment, defendants NCR Corp.,
Applied Digital Data Systems, an NCR subsidiary, and Hazeltine,
Inc. argued that since plaintiff Mary Sprueill admitted to having
ceased using their equipment more than three years before she
filed her complaint, the complaint was clearly untimely.

     Sprueill argued that the complaint was timely with respect
to these defendants because it was filed within one year of her
discovery of the defendants' fault in causing her injuries.
However, Judge Politan disagreed.  Citing to Wallen v. AT&T,
No. 12336/91 (NY Sup. Ct., Bronx Cty., Sept. 17, 1992), Judge
Politan held that the discovery exception to the statute of
limitations is not applicable to repetitive stress injury claims.
Also rejected was Sprueill's argument that her claim was timely
under the theory of a continuing duty to warn.  "This theory has
repeatedly been rejected by courts," Judge Politan said.

     Defendants Digital Equipment Corp. and Wyse Technology moved
for summary judgment as well, arguing that Sprueill's action
against them was also time-barred because her cause of action
accrued from the date of injury or symptoms of injury.  Sprueill
admitted to having pain as early as 1979, noted the defendants.

     Sprueill argued against summary judgment on the basis that
she had suffered new injuries during the statutory period that
were qualitatively different from her prior injuries.  Sprueill
cited the certification of Dr. Sandra N. Mohr to the effect that
she had been diagnosed with tenosynovitis in her right fingers,
flexor tenosynovitis of the wrists, and ulnar neuritis within the
last three years.

     However, Judge Politan found Mohr's certification to be
inadequate to deflect the defendants' motions for summary
judgment.

     "Dr. Mohr...never examined plaintiff before August of 1991,"
said Judge Politan.  "Additionally, Dr. Mohr admits that there
were no medical records in existence prior to Oct. 9, 1989, which
she could have reviewed regarding plaintiff's injuries," he
added.  "Hence, the certification is based on Dr. Mohr's pure
speculation, rather than any relevant medical facts," Judge
Politan concluded.

     Sprueill filed her complaint in the U.S. District Court for
the Eastern District of New York on March 29, 1993.  In the
complaint, Sprueill contends that her use of computer equipment
manufactured by the defendants during her employment was the
cause of her cervical radiculopathy, bilateral carpal tunnel
syndrome, and trigger finger syndrome.

     The complaint cites causes of action in negligence and
strict products liability.  Sprueill asserts that she used
computer equipment manufactured by Unisys Corp. (formerly
Burroughs Corp.) until 1970; equipment manufactured by NCR until
1979; equipment manufactured by Applied until 1989; equipment
manufactured by Hazeltine until 1989; equipment manufactured by
Wyse through 1990; and equipment manufactured by Digital until
1991.  Sprueill's action was transferred to the U.S. District
Court for the District of New Jersey on April 20, 1994.  Unisys
Corp. was dismissed as a defendant by order of Aug. 7, 1995.

     Counsel for Sprueill was Arnold Carl Lakind of Szaferman,
Lakind, Blumstein, Watter & Blader, P.C., Lawrenceville, NJ.
Counsel for NCR and Applied was Lynne J. Urbanowicz of Edwards &
Angell, Newark, NJ.  Counsel for Hazeltine was Thomas R. Curtin
of Ribis, Graham, Verdon & Curtin, Morristown, NJ.  Counsel for
Wyse was Michael J. Tartini of Minichino & Mautone, P.A.  Counsel
for Digital was Peter Russell Freed of Smith, Stratton, Wise,
Heher & Brennan, Princeton, NJ.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

EEOC SAYS RSI SCREENING TESTS VIOLATED ADA

     The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has accused
Rockwell International Corp. of violating the Americans with
Disabilities Act by conducting pre-employment testing designed to
screen out applicants with repetitive stress injuries and other
disabilities.  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v.
Rockwell International Corp. et al., No. 95-3824 (ND IL).

     In its amended complaint filed Dec. 14, the EEOC seeks
injunctive relief and compensatory and punitive damages for the
12 rejected applicants who filed charges with the EEOC.

     According to published reports, the 12 who filed charges had
applied for work at Rockwell's auto parts plant in Centralia, IL,
but were denied employment when they failed nerve conduction
studies designed to reveal RSIs or a propensity to incur RSIs.
ADA regulations require that medical tests given to job
applicants be job-related and consistent with the needs of the
business.  The EEOC has questioned the validity of nerve
conduction studies as an indicator for RSIs.

     The complaint alleges that Rockwell violated Sections
102(a), 102(b)(1), and 102(b)(6) of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. Sections
12112(a), 12112(b)(1), and 12112(b)(6), by "(a) failing to hire
the individuals listed...and other individuals because it
perceived them to have a disability within the meaning of the
ADA; (b) using employment tests that screen out a class of
individuals perceived to have disabilities; [and] (c) failing to
hire the individuals listed...and other individuals because they
had a record of a disability within the meaning of the ADA."

     The complaint asserts that Rockwell's engagement in
discriminatory employment practices was intentional and was done
with "malice or reckless indifference to the federally protected
rights of a class of individuals perceived to have disabilities."

     Also named in the complaint is Cambridge Industries, Inc. as
the successor to Rockwell at its Centralia facility.  Cambridge
purchased the facility from Rockwell in August 1994 and has
continued the operation since then.  According to the complaint,
Cambridge had notice of the charges at the time of the purchase.

     Representing the EEOC are Jean Powers Kamp, Gordon G.
Waldron and John C. Hendrickson of its Chicago office.
Representing Rockwell International are Richard H. Schnadig and
Nina G. Stillman of Vedder, Price, Kaufman & Kammholz in Chicago.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MANUFACTURERS GROUP REPORTS ON RSIs

     "Many misconceptions exist concerning the association
between upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders and office
work," the Office Ergonomics Research Committee (OERC) said in a
report released Jan. 4, entitled "Musculoskeletal Disorders in
the U.S. Office Workforce."

     "There is little scientific evidence on the exact causes of
[repetitive stress injuries] and the value of prescribed
interventions," the OERC says.  It adds that "[a] long term,
international research strategy is required to fill the voids in
our understanding."

     The OERC makes note of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data
that shows growth in the number of RSIs reported from 1990 to
1994.  The statistics show that the number of these injuries has
almost doubled in that period from 185,000 annually to 332,000.
However, the OERC notes that RSIs accounted for only 4.9% of all
occupational injuries in 1994, and that the rate of increase in
these injuries has lessened since 1993.

     The report goes on to examine the state of research into
input devices, such as computer keyboards; pointing devices, such
as computer mouses; workstation ergonomics; psychosocial
influences; medical considerations; and exercise.

     For example, the report cites a University of Rochester
study that found that keyboard users strike the keys four to five
times harder than necessary to activate the key.  The report
notes that the same study revealed that workers with symptoms of
RSIs strike the keys harder than do workers without symptoms.

     The report also cites a study by the National Institute on
Occupational Safety and Health that evaluated 127 exercises
recommended for keyboard users.  While the exercises were easily
performed in the office environment, 90% were seen as
questionable for workers with acute or chronic musculoskeletal
disorders, and 40% were judged to duplicate the "biomedical
demands" of keyboard use, says the OERC.

     The report concludes with descriptions of research projects
in the areas that the OERC has fully or partially funded.  One
such study by the University of California at San Francisco (UC-
SF) seeks to determine whether using a computer mouse causes
muscle fatigue and whether there is a difference in the fatigue
resulting from using a mouse with a drag lock compared to a
normal mouse.  The report says that an earlier UC-SF study showed
that mouses are being used 31% of the time in word processing
applications and 65% of the time in graphics applications.

     The OERC, a group composed of U.S. companies "concerned by
reports of an increasing number of [RSIs] among office workers,"
was formed in April 1991.  Its members include 3M, Apple
Computer, AT&T Global Information Solutions Corp., Compaq
Computer Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp.  The OERC lists as its
objectives: (1) the development of "an understanding of office
related [RSIs]"; (2) determining "the effect, if any, that office
work has on causing or exacerbating them"; (3) identifying the
interventions that "are successful in preventing or resolving
them"; and (4) ascertaining "whether appropriate medical
treatment is generally available to deal with them."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

8TH CIR.: EVIDENTIARY ERROR WAS OF APPELLANT'S MAKING

     A panel of the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals Dec. 20
declined to overturn a district court ruling that found no bad
faith in an employer's initial refusal to pay workers'
compensation to a worker disabled by carpal tunnel syndrome.
Roth v. Homestake Mining Co. of California, No. 95-1073
(8th Cir.).

     The district court's alleged error in allowing the fact of
the employer's eventual agreement to settle the workers'
compensation claim was of the plaintiff's own making and was not
reversible, the panel said.

     According to the record before the panel, Monty L. Roth
became permanently and totally disabled in 1990 due to the
effects of carpal tunnel syndrome after 18 years of employment
with Homestake Mining Co.  When Homestake refused to pay his
workers' compensation claim, Roth filed a petition with the South
Dakota Department of Labor's Division of Labor and Management.
Some three years later, during an administrative hearing
conducted by that agency, Homestake agreed to settle Roth's claim
for $326,000.

     However, Roth had filed a bad-faith action in federal
district court prior to the settlement.  In this suit, Roth
sought actual and punitive damages.  A jury subsequently returned
the verdict that Homestake had not acted in bad faith.

               Roth appealed, arguing that the district court abused its
discretion in allowing the fact of the settlement into evidence
while not allowing him to show that one-third of the settlement
amount had been given to his attorney.

     The Eighth Circuit panel, in a decision written by Judge
Pasco M. Bowman, affirmed the judgment of the district court.

     The panel held that Roth's argument was "fatally flawed
because it proceeds from the premise that Homestake introduced
the evidence of the settlement amount."

     "The record reveals, however, that Roth, not Homestake,
introduced the exhibit that included the settlement amount...when
he included the exhibit in his pre-trial exhibit book," the panel
said.  Roth was aware that the district court had ruled to
exclude the payment to the attorney, but failed to withdraw the
exhibit in a timely manner, noted the panel.  The panel held that
there was no abuse of discretion on the part of the district
court where the complained-of error was invited by the party
seeking reversal of the judgment.

     Absent a showing of bad faith on the part of Homestake, the
panel declined to consider Roth's argument that the district
court erred when it refused to submit the issue of punitive
damages to the jury.  "Homestake cannot be liable for punitive
damages absent a finding of bad faith," the panel said.

     Representing Roth was Charles Lefholz in Rapid City, SD.
Representing Homestake were Bradley Paul Gordon and A. Peter
Fuller of Fuller & Tellinghuisen in Lead, SD.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MO CT. APP. FINDS INSURER AT TIME OF DISABILITY LIABLE FOR
BENEFITS

     The workers' compensation insurer at the time a repetitive
stress disability begins is liable for benefits, even if the
disease is diagnosed earlier while a different policy is in
effect, the Missouri Court of Appeals said in a unanimous Dec. 12
opinion.  Oberg v. American Recreational Products et al.,
No. 67026 (MO Ct. App.).

     The panel declined to impose liability on the predecessor
insurer whose policy was in effect at the time of diagnosis but
not of disability.

     Kathryn Oberg started work at American Recreational Products
in October 1987, sewing rope into tent hems.  In December 1988,
she was diagnosed with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  The
next month, she underwent release surgery on her right hand only.
She resumed work after surgery.  She underwent release surgery on
her left hand on Oct. 3, 1989, three days after Liberty Mutual
Insurance replaced Home Insurance Co. as her employer's workers'
compensation carrier.

     After Oberg applied for disability benefits, an
administrative law judge found Liberty Mutual to be the insurer
at risk and awarded benefits for 17.5% permanent partial
disability.  The Labor and Industrial Relations Commission
modified by holding Home Insurance Co. liable rather than Liberty
Mutual.  Home was not a party to the claim.

     The Court of Appeals, Eastern District, reinstated Liberty
Mutual's liability in an opinion by Judge Kent E. Karohl.
Because Liberty Mutual's policy was in effect when Oberg's left
carpal tunnel syndrome became disabling, Liberty Mutual is
responsible for the award of benefits, the court said.  Although
the diagnosis predated that policy, there was no evidence of
disability until after the Liberty Mutual policy took effect, the
court said.  As a result, Oberg would have been unable to file a
claim until a disability existed.

     It also noted that Liberty Mutual was the insurer when Oberg
was last exposed to the risk, namely the day before surgery.

     Last, the court found the Commission's award against Home
improper because Home was never a party and did not participate
in the case.

     There was no dispute over the amount of the award or whether
Oberg's RSI was an occupational disease caused by the repetitive
activity of her job.

     Nile Griffiths of St. Louis represented Oberg.  Deborah L.
Hellmann of St. Louis appeared for Liberty Mutual.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

PHYSICIAN'S INPUT TO DISABILITY RATING DEEMED INADMISSIBLE

     A panel of the New Mexico Court of Appeals has reversed and
remanded a workers' compensation judge's determination of the
disability rating of a worker with carpal tunnel syndrome.
Jurado v. Levi Strauss & Co., No. 15,396 (NM Ct. App.)

     The panel ruled that the testimony of a physician, on which
the rating was partially based, was inadmissible under New Mexico
law.

     Olga Jurado suffered an injury to her wrists and hands while
working at the "hem line" station of the Levi Strauss plant in
Roswell, NM, on Dec. 11, 1991.  She ceased working on March 5,
1992, and has not returned to work.  She had carpal tunnel
release surgeries in March and June 1992.  On May 14, 1993,
Jurado's orthopedist, a Dr. Allegretto, adjudged that she had
reached maximum medical improvement.  Allegretto assigned a 5%
impairment rating to each upper extremity, which translated to a
6% impairment for the "whole person."
               However, Jurado also complained of pain in her neck since
her injury.  After a number of doctors could find no explanation
for her symptoms, Jurado sought out the opinion of an independent
medical examiner, Dr. Guy R. Fogel.  Fogel examined Jurado and
established her permanent partial impairment rating to the body
as a whole at 5% for her neck and shoulder condition.

     A workers' compensation judge (WCJ), Peter L. Dinelli,
subsequently awarded Jurado a 14% permanent partial disability
rating by adding the ratings established by Drs. Allegretto and
Fogel to a 3% rating for Jurado's "specific vocational
preparation."

     Prior to determining Jurado's disability rating, the WCJ had
denied Levi Strauss's motion in limine to exclude Fogel's report.
Levi Strauss had argued that Fogel's report was inadmissible
testimony under NMSA Section 52-1-51(C) because Fogel was neither
Jurado's "authorized health care provider" nor an independent
medical examiner (IME) agreed to by the parties or selected by
the WCJ on petition by the parties.  The WCJ determined that
Fogel's report was not "testimony" within the meaning of Section
52-1-51(C) since it was "undertaken to determine impairment
ratings needed to calculate disability pursuant to the statutory
formula."

     Levi Strauss appealed, arguing that the WCJ erred in finding
Fogel's report admissible under Section 52-1-51(C).

     In its Nov. 1 opinion, the appellate panel agreed with Levi
Strauss and reversed the WCJ's denial of its motion in limine.
It noted that NMSA Section 52-1-51(C) limited physician testimony
at workers' compensation hearings to providers who had treated
the workers and to IMEs agreed to by the parties or selected by
the WCJ on petition by the parties.

     The panel said that it was clear, as did the WCJ, that Fogel
had not provided continuing medical care to Jurado.  The panel
also ruled that Fogel was not selected as an IME under the
statute since he was unilaterally chosen by Jurado.  The WCJ had
noted this fact as well.  However, the panel held that the WCJ
had misconstrued Workers' Compensation Act Rule 92.4.3E as
standing "for the proposition that the medical opinions of a
health care provider prepared in the form of a written report do
not constitute testimony under Section 52-1-52(C)."

     "The fact that it was 'undertaken to determine impairment
ratings needed to calculate disability pursuant to the statutory
formula' does not mean that it is admissible," said the panel.
It added that "[t]he Act does not authorize such an evaluation
except in connection with ongoing care from authorized treating
health care providers, ...or IMEs in situations where medical
issues are in dispute."

     Counsel for Jurado was James G. Chakeres in Albuquerque.
Counsel for Levi Strauss was Bryan D. Evans of Atwood, Malone,
Mann & Turner, P.A. in Roswell.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>