
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B040-159</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te71.html 205.156.212.5 19970122051840 text/html 25496
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:16:45 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:57 GMT
Content-length: 25309
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te71.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PCIA BULLETIN via NewsNet <BR>
January 05, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Hearing Impaired Community, Wireless Industry Meet During&nbsp;Summit to Find Solutions to Incompatibility, Interference&nbsp;Problems</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(776 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Representatives from the Hearing Impaired, Disabled Community&nbsp;Discuss Incompatibility, Interference Issues At Summit</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(925 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>People</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CNET added four employees to its product development group.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>Briefly</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Unitech was served with a class action lawsuit alleging the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1477 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PCIA BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 05, 1996

Hearing Impaired Community, Wireless Industry Meet During
Summit to Find Solutions to Incompatibility, Interference
Problems

Wednesday kicked off a two day summit between members of the
wireless industry, the hearing impaired and hearing aid
manufacturers.  These diverse groups, at odds lately with each
other over issues of compatibility, met for two days at the
Hearing Aid Compatibility and Accessibility to Digital Wireless
Telecommunications Summit Meeting to discuss and explore avenues
for creating greater access to wireless telecommunications for
the hard of hearing population.
     Jay Kitchen, president of the Personal Communications
Industry Association (PCIA), opened the standing room only summit
by emphasizing that the wireless industry undertook the summit
not because it was mandated to do so, but because it was the
right thing to do.
     Kitchen encouraged attendees to set an example for
politicians and work quickly to build consensus and find
solutions to the problems of interference and incompatibility
between the wireless industry and the hearing impaired community.

     FCC Chairman Reed Hundt delivered the summit's opening
address.  He called the summit the "finest group of its kind that
has been assembled in the area of communications."  He added that
he was proud to see the communications industry come together
with representatives from the hearing impaired community to work
together in a spirit of cooperation.
     While new FCC Wireless Bureau Chief Michele Farquhar and
some of her staff were on hand for Hundt's opening remarks, they
could not stay and participate in the summit  because of the
government shutdown, Farquhar and her staff are authorized to
work on auctions only and could not stay to add their input and
represent the FCC in the meetings.
     Hundt called the summit the "right time and the right place
to pursue these issues," and he said the FCC will do what the
summit concludes it should do in order to make it possible and
practical for the hearing impaired to use wireless
telecommunications devices.  The FCC expects specific action
items to come out of the summit, he said, expressing his
confidence that the assembled group would find the right
solutions and that his agency would implement them so that all
Americans can be part of the Information Age. Time is of the
essence, Hundt said, as it is imperative that solutions to
incompatibility problems be found before the telecom industry
progresses any further.
     The companies that comprise the wireless industry face
incredible competitive pressures, Hundt told the audience, and it
is hard for those not directly involved with the industry to
sympathize with the pressure they are under.  He encouraged the
hearing impaired community to work with the wireless industry and
to be open to compromise so that a solution that is agreeable to
both sides can be worked out.
     The alternative, Hundt obliquely implied, would be having
the government step in and mandate solutions, which would likely
satisfy no one.  That point was reemphasized later in the day by
another speaker, Dr. Elizabeth Jacobson, deputy director of the
Center for Devices and Radiological Health at the Food and Drug
Administration.  Dr. Jacobson's office regulates medical devices,
such as hearing aids, and devices that emit radiation, such as
cellular telephones.  She said a non regulatory approach to
solving the problem of interference and incompatibility would be
faster and cheaper than getting the government involved and
encouraged both sides to work together to find their own
solution.

All Wireless Technologies Can Cause Interference, One Panelist
Said

     In the summit's first panel, George Schmitt, president of
Omnipoint Communications, said every wireless technology, whether
it is  CDMA, TDMA, DECT or GSM, can, in some circumstances, cause
problems with some hearing aids that are not well designed,
because all wireless technologies pulse, thus interfering with
hearing aids.  However, he said finding a solution to the problem
of interference is "absolutely do able," if mobile phone and
hearing aid manufacturers join forces with wireless operators and
help solve the problem.
     Schmitt responded to the charge that the wireless industry
has ignored the hard of hearing population, which some said
comprises 10 percent of the American population.  Because it is a
minority, Schmitt said that he does not believe any wireless
operator would be "dumb enough" to ignore the 10 percent of the
American population that is hard of hearing.
     Schmitt told the audience not to forget people with other
disabilities when discussing issues of accessibility to wireless
technology.  People with vision loss and physical handicaps have
as much of a right to use wireless technology as hard of hearing
people do, he said.  Schmitt added that the problem with
interference between wireless devices and hearing aids has been
exaggerated.  "The problem is not as severe as people make it out
to be," he said.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PCIA BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 05, 1996

Representatives from the Hearing Impaired, Disabled Community
Discuss Incompatibility, Interference Issues At Summit

Two afternoon panels at Wednesday's Hearing Aid Compatibility and
Accessibility to Digital Wireless Telecommunications Summit
Meeting were made up of representatives from the hearing impaired
community who were on hand to educate the audience, especially
those from the wireless industry, about the problems they face
when trying to use wireless technology.
     On the first panel, "Understanding Hearing Loss,"  otologist
Dr. Stephen Epstein, presented information about the prevalence
and demographics of hearing loss in the United States.
     According to Dr. Epstein, 28 million Americans suffer from
some form of hearing loss and several million of them use a
hearing aid or some form of device that enables them to hear.
With the aging of the Baby Boomer generation, Epstein said his
figure of 28 million is likely to double in the coming 10 years.
Not only will the Boomers not go into old age peacefully, he said
they also won't go without their gadgets, further emphasizing the
need to make wireless devices hearing aid compatible.
     The following panel, "Access to Telecommunications,"
included a taped demonstration of what some hearing aid users
experience when they try to use wireless telephones.  Dr. Mead
Killion, president of Etymotic Research and an adjunct professor
of audiology at Northwestern University, conducted the
demonstration using a CDMA phone, a digital cellular phone and a
GSM based Sprint Spectrum phone.
     By placing a hearing aid that had a microphone implanted in
it in one of his ears, he was able to demonstrate to attendees
the kinds of interference that can occur with some wireless
phones.  In a few instances there was no interference, but in
several others the interference was loud enough to make it
impossible for Killion to hear the person he was calling.

Retro Fit Solutions Place a Poor Second to Designing Technology
to Be Compatible From the Beginning, Panelist Said

     Deborah Kaplan, vice president of the World Institute on
Disability, sat on the "Understanding Hearing Loss" panel.  She
is a member of the Clinton administration's Advisory Council on
the National Information Infrastructure and an advocate for
universal design, a theory and practice of designing everything
from buildings to telephones that emphasizes designing equipment
and services for the fullest range of human function  in other
words, creating things that can be used by the largest number of
people, regardless of their abilities or disabilities.  Curb
cuts, cuts made in sidewalk curbs, are an example of universal
design, as they allow people who are walking, confined to wheel
chairs, pushing strollers, pulling luggage and riding bicycles to
get onto and off a sidewalk without having to "jump" the curb.
     Kaplan lamented that the summit was focusing on retro fit
solutions to its problems instead of universal design.  Retro fit
solutions place a poor second to solutions that were designed and
implemented before a product ever leaves its testing phase, she
said.  Retro fit solutions do not tend to be affordable, elegant
or terribly useable, she said.  According to Kaplan, the problem
of incompatibility between wireless devices and hearing aids is
not just about technology, it is about the wireless industry's
failure to take its technology out of the laboratory and test it
on real human beings.
     When developing products for consumer consumption, companies
must ask themselves who will be using the product before, not
after, they have developed it, Kaplan said.  Failing to ask that
question may put companies in the position of having to ask
themselves questions about retro fitting:  How much will it cost
and who will pay for retro fit solutions?  Will it be comfortable
for users?  How difficult will it be to implement?
     Speaking to those members of the audience representing the
wireless industry, Kaplan advised them to put disabled people in
their focus groups and make them their beta testers, so as to
prevent problems like this in the future.   If wireless
telephones had been designed with hearing aid compatibility from
the beginning, the industry could have avoided many problems, she
said.

Informal Experiment Finds Some Hearing Aid Users Experience
Interference, Some Do Not

     Brenda Battat, deputy executive director for the educational
organization Self Help for Hard of Hearing People (SHHH),
discussed an  informal and unscientific test she had conducted
using a Sprint Spectrum phone.  She asked people that wore in
the ear hearing aids, behind the ear hearing aids, ear canal
devices and cochlear implants to use the phone and tell her what,
if any, interference they experienced.  She said all the behind
the ear device wearers who tested the phone experienced
interference.  Of the four in the ear device users she polled,
two experienced interference and two did not.  Those wearing in
the ear canal hearing devices also experienced interference, as
did the two she tested using cochlear implants.  Battat said she
also had her subjects try the phone using one of the external
phone devices, which are supposed to make wireless phones hearing
aid compatible.  While the device did work in that it enabled the
hearing aid users to hear the person on the other end of the
line, she said it did nothing to mitigate the interference they
experienced.
     Battat also refuted a claim made earlier in the day by Tom
Wheeler, president of the Cellular Telecommunications Industry
Association (CTIA) regarding the number of wireless phone
manufacturers that produce hearing aid compatible phones.
Wheeler stated that 25 wireless phone manufacturers are building
hearing aid compatible phones.  Battat said that only two
companies produce such phones, while the rest build in hearing
aid compatibility as a retro fit.m





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PCIA BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 05, 1996

CNET added four employees to its product development group.

CNET added four employees to its product development group.
Brian Southwell joined the company as manager of system
administration and project support.  He will be responsible for
the installation and configuration of CNET's product line,
technical customer support and technical consulting with the
sales and development organizations.  Donald Boggs joined as a
programmer analyst and will work with CNET's WiNGS and Basic
Operating System (BOS) products. David Lindsay and Cindy Cheng
joined the company as product developers.  Lindsay will develop
traffic data analysis tools for BOS, and Cheng will work on the
configuration of the BOS graphical user interface.

Kenwood Communications appointed Steve Shelton national sales
manager for land mobile radio.  He will plan and direct sales
activities for the company's line of mobile and portable radios,
with direct responsibility for Kenwood's national sales
representatives.  Shelton most recently served as director of
sales and marketing for Larsen Electronics.  Kenwood promoted Joe
Watts to product manager for the Land Mobile Radio Products
Group.  He will be responsible for supporting marketing, product
planning and the engineering staff in new product development.

Jeffrey Hultman was appointed to Coral Systems' board of
directors.  He is currently president and CEO of Dial Page.
Prior to joining Dial Page, Hultman was president and CEO of
PacTel Cellular (now AirTouch Cellular).  Harris Corp. named
Joseph Tsui to the newly created senior management position of
vice president general manager for the company's communications
operations in the greater China region.  He will be responsible
for all of Harris Communications Sector's business interests,
including joint ventures.  Mr. Tsui was most recently president
and CEO of the telecom group of Tricom Holdings, a marketing and
distribution company in the telecommunications and office
equipment business, based in Hong Kong and focused on the Asian
market.  He has held positions with Stromberg Carlson, Northern
Telecom and MITEL.

ICO Global Communications, established in 1995 to provide global
satellite phone service, appointed Peter Cummings as its chief
commercial officer.  He will shape ICO's products and services,
bringing them to market and overseeing the development and
management of ICO's worldwide network of wholesalers and
distributors.  Cummings will also manage the day to day
commercial operations of ICO.

Thomas Mackiewicz was named business development manager at SBA
Inc.  He will establish relationships with wireless carriers in
need of site development services for PCS, cellular, paging, ESMR
and IVDS technologies.  Prior to joining SBA, Mackiewicz was the
product development manager for McCaw Cellular Communications,
where he was involved in the South Florida launch of the first
TDMA digital cellular network.  SBA promoted Mark Baker to
director of microwave relocation.  In this capacity, he will
oversee negotiations with incumbents and the installation of
systems for clients.  Prior to his promotion, Baker was special
projects manager for SBA.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PCIA BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 05, 1996

Unitech was served with a class action lawsuit alleging the

Unitech was served with a class action lawsuit alleging the
company's publicly issued reports and statements contained
materially false and misleading information in violation of
federal securities laws.  The suit seeks unspecified compensatory
damages for shareholders who purchased Unitech stock between
March 16, 1995, and December 21, 1995  on December 20, the
company announced it expected to report a significant loss for
the fiscal year ended October 31, 1995, and that its previously
reported quarterly results for FY95 may have been materially
misstated.  Unitech's former CEO, John Londelius,  and COO,
Kenneth Lind, are named as individual defendants in the suit.

Mitsubishi released the first phone designed to work on American
Mobile Satellite's North American satellite system.  The
transportable phone is briefcase sized and is available through
authorized service dealers at a retail price of approximately
$3,300.  Usage rates start at $1.49 per minute.

MobileComm announced it will begin offering its retail pagers and
service offerings with a single frequency.  MobileComm pagers
will use the company's nationwide 900 MHz network.  This move
will benefit both retailers and customers by making it easier to
sell and use the pagers, the company said.  For example, multi
city retail chains will be able to reduce the number of units in
their warehouses while providing a wider range of services.
Additionally, MobileComm said users will benefit through enhanced
paging service without the hassle and expense of changing their
pager.

Bell Atlantic is getting into the site location service business.
The company's carrier services organization is joining with Bell
Atlantic Properties to help PCS licensees secure the real estate
they need for their antennas.  Bell Atlantic offers 2,000
possible locations for cell sites and will also assist PCS
operators in selecting and leasing sites from other sources.

AT&T Network Systems and Philips Electronics signed the final
purchase agreement under which AT&T has acquired a portion of the
public network assets held by the Philips Communications Systems
division.  Financial terms and conditions of the deal were not
disclosed.  Under the terms of the contract, AT&T Network Systems
purchased the assets related to four Philips Communications
Systems units:  Cellular Infrastructure Systems; Managed
Transport Networks; Microwave Transmission and Access; and
Transmission.

PCIA's annual Spring Government Conference will be held May 14 16
at the Washington Hilton in Washington, D.C.  The week's events
will kick off with Capitol Hill Day on May 14.  Educational
sessions and council meetings will be held May 15 16.  The Eugene
C. Bowler Dinner, which includes an awards presentation, will be
held May 15 at the National Building Museum in Washington, D.C.
For more information or to register, call 800/326 8638 or the fax
on demand line at 800/680 PCIA.

United Airlines and GTE Airfone teamed to allow certain
passengers the ability to receive calls at their seat without
making any prior arrangements.  While it has been possible for
airline passengers to make calls from their seats for a couple of
years, this program allows United Airlines' Mileage Plus Premier
members to receive calls on United planes.  After being seated,
passengers remove the Airfone handset, slide their United Premier
card down the side of the handset and enter their seat number.
This activates the phone and lets GTE Airfone's system know where
the passenger is located.  When a call is placed to a passenger
on the plane, the handset will ring and the seat number of the
recipient will be displayed on the phone's screen.

AirTouch Communications acquired the assets of Message Center
Beepers, a privately held paging company with more than 345,000
subscribers, primarily in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey,
New York and Pennsylvania.  Financial terms of the deal were not
disclosed.

Geotek and Hughes Network Systems inked a deal calling for Hughes
to extend to Geotek a two year, approximately $25 million line of
credit for Geotek to acquire additional 900 MHz spectrum in the
United States.  The deal is a continuation of  a  strategic
partnership formed by th D AMPS/AMPS wireless system in the
Ukraine, in conjunction with the region's privately owned
operator, Digital Cellular Communication of Ukraine.  The service
will provide service in Donetsk, an industrial region with 5.5
million people.  Ericsson's system will combine fixed and mobile
wireless communication service with the capacity to cover between
6,000 and 7,000 subscribers.  Both the fixed and mobile services
will use the same base stations.  The order includes a mobile
switching center and several RBS 882 base stations.  The first
test call on the system is scheduled for March, and commercial
operation is set for launch in May.  Financial details of the
deal were not available.

Six companies from China and Singapore formed the Asia Pacific
Mobile Telecom Project to provide mobile phone services to any
location in the Asia Pacific region.  The project was founded by
four Chinese government organizations and two Singapore partners:
China Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General, China
Aerospace Corp., China Unicom Satellite Telecom, China
Telecommunications Broadcast Satellite Corp, Singapore Telecom
and Singapore Technologies Telemedia.  With its cost estimated at
between US$500 million and US$800 million, it is envisioned that
the project will allow mobile phone users to make calls from
anywhere in the Asia Pacific region.  The project will begin
operation in 1998, providing "seamless" phone usage from Pakistan
to Japan and covering almost half the world's population, a
spokesman said.

The Advisor Gold FLX is the first alphanumeric pager using the
Flex protocol. The latest addition to Motorola's Gold Edition
Professional Pager line, the FLX is designed for advanced
alphanumeric pager users.  The palm sized message center features
a 30,000 character message memory and a four line, 80 character
scrolling display. Its 43 text and numeric message slots include
storage for 19 personal messages, 21 notebook messages and three
information services.  It offers eight musical alerts or silent
vibration.  A few unique features: users can convert any personal
message to an alarm that will alert and re display the message at
a specific time set by the user; and a programmable on/off
feature enables the pager to turn on and off at predetermined
times selected by the user.  The FLX has a suggested retail price
of $319.

The MicroTAC Lite II and MicroTAC Lite XL cellular phones from
Motorola may be used in conjunction with a HATIS (hearing aid
telephone interconnect system) device, which allows many hearing
impaired persons to use cellular phones.  The latest additions to
Motorola's family of cellular phones feature three dedicated, one
touch Turbo Dial keys for frequently dialed numbers; the
VibraCall alert option; data capabilities; internal rapid
charging; a headset jack for hands free operation with a headset;
and 99 alphanumeric memory locations to create a personal phone
directory.

The PCS 1900 series of omnidirectional and panel antennas from
Andrew Corp. are designed to decrease interference, decrease call
dropping and allow for easy upgrading.  They have a broadband
frequency range of 1850 MHz to 1990 MHz and are suited for
transmit or receive applications in networks designed for
omnidirectional and 60/65 horizontal beamwidth sector coverage.
They're also available for other frequencies and other
beamwidths.

The antenna equipped, AllPoints wireless PC card from Megahertz
fits into a type II PC card slot, operates approximately 30 hours
on a nonproprietary 9 volt NiCad battery and is bundled with
ready to use software.  The card allows users to send and receive
e mail, access databases, send and receive faxes, transfer files,
send and receive messages and access headline news and stock
quotes, wirelessly via the RAM Mobile Data network.  The
AllPoints PC card lists for $499, which includes the card, and
RadioMail and Wynd software.  The card is compatible with Windows
95, Windows 3.1, DOS, Macintosh, Newton and GEOS (HP Omnigo)
platforms.

The GoAnyWhere Type 2 PC card prototype from NovaLink
Technologies is a wireline fax modem, a cellular modem and a
radio modem.  Available in the second quarter for about $500,
GoAnyWhere will be bundled with DTS Wireless' ZAP it software,
which provides wireless access to Internet messaging via the RAM
Mobile Data Mobitex wireless data network.  Its advanced lithium
manganese dioxide battery is expected to deliver eight hours of
operation between charges.  The modem, which incorporates a
wireless packet data chipset from Rockwell International,
operates in two power modes: self powered for sufficient
operation with palmtops and PDAs; and power sharing man SRP of $529.

Motorola is offering RSVP, a numeric pager built into a cellular
phone battery.  RSVP slides onto the back of any Motorola
MicroTAC, or any retail pocket personal cellular phone, in place
of the phone's battery.  It has the features of Motorola's Bravo
Encore! numeric pager: audio or vibrate alert, time of day,
backlit display and message time stamp.  It features a removable
and rechargeable Nickel Metal Hydride battery that powers both
the pager and the cellular phone.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>