
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B028-125</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec31.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224902 text/html 26061
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:47:13 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:44 GMT
Content-length: 25874
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec31.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL UNIX&nbsp;FOR NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1022 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL&nbsp;SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1039 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE&nbsp;PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT&nbsp;OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(969 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL UNIX
FOR NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM

Best Western International, Inc., the world's largest hotel
brand, has selected multiple AlphaServer 8400 "TurboLaser"
systems, the world's most powerful servers, together with
thousands of Digital personal computers, to power Best
Western's new worldwide central reservation system (CRS).
Digital and Best Western announced this agreement, among the
largest AlphaServer 8400 sales to date, at the International
Hotel/Motel & Restaurant trade show here.

When fully implemented, the deal will be worth more than $12
million in Digital revenue. A total of 10 AlphaServer 8400
systems will power Best Western's operations center central
host server, located in Phoenix, Ariz., as well as BWI's
reservation centers located in Phoenix, Wichita, Kan., Dublin,
Ireland, and Milan, Italy. The new servers will run Oracle7
relational database management system with the 64-bit Digital
UNIX operating system, handling in excess of 2,000
transactions per second. AlphaServer systems will replace
outdated and over-extended mainframes.

In addition, Digital will deliver some 3,500 Digital Venturis
535 PCs to every Best Western property worldwide, where they
will provide a full range of inventory and rate management
capabilities. This part of the system will enable hoteliers to
enroll in Best Western marketing programs and create their own
programs and pricing packages.

"Today we unveil the hotel industry's most ambitious, advanced
customer reservation system. We selected the
Digital/Oracle/UNIX solutions because of its superior
performance, flexibility, and growth potential -- at one-tenth
the cost of competing systems," said William S. Watson, Best
Western International's executive vice president.

"We expect the Digital/Oracle solution to dramatically improve
our ability to respond more rapidly to customer needs, to
quickly provide our client agents more and more relevant
information on our customers' travel preferences, to increase
our sales and revenues, and to enhance our company's image,"
Watson added.

The new system is expected to to generate more than $50
million in incremental annual room revenue and will
significantly reduce corporate and property level operating
costs.

Pace-setting Global Reservation System

Best Western's new central reservations systems, scheduled for
a March 15, 1996, start-up, offers unprecedented features and
functions, both at the property level and at the Best Western
central reservations offices. It will be a service
enhancement for the 40 million travelers worldwide who stay at
Best Western hotels each year.


With the new CRS, Best Western will be the only hotel chain to
provide comprehensive geographic, pictorial, and textual
information to its reservation sales agents. These features
will enable guests who call a Best Western central reservation
office from any location, whether at home or on the road, to
find the Best Western hotel that is closest to their desired
destination.

The new system will enable Best Western to provide detailed
guest histories, group booking capabilities, revenue
management service, travel agent commission data, and a wide
range of property-specific and destination information.

Yet the new system is much more than a traditional
transaction- oriented network. It will provide the business
tools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing and
future customers.

"Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bring
radical changes to the way products are distributed to its
customers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital and
Oracle as technology partners for the new millennium," said
Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServer
Business Segment. "While Best Western customers may never know
what's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, Best
Western managers will sleep better knowing our systems are
providing those customers the fastest, most reliable services
in the travel industry."

Digital's AlphaServer 8400 Systems

AlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastest
microprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12
service, travel agent commission data, and a wide range of
property-specific and destination information.

Yet the new system is much more than a traditional
transaction- oriented network. It will provide the business
tools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing and
future customers.

"Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bring
radical changes to the way products are distributed to its
customers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital and
Oracle as technology partners for the new millennium," said
Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServer
Business Segment. "While Best Western customers may never know
what's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, Best
Western managers will sleep better knowing our systems are
providing those customers the fastest, most reliable services
in the travel industry."

Digital's AlphaServer 8400 Systems

AlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastest
microprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12
64-bit processors and 14 Gbytes of memory, and can be
clustered for far greater performance.

Recently, Digital and Oracle together shattered the
transaction processing world performance record in benchmark
testing (tpcC) defined and audited by the independent
Transaction Processing Performance Council. This was
accomplished on an AlphaServer 8400, Digital UNIX operating
system, and Oracle 7 database system. The Digital/Oracle
solution bested the previous record held by Hewlett Packard by
75 percent, and was far better than the best systems from IBM,
Sun, AT&T, and Tandem.

Taken together, the 64-bit Alpha technology, 64-bit Digital
UNIX, and 64-bit databases such as Oracle7 enable the
breakthrough performance and price/performance of VLM64.
Digital is unique in the industry in its ability to deliver
this capability to customers today.

Applications such as data warehousing, financial management,
and online transaction processing take particular advantage
of VLM64 solutions. This is because more than 4 billion times
more data can be stored in memory than even the most powerful
mainframe systems, at a fraction of the cost. This provides
dramatic improvements in processing speed, application
performance, and system affordability.

Digital's Venturis PCs

Digital Venturis is Digital's value-oriented desktop PC family
designed to meet the computing requirements of general
business users in standard office applications, as well as
those of users in a client/server environment. Ideal for the
volume purchaser, Venturis systems are simple to install, easy
to use and easy to maintain, while providing room to expand as
computing needs evolve.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX

Texas Instruments (TI) Software will begin shipments of
Composer for Digital Equipment Corporation's Digital UNIX.
Texas Instruments Software's Composer is a market-leading
component-based development tool for client/server application
development.  Standards-compliant, high-performance Digital
UNIX is the industry's leading 64-bit UNIX operating system.

The combination of Composer and Digital UNIX provides the
maximum performance, modularity and scalability available in
the client/server application development market today. With
Composer, users can design, develop and deploy flexible
client/server applications that allow maximum use of computing
resources regardless of the client/server architecture. In
combination with Digital UNIX, Composer gives users the high
performance needed to run client/server applications in a UNIX
environment. Applications developed with Composer can be
deployed on the Digital's Alpha* workstation running Digital
UNIX or OpenVMS*.

"Digital UNIX offers Composer customers an industry standard
high-performance UNIX operating system that lets them move
today to the next generation of open computing," said Susan
Morgan, alliance manager for Texas Instruments Software. "This
TI and Digital solution enables customers to develop and
deploy client/server applications in a reliable, distributed
environment where top transaction processing performance is a
must and customers can be assured of scalability that meets
business growth needs," Morgan added.

"We're pleased that TI has decided to port its market-leading
application development tool to Digital UNIX," said Mark
Silverberg, UNIX product marketing manager at Digital
Equipment Corporation.

"The combination of Composer, Digital UNIX and 64-bit Alpha
platforms provides users with the ideal combination of
flexible tools and robust power to develop mission-critical
client/server applications."

The Implementation Toolset module of Composer will be
available for Digital UNIX. This module, which ensures the
automation of the compilation, linking and installation of
Composer-developed applications, allows migration of the
developed code to the target deployment system.

As part of its strategy to provide customers with many
development and implementation options for software
applications, Texas Instruments Software provides Composer for
a broad range of operating systems. In addition to Digital
UNIX, these operating systems include Digital OpenVMS, IBM
MVS, Tandem NonStop Kernel, Tandem NonStop-UX, Hewlett-Packard
HP-UX, IBM AIX, Sun Solaris, Sequent Dynix/ptx, Pyramid
DC/OSx, Siemens/Nixdorf SINIX, AT&T GIS SVR4, Microsoft
Windows 3.1 and NT, and OS/2.

For information on U.S. pricing and availability call (800)
838-1843.

About Texas Instruments Software

Texas Instruments Software is the market leader in software
application development and assembly tools and services for
department and organization-wide implementation of
client/server technology. Texas Instruments Software is a
division of Texas Instruments Incorporated (NYSE:TXN), a
high-technology company headquartered in Dallas, Texas, with
sales or manufacturing operations in more than 30 countries.

For more information on Texas Instruments Software and its
products, please visit the division's World Wide Web site at
http://www.ti.com/software/software.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL
SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD

Digital Equipment Corporation and Microsoft Corporation has
unveiled audited transaction benchmark results that establish
new records in the highly competitive market for database,
application and PC LAN servers. The results further
demonstrate the companies' leadership in providing customers
the industry's most powerful, most cost-effective open server
platforms.

Breakthrough results of 3194.4 transactions per minute (tpmC)
at $196/tpmC, based on the TPC-C(2) benchmark Revision 3.0,
were achieved on the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 64-bit SMP system
running Microsoft Windows NT Server operating system V3.51 and
Microsoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database management
system. No other Microsoft SQL Server platform from any system
vendor delivers such impressive results.

The 3194.4 at $196/tpmC result is the industry's best price/
performance using any system, any database, or any operating
system. In fact, no other system has ever come close to
breaking the less-than-$200/tpmC barrier.

With a total system cost of $626,102, the AlphaServer 2100
5/300 delivers transaction performance and price/performance
superior to any other system priced below $1 million -- 24%
better throughput performance and $46/tpmC less than its
closest competitor, the Intel-based Compaq ProLiant 5/133

Model 2. It also provides better performance and price/
performance than many systems costing much more than $1
million (see charts below).

The Digital/Microsoft combination even outperforms a Tandem
Himalaya K10000-16 system with 16 processors and costing $3.5
million. And compared with competitive systems from IBM, HP,
Sun, Bull, AT&T, and others, these results are far superior.

"These independent benchmark results again demonstrate the
breakthrough performance and affordability of the Alpha
architecture," said Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of
the Alpha Server Business Segment. "For customers, this
represents the industry's best value in high-performance
server capabilities. It also further demonstrates the
engineering achievements of our strategic alliance with
Microsoft."

The TPC-C benchmark is the industry-standard test for
measuring database transaction processing performance and
price/performance. The $/tpmC result reflects the cost of
acquisition and ownership of the system over a five-year
period, including hardware and software maintenance, software
upgrades, and extended warranties.

"Today's news is one more way Digital and Microsoft are
bringing to customers computing solutions that offer
unprecedented value and flexibility," said Rich Tong, general
manager of the Business Systems Division at Microsoft.

"These TPC results demonstrate the power of the Microsoft SQL
Server and Digital Alpha platform for transaction- and
compute-intensive business applications in heterogeneous
environments."

Heterogeneous Computing Environment

The AlphaServer 2100 5/300 benchmark was conducted using three
CPUs and 2 gigabytes of memory. These results were achieved
in a heterogeneous computing environment, using Visigenics
ODBC client software for SCO UNIX running on Digital's
Intel-based Prioris PC systems.

"No longer must customers limit themselves to a single
operating system to get interoperability, performance, and
affordability," said Nist. "With these results, Digital has
proved that one of the best ways to solve business problems
can include a heterogeneous environment. Digital demonstrates
that a customer can leverage the strengths of both Windows NT
and UNIX to provide a cost-effective high-performance
solution." Competitive Comparisons

PRICE PERFORMANCE tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 $196 $626,101

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Digital AlphaServer 8400 5/300 9414.06 316 2,972,726

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/100-1 1516.77 319 484,108

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 364 1,384,763

TRANSACTION THROUGHPUT tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 $364 $1,384,763

Sun SPARCCenter 2000E 3534.20 495 1,751,004

AT&T 3555/4-XP 3312.70 587 1,942,593

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 196 626,102

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

Tandem Himalaya K10000-16 3043.49 1160 3,529,520

Bull ESCALA Deskside D401/8 2660.03 530 1,409,965

Compaq ProLiant 45005/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Customers Deploying Enterprise Database Solutions

The Potomac Group, of Nashville, Tenn., provides doctors and
hospitals in 20 states instant on-line access to Medicaid
subscriber data. According to Bill McClary, executive vice
president of operations, "Our AlphaServer 2100 / Microsoft SQL
Server solution enables us to compete and win in a market
dominated by giant companies with multi-million dollar legacy
systems."

At Ruben H. Donnelley Corporation, the world's oldest
publisher of Yellow Pages, AlphaServer 2100 systems and
Microsoft SQL Server are greatly expanding the company's
Interactive Yellow Pages, with new features such as
FAX-on-demand and sophisticated database manipulation.

And at the Los Angeles Times, the third largest newspaper in
the country, AlphaServer 2100 systems and Microsoft SQL
Server, together with Autologic for Windows NT, are powering a
rastor image processing (RIP) systems that enables the Times
to product more pages faster, with more graphics and higher
resolution, at lower cost.

300MHz Processor Upgrade, Special Pricing

In announcing the benchmark results, Digital also unveiled a
processor upgrade program for the AlphaServer 2100 and 2000
systems, raising the performance of the Alpha 21164 CPU used
in this system to a blazing 300MHz. The Alpha 21164
microprocessor is still the industry's fastest and only BIPS
(billion instructions per second) chip.

Through December, this upgrade is specially priced at only
$4,000. Complete 300MHz AlphaServer 2100 systems will be
generally available in Q1 of CY1996.

60-Day Payment-Free Leasing Offer

Digital also announced a limited-time leasing offer on all
Alpha servers and workstations. Through June 1996, Digital
Financial Services, a division of GE Capital, is offering
customers who migrate to Digital from competitors' systems a
60-day payment holiday on all 36-month leases. The program is
available to all direct and partner channels worldwide.

The Digital/Microsoft Alliance

Digital's AlphaServer systems provide a highly scalable
enterprise platform for the Microsoft BackOffice suite, which
includes Microsoft Windows NT operating system, Microsoft SQL
Server, Microsoft Systems Management Server, Microsoft SNA
Server, and Microsoft Mail Server. In June, Digital announced
an OEM agreement with Microsoft to bundle the Microsoft
BackOffice server suite with Digital AlphaServers and
Intel-based Prioris servers.

In August, Digital and Microsoft announced a major alliance,
the Microsoft-Digital Alliance for Enterprise Computing,
which will help customers implement and support Windows-based
computing in the enterprise. The enterprise level performance
numbers announced today demonstrate the results of the joint
efforts of Digital and Microsoft to deliver Windows NT-based
solutions to the enterprise.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE
PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS

Mediaplex Application Development System Offers Best Of Class
Cross-Platform Authoring Environment

Digital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (San
Francisco) have forged an agreement to create a development
solution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,
the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.
Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will be
bundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, and
Macromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimedia
applications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximum
revenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part of
their agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in joint
technical development and marketing, and provide technical
support to developers.

"We've already achieved critical mass with the number of
telecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in their
trials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director of
worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and Interactive
Information Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoring
technology with Digital's Mediaplex Application Development
System, we can offer both the platform and middleware strength
of Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoring
capabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkey
content creation solution."

"Because we already have the Director Player running on a
variety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position to
bring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the device
they have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,
Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With their
cost-effective architecture and strong understanding of what
broadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is an
ideal partner."

Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, Sasha
Magee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,
said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already using
Director, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with a
smooth and continuous path to move our business to the
broadband marketplace, particularly because both companies are
committed to delivery on multiple computing and set-top box
platforms."

Complete Authoring Resources

The Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporate
several Macromedia authoring solutions, including: Macromedia
Director 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creating
multimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution image
editing and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering and
animation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge by
Sonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content for
the World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an application
for compressing and playing Director files on the World Wide
Web -- is included.

These products will enable developers to create client
applications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fully
integrated with the streaming capabilities of the media
server. For custom client/server applications such as
interactive home shopping, distance learning, and home
banking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit
(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes of
application services on the server.

Robust Content Design and Testing Platform

The Mediaplex Application Development System also includes
complete hardware resources for creating applications,
including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and a
Pentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using this
configuration, developers can design content on the PC and
test their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.
Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia network
extensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, the
World Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments from
Apple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).

The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equipped
with a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of hard
disk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,
and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. A
dual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIX
for testing interactive broadband applications, or Microsoft
Windows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating point
processor capabilities for graphics rendering and video
editing. The Mediaplex Application Development System comes
with Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.

The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentium
processor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB of
hard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,
16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, and
Ethernet connectivity.

Pricing and Availability

The Mediaplex Application Development System, with this full
complement of hardware and software resources, is priced
starting at $33,900, with significant discounts available for
qualified developers, and will be available from Digital in
the first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one year
membership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access to
support forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital's
SDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced as
separate options.

About Macromedia

Macromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts software
tools, offers a full range of products for the Windows and
Macintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:
Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design and
illustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standard
animation and authoring tool for multimedia production;
Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoring
environment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the most
powerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,
the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;
Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design and
editing; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentation
application.

About Digital

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, and
Westminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunications
companies using Digital technology include US West's trial in
Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in the
Northeast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's servers
are also being used in production environments to insert
advertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TV
headends served by Adlink in California, and to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>