
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B33-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B026-251</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec94.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223814 text/html 20226
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:36:21 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:13 GMT
Content-length: 20039
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec94.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>DIGITAL ANNOUNCES THREE NEW PRINTERS&nbsp;WITH INDUSTRY-LEADING CONNECTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(638 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>WORLD AIDS DAY EVENT FOCUSES ON WORKPLACE ISSUES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(397 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DIGITAL SEMICONDUCTOR'S FX!32 TRANSLATION&nbsp;SOFTWARE WINS TOP BYTE AWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL ALPHA SERVERS,&nbsp;PCs TO POWER NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1022 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ILENE H. LANG JOINS DIGITAL AS HEAD OF&nbsp;CONNECTIVITY SOFTWARE BUSINESS UNIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(380 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL ANNOUNCES THREE NEW PRINTERS
WITH INDUSTRY-LEADING CONNECTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE

LG08plus, LG12plus and LA30N Printers Meet User Demand for
Mission-Critical, High-Volume Printing Solutions

Digital Equipment Corporation has reinforced its position as a
leader in printing solutions with the announcement of the
LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers and the LA30N dot
matrix companion printer. These three new impact printers, all
of which will be demonstrated at the Digital Equipment
Corporation User Society (DECUS) trade show in San Francisco,
enable unparalleled connectivity in open office or industrial
computing environments. Offering unsurpassed openness and the
lowest cost of ownership in their respective classes, the
printers are ideal for users seeking mission-critical,
high-volume printing solutions.

"Not only does Digital continue to support its customers with
a new generation of ANSI printers, but is committed to
ensuring these products are compatible in open system
environments," said Jeb Hurley, acting vice president,
Printing Systems Business. "Digital uniquely offers users the
ability to distribute printing throughout the enterprise and,
because of our wide range of products, enables them to select
a printer with just the right price, speed and performance to
meet their needs."

LGO8plus and LG12plus Line Matrix Printers

The LGO8plus and LG12plus printers expand Digital's successful
LGplus family of high-speed line matrix printers (first
launched in May, 1995, with the LG04plus printer). These
printers are ideal for a variety of mission-critical
applications such as bar coding, multi-part forms, accounting
statements and internal reports -- in many cases supplanting
the need for more costly laser printers for these types of
applications.

Benefits of the LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers
include:

* unsurpassed reliability with an unlimited duty cycle and
10,000 hour mean time before failure (MTBF)

* high-quality output and the lowest cost per page in its
class

* support for a variety of platforms including OpenVMS, UNIX,
Windows NT and Windows '95

* compatible with a number of emulations including ANSI,
ProPrinter, LP, LG, Epson and P Series protocols as well as
optional emulations (including Magnum Code V [VGL] and
Printronix Graphics Language)

* maximum flexibility in multi-user environments with both
serial and parallel ports

* high-speed 800 line per minute and 1,200 line per minute
printing (for the LG08plus and LG12plus printers,
respectively)

* allows users to upgrade their printing speed with the use of
an upgradeable printhead for LGplus series printers

* backward compatibility with software applications written to
support existing LG models

* LAN connectivity via the RapidPrint 200 interface box, an
optional Ethernet interface device supporting TCP/IP, LAT, and
Novell network protocols

LA30N Dot Matrix Companion Printer

As a third generation product in Digital's ANSI dot matrix
printer family, the powerful LA30N dot matrix companion
printer is designed to withstand rigorous use and provide
outstanding performance for customers in a wide range of
industries. The LA30N printer supports not only Digital's ANSI
printing protocol, but also the IBM Proprinter X24E and Epson
ESC/P2 protocols, enabling it to function in workstation as
well as

Specific benefits of the LA30N dot matrix companion printer
include:

* outstanding reliability and performance with a 3,500
page-per-month duty cycle and 8,000 hour MTBF

* high-quality print output at speeds up to 330 characters per
second

* superior flexibility with two user-selectable configurations
as well as auto-switching serial and parallel interfaces

* advanced paper-handling capabilities that allow for either
rear or bottom paper feed as well as push or pull tractor feed

Pricing and Availability

Pricing and availability for the LGO8plus line matrix printer,
the LG12plus line matrix printer and the LA30N dot matrix
companion printer will be announced in January, 1996. All
three products will be available through Digital's worldwide
network of reseller and distributor partners. For more
information within the U.S. call 800-777-4343, or your
authorized Digital representative.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet
January 1996

WORLD AIDS DAY EVENT FOCUSES ON WORKPLACE ISSUES

World AIDS Day Event Focuses on Workplace Issues features
guided dialogue with local talk show host David Brudnoy, WBZ
Radio's News and Program Director Brian Whittemore, and
Brudnoy's physician, Dr. Deborah Cotton

The New England Corporate Consortium for AIDS Education -- in
commemoration of World AIDS Day -- will hold its annual
business breakfast on Friday, December 1 at the Museum of Fine
Arts in Boston. The theme is "Shared Rights and Shared
Responsibility," focusing on creating supportive work
environments for employees affected by the HIV disease.

The meeting will center around a guided dialogue entitled
"Managing AIDS in the Workplace -- the Triumph of Reason and
Compassion: The David Brudnoy Story." Brudnoy, a nationally
recognized critic, author and well-known television and radio
talk show host, will speak of his own experience living and
working with HIV disease. With his manager, Brian Whittemore,
and his physician, Dr. Deborah Cotton of the Harvard Medical
School of Public Health and the Infectious Disease Unit of
Massachusetts General Hospital, Brudnoy will discuss the
issues and decisions that are key to managing AIDS in the
workplace.

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there are
approximately 17 million HIV/AIDS infections worldwide, and
predicts up to 40 million infections worldwide within five
years. Among the 50 states, Massachusetts has the 10th highest
number of AIDS cases. From July 1994 to July 1995 there were
1,396 new cases reported. This represents a 23.1 percent
increase over the previous year. It is estimated that 90
percent of those infected with HIV are employed.

"The New England Corporate Consortium for AIDS Education was
formed in 1987 because AIDS/HIV disease is a business issue,"
said Paul Ross, chairman of the New England Corporate
Consortium for AIDS Education and manager of the AIDS Program
Office at Digital Equipment Corporation. "Business must take a
leadership role in combating both AIDS/HIV disease and
AIDS-related discrimination by encouraging effective AIDS
education and ensuring compassionate treatment for those
affected by AIDS/HIV."

The New England Corporate Consortium for AIDS Education is a
group of 20 companies spearheading the region's fight against
AIDS. The group's charter is to stimulate private sector
leadership in responding to AIDS. The companies, each of which
has its own internal AIDS awareness program, have developed
AIDS education materials that are available to businesses
through the AIDS Action Committee and the American Red Cross.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL SEMICONDUCTOR'S FX!32 TRANSLATION
SOFTWARE WINS TOP BYTE AWARD

Digital Equipment Corporation's new FX!32 translation
software, which gives Alpha computer systems and PCs full,
high-performance x86 compatibility for 32-bit Windows and
Windows NT applications, has won BYTE magazine's prestigious
"Best Technology" award.

Calling the new technology "revolutionary," BYTE announced the
award at a ceremony in Las Vegas. The award was accepted by
Maurice Marks, technical director for Digital Semiconductor, a
Digital Equipment Corporation business, and leader of the
FX!32 development effort.

FX!32 advanced translation and emulation technology will give
Alpha users transparent access to 32-bit native x86
applications, greatly augmenting the broad Alpha portfolio of
native Windows NT applications. Sixteen-bit Windows
applications will be accessible through Insignia Solutions'
SoftWindows product. The combination of these approaches will
provide for Alpha users the entire suite of x86 Windows
applications, at comparable or better performance than on x86
systems.

Digital Semiconductor, a Digital Equipment Corporation
business headquartered in Hudson, Massachusetts, designs,
manufactures and markets industry-leading semiconductor
products including Alpha microprocessors and PCI chips for
networking, bridging, and graphics/multimedia, as well as
low-power StrongARM microprocessors under license from
Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. Digital Semiconductor operates
design centers in Hudson; Palo Alto, California; Austin,
Texas; and Jerusalem, Israel. A new, $450-million fabrication
facility in Hudson will begin revenue production in 1996.
Mitsubishi Electric Company is a second source for Alpha
microprocessors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet
January 1996

BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL ALPHA SERVERS,
PCs TO POWER NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM

Best Western International, Inc., the world's largest hotel
brand, has selected multiple AlphaServer 8400 "TurboLaser"
systems, the world's most powerful servers, together with
thousands of Digital personal computers, to power Best
Western's new worldwide central reservation system (CRS).
Digital and Best Western announced this agreement, among the
largest AlphaServer 8400 sales to date, at the International
Hotel/Motel & Restaurant trade show here.

When fully implemented, the deal will be worth more than $12
million in Digital revenue. A total of 10 AlphaServer 8400
systems will power Best Western's operations center central
host server, located in Phoenix, Ariz., as well as BWI's
reservation centers located in Phoenix, Wichita, Kan., Dublin,
Ireland, and Milan, Italy. The new servers will run Oracle7
relational database management system with the 64-bit Digital
UNIX operating system, handling in excess of 2,000
transactions per second. AlphaServer systems will replace
outdated and over-extended mainframes.

In addition, Digital will deliver some 3,500 Digital Venturis
535 PCs to every Best Western property worldwide, where they
will provide a full range of inventory and rate management
capabilities. This part of the system will enable hoteliers to
enroll in Best Western marketing programs and create their own
programs and pricing packages.

"Today we unveil the hotel industry's most ambitious, advanced
customer reservation system. We selected the
Digital/Oracle/UNIX solutions because of its superior
performance, flexibility, and growth potential -- at one-tenth
the cost of competing systems," said William S. Watson, Best
Western International's executive vice president.

"We expect the Digital/Oracle solution to dramatically improve
our ability to respond more rapidly to customer needs, to
quickly provide our client agents more and more relevant
information on our customers' travel preferences, to increase
our sales and revenues, and to enhance our company's image,"
Watson added.

The new system is expected to to generate more than $50
million in incremental annual room revenue and will
significantly reduce corporate and property level operating
costs.

Pace-setting Global Reservation System

Best Western's new central reservations systems, scheduled for
a March 15, 1996, start-up, offers unprecedented features and
functions, both at the property level and at the Best Western
central reservations offices. It will be a service
enhancement for the 40 million travelers worldwide who stay at
Best Western hotels each year.


With the new CRS, Best Western will be the only hotel chain to
provide comprehensive geographic, pictorial, and textual
information to its reservation sales agents. These features
will enable guests who call a Best Western central reservation
office from any location, whether at home or on the road, to
find the Best Western hotel that is closest to their desired
destination.

The new system will enable Best Western to provide detailed
guest histories, group booking capabilities, revenue
management service, travel agent commission data, and a wide
range of property-specific and destination information.

Yet the new system is much more than a traditional
transaction- oriented network. It will provide the business
tools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing and
future customers.

"Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bring
radical changes to the way products are distributed to its
customers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital and
Oracle as technology partners for the new millennium," said
Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServer
Business Segment. "While Best Western customers may never know
what's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, Best
Western managers will sleep better knowing our systems are
providing those customers the fastest, most reliable services
in the travel industry."

Digital's AlphaServer 8400 Systems

AlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastest
microprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12
service, travel agent commission data, and a wide range of
property-specific and destination information.

Yet the new system is much more than a traditional
transaction- oriented network. It will provide the business
tools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing and
future customers.

"Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bring
radical changes to the way products are distributed to its
customers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital and
Oracle as technology partners for the new millennium," said
Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServer
Business Segment. "While Best Western customers may never know
what's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, Best
Western managers will sleep better knowing our systems are
providing those customers the fastest, most reliable services
in the travel industry."

Digital's AlphaServer 8400 Systems

AlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastest
microprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12
64-bit processors and 14 Gbytes of memory, and can be
clustered for far greater performance.

Recently, Digital and Oracle together shattered the
transaction processing world performance record in benchmark
testing (tpcC) defined and audited by the independent
Transaction Processing Performance Council. This was
accomplished on an AlphaServer 8400, Digital UNIX operating
system, and Oracle 7 database system. The Digital/Oracle
solution bested the previous record held by Hewlett Packard by
75 percent, and was far better than the best systems from IBM,
Sun, AT&T, and Tandem.

Taken together, the 64-bit Alpha technology, 64-bit Digital
UNIX, and 64-bit databases such as Oracle7 enable the
breakthrough performance and price/performance of VLM64.
Digital is unique in the industry in its ability to deliver
this capability to customers today.

Applications such as data warehousing, financial management,
and online transaction processing take particular advantage
of VLM64 solutions. This is because more than 4 billion times
more data can be stored in memory than even the most powerful
mainframe systems, at a fraction of the cost. This provides
dramatic improvements in processing speed, application
performance, and system affordability.

Digital's Venturis PCs

Digital Venturis is Digital's value-oriented desktop PC family
designed to meet the computing requirements of general
business users in standard office applications, as well as
those of users in a client/server environment. Ideal for the
volume purchaser, Venturis systems are simple to install, easy
to use and easy to maintain, while providing room to expand as
computing needs evolve.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet
January 1996

ILENE H. LANG JOINS DIGITAL AS HEAD OF
CONNECTIVITY SOFTWARE BUSINESS UNIT

Digital Equipment Corporation has announced the appointment of
Ilene H. Lang, 52, as vice president of the company's newly
formed Connectivity Software Business Unit. Lang, formerly
senior vice president of Lotus Development Corporation's
Desktop Business Group, joins Digital on November 27. She will
report to Digital Chairman Robert B. Palmer.

"Our goal for the Connectivity Software Business Unit is to
create industry-leading solutions for client/server, Internet
and enterprise connectivity," said Palmer. "I am pleased to
have Ilene join Digital to establish our leadership in solving
the connectivity problems faced by enterprises. Her proven
experience in the development and marketing of software
solutions makes her the ideal choice to build this business
for Digital."

Under Lang's leadership, the Connectivity Software Business
Unit will develop, market and sell software that enables
customers to connect with and exploit the information assets
critical to running their business and satisfying their
customers.

"I'm delighted to be joining Digital at such an exciting time
in its history," said Lang. "Establishing a business unit to
deliver the enterprise connectivity software needed to
leverage critical information assets is precisely on target.
Digital's leadership products and talented people, coupled
with its core competencies in networking, messaging, and
Internet technology, provide a strong foundation for success."

For the past year, Lang led the worldwide development and
marketing of Lotus' SmartSuite product line. During that
time, she established the company's presence in the emerging
team computing market, restructured operations to meet
profitability goals and accelerated new product development.
Previously, she served as vice president for International
Product Development for Lotus. In that role, she was
responsible for the development of all Lotus products outside
the U.S, and established a strategy and process for
simultaneous product shipment worldwide.

Before Lotus, Lang was interim chief operating officer of the
Industrial Technology Institute, a leading organization
devoted to improving manufacturing through application and
effective use of technology; and president of Adelie
Corporation, a vendor of marketing and sales productivity
software solutions to Fortune 100 companies and large
commercial banks. Lang also served in several senior
management positions at Symbolics, a pioneer in advanced
computer systems for artificial intelligence and symbolic
processing systems.

Lang holds an MBA from Harvard Business School and received
her undergraduate degree from Radcliffe College.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>