
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B018-203</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg23.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034329 text/html 27620
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:49 GMT
Content-length: 27433
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg23.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>ALCOHOL SENSORS INTERNATIONAL COULD BE READY TO TAKE IGNITION&nbsp;INTERLOCK MARKET BY STORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(935 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>AFTER A YEAR OF TURMOIL AND GROWING PAINS, SENSORMATIC WANTS A CALMER&nbsp;1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SENSOR FIRMS WORK TO BUILD BLOOD SUGAR SENSORS FOR DIABETICS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(545 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SIEMENS ROLLS OUT SENSORS TO DISABLE PASSENGER AIRBAG IF CHILD SEAT&nbsp;PRESENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(394 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>FIRST TECHNOLOGY POSTS HEALTHY GAINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1152 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>CAR BUYERS BECOMING AWARE OF SIDE-IMPACT AIRBAGS; SOME ARE DEMANDING&nbsp;THEM ALREADY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(389 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

ALCOHOL SENSORS INTERNATIONAL COULD BE READY TO TAKE IGNITION
INTERLOCK MARKET BY STORM

     The market for sensors that disable a car's ignition if drivers
have too much to drink continues to grow, and a new company wants into
this robust business.  Islandia, N.Y.-based Alcohol Sensors
International Ltd. topped off several years of intensive R&D with an
initial public offering of its stock in mid-November, and already has
seen its market value double.  From an initial price of 7 on NASDAQ,
ASI's stock price had risen to 12 5/8 at our deadline.
     The frenzied reception by investors is no surprise to ASI
President and CEO Robert Whitney, who told SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS his
firm's technological superiority should help ASI rake in $50 million
in sales during 1996.
     ASI claims its sensor, called the Sens-O-Lock, is superior to
competing products since it never needs to be recalibrated and is
easier to use because of its unique, open-chamber technology, which
requires no direct mouth contact to take a breath sample and test for
the presence of alcohol.
     "There is no question we lead the way.  We've spent tons of time
and money for the best mousetrap in the world," said Whitney.
     But the chief executive of LifeSafer Interlock Inc., of
Cincinnati, Ohio, which makes a competing product, questioned the
credibility of a product that never is checked for accuracy once it is
installed.  He said sensors used for such critical tasks ought to be
verified regularly, as is his firm's LifeSafer.
     "I wouldn't want the liability associated with it," said
LifeSafer President Richard Freund.  "I think that's a real big issue. 
It exposes a publicly traded company to a lot of liability problems."

  ...State Laws Create Market

     In as many as 32 states, authorities have the option to require a
driver convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI) to have an alcohol
sensor installed in his or her vehicle as a condition of retaining
their driver's license.
     Once the vehicle begins moving, the devices ask randomly for
another sample.  If the driver fails, the unit will flash the
vehicle's external lights and sound the horn if the vehicle is not
brought to a stop within a brief period.
     ASI also wants to sell the device to parents and others who want
a means of preventing their families from driving drunk.
     In all cases, the device will be installed by specially trained
technicians who work for firms that install car alarm systems, Whitney
said.  Drivers who use the device under court order will return to the
technician regularly to enable authorities to keep tabs on whether the
system has detected alcohol and how often it has been used.
     Auto safety experts vouch for the effectiveness of the devices in
keeping alcohol-impaired people from operating their vehicles.  "We
support ignition interlocks if they are set up properly," said John
Undeland, spokesman for the American Automobile Association's
Washington, D.C.-area division.  "The only downside, if there is one,
is that once the system is in place, it doesn't change people [who
have alcohol problems].  They still drink, but they just can't drive."
     Carl Ekstein, vice president of marketing and business
development for Rockville, Md.-based Life Sciences Corp., which
installs and maintains LifeSafer units in several mid-Atlantic states,
agreed.  "These devices are highly effective in stopping repeat
offenders.  Our experience is that less than 1 percent of people using
the sensor are rearrested for DWI," Ekstein told us.
     Whitney told us ASI plans to market the Sens-O-Lock in two
versions.  Equipped with a data logger, the device will be used by
people who have been ordered by authorities to do so.  Whitney said
the market in just the United States is perhaps $300 million per year. 

  ...Voluntary Market Expected to Be Larger

     ASI charges about $600 per year for each data logger-equipped
device.  But officials said they expect to realize the majority of
their revenue from sales of the Sens-O-Lock to municipalities and
businesses for use on their vehicle fleets, and from retail sales of a
simpler, Sens-O-Lock stripped of the data recording capabilities and
priced at about $429.
     "We see this as going into every school bus, locomotive and
subway train," said ASI Director of Marketing Frank Savarese.
     But Ekstein questioned ASI's ability to crack the voluntary
market.  "I've already tried it and I'm not deluged with requests. 
It's hard to get enough cases for market research," he told us.
     Freund said the Sens-O-Lock's positioning as a product the
consumer can have installed and never have to adjust could be a
problem.  "I understand their motivation [in wanting to sell to
consumers]," he said.  "We have looked at the possibility of a simple
product, but if we put it out for the consumer market, we would
require that it be periodically recalibrated.  We have some voluntary
users, but they are a small percentage.  We focus on DWI offenders."
     ASI also may have overstated the size of the market for ignition
interlock devices, Freund said.  "The market is 10 years old, and at
the end of 1995 about 20,000 people had the devices in their cars," he
told us.  "That's about a $15 million market, and we have half of it."
     ASI's Whitney remains undeterred and said that all told, the
worldwide market for vehicle alcohol sensors could one day top the
billion-dollar figure.
     In addition to making a big splash in the market for alcohol
sensors, ASI hopes to expand into sensing other substances, although
Whitney declined to provide details.  "We will be a major player in
the sensor world," he predicted.
(AAA Potomac, John Undeland, 703/222-4100; ASI, Robert Whitney,
516/342-1515; Life Sciences Corp., Carl Ekstein, 301/212-9222;
LifeSafer Interlock, Richard Freund, 800/531-0006.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

AFTER A YEAR OF TURMOIL AND GROWING PAINS, SENSORMATIC WANTS A CALMER
1996

     Sensormatic Electronics Corp., buffeted last year by
improprieties in its accounting practices and by disappointing sales
following a banner year in 1994, hopes new President and Chief
Operating Officer Robert Vanourek--who joined Sensormatic in October
1995--will improve its fortunes this year.
     The Boca Raton, Fla.-based company's stock price on the New York
Stock Exchange fell by more than half during the second half of 1995,
to 17 3/8 at our deadline.  The stock tumbled in mid-December after
officials told shareholders the company would take an unspecified
charge as part of a restructuring effort to strengthen results.
     "The company last year had a lot of trouble attributable to its
phenomenal success and growth," said a source close to Sensormatic. 
"The company's growth outpaced its infrastructure.  Things have
happened so rapidly that they really weren't able to put the checks
and balances in place."
     Officials would not specify what steps they plan to take to
rejuvenate the company, but it is likely the company will try to
improve its financial recordkeeping, keep close tabs on expenses, and
boost productivity.  Executives said it was too early to say how much
the changes would cost, but the sour response from Wall Street to the
restructuring announcement suggests investors remain somewhat
skeptical of the company.

  ...Checkpoint's Presence Formidable

     Although Sensormatic counts among its customers most of the
world's largest retailers, it continues to face a strong challenge
from arch rival Checkpoint Systems Inc., of Thorofare, N.J.
     "We have lost the momentum in drug stores and there is aggressive
competition in the food market," Vanourek acknowledged to shareholders
Dec. 14, "but we will not concede any market to any competitor." 
     Checkpoint officials said their firm is poised to control about
75 percent of the drug store theft control market.  Overall sales at
Checkpoint grew more than 60 percent for the nine months ended Sept.
24, 1995, even as sales at Sensormatic were soft.
     Expect Sensormatic to continue its attack on Checkpoint as it
tries to solidify its dominant position in loss prevention and renew
its commitment to the retail market.  A possible tactic could be
emphasizing the advantages of Sensormatic's magnetic technology
compared with Checkpoint's radio frequency-based equipment, which has
been called unreliable by some critics.
     "Sensormatic will hit Checkpoint hard over the issue of how its
technology can be fooled," our source told us.  "Sensormatic is
certainly going to use that as ammunition."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

SENSOR FIRMS WORK TO BUILD BLOOD SUGAR SENSORS FOR DIABETICS

     Several sensor companies are racing to give diabetics relief from
the daily finger-pricking required to monitor their blood glucose
levels and to enable better management of the troublesome disease.
     San Diego-based Synthetic Blood International Inc. told SENSOR
BUSINESS NEWS tests on laboratory animals indicate its implantable
biosensor is nearing the point where it does not upset the immune
system and lasts long enough to be practical.  The device, similar in
some respects to a pacemaker, would be placed in the stomach or the
abdomen and could go a year or longer between battery changes, said
Synthetic's Alan Brunson.  It would provide measurements as often as
every seven minutes.
     Meanwhile, MiniMed Inc., of Sylmar, Calif., reported it plans to
start a clinical trial of its glucose sensor by late this year.  The
sensor is designed to be inserted subcutaneously by diabetics.  An
alarm would signal abnormal blood sugar levels.
     "I don't think people know how bad people who are diabetics have
it," said Synthetic Blood President and CEO Gerald Schlatter.  "It is
really a different way of life.  We've done market research on this
product and we feel that the product would be very well received."
     Synthetic Blood believes the market for blood glucose sensors
could hit a billion dollars or more.  The company hopes to partner
with a larger company to commercialize its technology, and plans human
trials by the end of 1996.
     "We're versatile and we can correct mistakes easily.  But
companies like ours can have a tough time raising R&D money.  Larger
companies in biotechnology look for small companies like ours.  We've
had various conversations with pacemaker and drug companies,"
Schlatter told us.

  ...Biocontrol Technology Points Angry Finger at the Press

     The announcements from Synthetic Blood and MiniMed come as
Pittsburgh-based Biocontrol Technology Inc. publicly complained about
media coverage of its Diasensor noninvasive blood glucose sensor,
which has been in the FDA approval process for more than a year.  The
company already is selling the device abroad and said it expects to
begin U.S. production of the sensor this month, but Biocontrol
officials appear to be worried the company is seen in a negative
light.
     The firm issued a sharply worded news release urging potential
customers to lambast reporters for criticizing the product's large
size and $8,000 cost, and for raising questions about its reliability.
     "Biocontrol pledges that we will continue to focus on getting the
Diasensor...through the process necessary to market it and that we
will not be stopped by any negative or uninformed sources who would
prefer, for known and unknown reasons, to have us fail," the release
said.  "...It is very difficult to believe that the timing [of the
criticism] is simply a matter of coincidence."
     A Biocontrol spokeswoman did not return phone calls from SENSOR
BUSINESS NEWS to discuss the issue.  
     (Synthetic Blood's Schlatter said he does not anticipate
difficulty when the time comes to get FDA approval to market the
company's product.)
     In a related matter, Biocontrol and Diasense Inc., which jointly
have developed the Diasensor, said they planned to combine their
operations sometime in the first quarter of this year.  Officials said
the merger was in the financial best interest of the Diasensor
project.  (Biocontrol Technology, 412/ 429-0673; MiniMed, Synthetic
Blood, 619/595-4829; Kevin Sayer, 818/362-5958.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

SIEMENS ROLLS OUT SENSORS TO DISABLE PASSENGER AIRBAG IF CHILD SEAT
PRESENT

     In spite of their proven ability to save lives, front passenger
airbags pose a threat to young children.  When the airbag deploys, it
can injure or kill a child riding in a car safety seat, say experts.  
     A solution is for the child to ride in the back seat, but some
vehicles, such as pick-ups, do not have rear seats.  In any case, many
parents feel more comfortable with their children beside them as they
drive.
     Siemens Automotive Corp. believes it has a better answer.  The
Auburn Hills, Mich.-based unit of German multinational Siemens AG last
month introduced a sensor designed to deactivate the passenger airbag
if a specially equipped child safety seat is directly in its path.
     As an added benefit, the system also will turn off the airbag if
the seat is empty, saving the considerable cost of replacing the
airbag in the event of a collision that otherwise would cause it to
activate.
     Beginning late this year, 1997-badged cars from two unnamed
European luxury carmakers will come with the sensors as standard
equipment, accounting for some 600,000 vehicles worldwide, said
Siemens spokesman David Ladd.  
     Chrysler, Ford and General Motors also are "enthusiastic," he
said.  The cost to the automakers will be under $40 per vehicle, Ladd
told us.
     The system uses pressure-sensitive foil within the seat to detect
weight greater than 25 pounds.  Sensors at either side of the seat
look for devices on specially-equipped safety seats and will disable
the airbag if the seat is rear-facing or at an angle.
     Ladd said safety seat makers in Europe already have agreed to put
the equipment on their seats, and U.S. makers are likely to follow
suit.  The modifications cost boost the seat prices by about 5
percent, he said.
     Within a few years, other sensing systems--perhaps based on
optical or radar technology--should appear and eliminate the need for
specially equipped child seats, Ladd said.  Today, such alternative
systems are considered too unreliable and are cost-prohibitive, he
told us.
     Ladd said Siemens will discourage retrofitting existing vehicles
or child safety seats with the technology.  "The strategy is to
install the equipment at the point of manufacture," said Ladd.  "It's
more reliable."
     Some 1996 vehicles will come equipped with a key-operated switch
to disable the front passenger airbag, but whether people will use the
switch properly is questionable, experts say.  (Siemens Automotive,
810/253-1000.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

FIRST TECHNOLOGY POSTS HEALTHY GAINS

     Sales and profit figures from a key supplier of fuel cut-off
sensors and other safety products to many of the world's automakers
underscore the importance of the automotive industry as a hot market
for sensor makers.
     Southwood, England-based First Technology PLC reported sales of
$28 million for the six-month period that ended Oct. 31, 1995, up a
healthy 10.2 percent.  Profits grew to almost $5.1 million, a gain of
some 16 percent.  The company predicts strong sales in 1996 even if
worldwide demand for cars falls, as its safety products are installed
on a greater proportion of new vehicles.
     Much of the growth is a result of the company's growing
domination of the market for the fuel cut-off sensors, which disengage
a car's fuel system in the event of a crash, said Chairman Fred
Westlake.  In November, First Technology opened a factory in eastern
France to increase its capacity to produce the sensors (SEN, Dec. 6,
1995, p. 3).  The company also has facilities in the United States. 
(First Technology, Phone: 011/01344/22322.)


S. Himmelstein Rolls Out High-capacity Torquemeters
     S. Himmelstein and Co., of Hoffman Estates, Ill., introduced a
series of high-capacity, non-contact, strain gauge torquemeters.  The
sensors measure the torque, speed, power and efficiency of large
rotating equipment.  They are available in capacities ranging from
750,000 to 4 million pound-inches.  (S. Himmelstein, Steven Tveter,
708/843-3300.)

Breed Technologies Gets ISO 9001 and QS 9000 Certification
     Breed Technologies Inc., a Lakeland, Fla.-based maker of crash
sensors and airbag systems for automakers worldwide, reported it has
received ISO 9001 and QS 9000 quality assurance certification from the
British Standards Institution.  The QS 9000 program identifies auto
suppliers that meet certain standards for quality management, and
recognition by the program is likely to be crucial by 1997.  (Breed
Technologies, Lisa Spinazzola, 941/668-6464.)

ISA Merges With International Division
     The International Society for Measurement and Control (ISA) and
its international subsidiary have dropped the distinction between
themselves effective Jan. 1.  ISA, headquartered in Research Triangle
Park, N.C., created the international division in 1986 to handle its
growing international membership base, but delegates recently voted to
combine ISA's North American and international operations and create
an International Development Council instead.  ISA sponsors an annual
conference and trade show that attracts hundreds of sensor,
instrumentation and software firms.  (ISA, 919/549-8411.)

Sensotec Rolls Out Two Sensors
     Sensotec Inc., of Columbus, Ohio, released two new sensors to
measure static and dynamic displacement.  The units have free,
unguided armatures and are ideal for use in limited-space, remote or
hazardous locations, according to the firm.  The sensors cost $136
each.  (Sensotec, 800/848-6564.)

HPS Leases New Building
     MKS Instruments Inc.'s Boulder, Colo.-based HPS Division, said it
leased a 13,000-square-foot facility to expand its production of
SensaVac vacuum gauges.  The new building is next door to the
company's present location and should help HPS provide faster service
and a broader product line, the company said.  The SensaVac line
currently includes standard and convection Pirani gauges and hot and
cold cathode ionization gauges.  (HPS, 800/345-1967.) 

Arizona Instrument Moves Ahead With New Technologies
     Arizona Instrument Corp., a maker of equipment for quality
control, industrial control and environmental monitoring, said it has
completed development of a gold film micro-sensor to be used in its
next-generation toxic gas monitors.  The Phoenix, Ariz.-based firm
also said it has made progress on its new line of moisture analyzers,
which will be sold under the name Computrac and will be targeted at
the titration market, estimated to be $60 million worldwide.  Both
product lines are scheduled for commercial availability at the end of
1996.  (Arizona Instrument, Scott Carter, 602/470-1414.)

Toshiba Shows Samples of New Shock Sensor
     Japan's Toshiba Corp. late last month began shipping samples of a
new shock sensor, according to the Comline news service.  The sensor
uses half the power of its predecessor and is just a third of the
size.  Samples are available for 300 yen, or about $3, each. 
(Toshiba, Phone: 011/03/3457-2148.)

New Accelerometers Are Less Costly to Repair, Company Says
     A pair of piezoelectric accelerometers from San Juan Capistrano,
Calif.-based Endevco Corp. are the industry's first such devices with
a completely replaceable subassembly, the company said.  The devices
can measure vibration in three orthogonal axes and are considerably
less expensive to fix than competing products, which must be entirely
replaced if one axis is damaged, according to 
Endevco.  (Endevco, Anthony Chu, 714/493-8181.)
              Endevco's Accelerometer

Honeywell Buys General Signal's Sensor Business
     Honeywell Inc. said it has agreed to buy the sensor,
instrumentation and measurement business of General Signal Corp.'s
now-defunct Leeds & Northrup unit for an undisclosed sum.  Honeywell,
based in Minneapolis, will fold the business, which includes assets
related to analytical devices, controllers and temperature and
humidity sensors, into its existing industrial control business.  The
sale bolsters Honeywell's position as a supplier to the process and
discrete manufacturing industries.  It also is the final step in
Stamford, Conn.-based General Signal's dismantlement of the Leeds &
Northrup division and will help the firm reduce its debt load. 
(General Signal, Nino Fernandez, 203/329-4320; Honeywell, Meta
Gaertnier, 612/951-0773.)

Ohio Firm Expands Data Acquisition Offerings
     Cleveland, Ohio-based IOtech Inc., announced it has expanded its
DBK series of signal conditioning and expansion products for personal
computer-based data acquisition.  The firm's new eight-channel relay
contact output card is designed for industrial applications that
require power signal switching.  It lists for $295.  (IOtech, 216/439-
4091.)

U.S. Carmaker Buys FiberChem Sensor System
     Las Vegas-based FCI Environmental Inc., a unit of FiberChem Inc.,
said a Big Three auto manufacturer has purchased one of its CMS-5000
continuous monitoring systems to monitor storm water discharge in
accordance with federal regulations.  FCI declined to identify the
purchaser, but officials said they expect to sell more of the systems
to it during 1996.  The sale is an indication that its environmental
sensor technology has applications beyond the oil industry, where FCI
has realized most of its sales.  (Liviakis Financial Communications
Inc., 916/448-6084.)

New Photoelectric Sensors Use Lasers for Extended Range
     A new series of photoelectric sensors from Banner Engineering
Corp. are the world's first retroreflective laser sensors, according
to the Minneapolis-based company.  The Omni-Beam sensors contain a
Class II laser diode and achieve sensing ranges up to 225 feet, and
sport LEDs for power, signal and output.  The laser beam is visible,
simplifying the process of aligning the sensor.  (Banner Engineering,
Floyd Schneider, 612/544-3164.)

Centronic's New Silicon Photodiode Eliminates Distortion
     Newbury Park, Calif.-based Centronic Inc. unveiled a large area
silicon photodiode designed for easy insertion into standard "vector"
board PCBs.  The QD100-5T-COW, eliminates distortion, light loss and
crosstalk, and is aimed at customers involved in laser beam position
detection, target acquisition, machine controls and encoders,
officials said.  It is priced at $37.50 in quantities of fewer than
100.  (Centronic, Yuval Tamari, 800/700-2088.)
     Remember to send your new product info and other news to Sam
Silverstein, fax 301/424-0176.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

CAR BUYERS BECOMING AWARE OF SIDE-IMPACT AIRBAGS; SOME ARE DEMANDING
THEM ALREADY

     There are indications people shopping for high-end automobiles
may begin to expect side-impact airbags by late this year.  That is
when Cadillac and Mercedes-Benz will join Volvo in offering the safety
systems as standard equipment on all their models.
     For 1996, several Mercedes models offer the side airbags.  Most
people do not yet know about side airbags, so few purchasing decisions
are likely to hinge on their presence for now, said Len Logue, who
sells Mercedes vehicles in Silver Spring, Md.
     The situation at Volvo is different.  The Swedish automaker--long
associated with "safety" in car buyers' minds--was the first
manufacturer to offer the equipment, and an official said side airbags
are growing increasingly important to prospective customers.
     "People with one- and two-year-old Volvos want to trade their
cars in for cars with the side airbags," Volvo District Sales Manager
Robert Brissie told us at the Washington, D.C., International Auto
Show last week.
     That could be a sign that well-heeled car buyers are beginning to
conclude that side airbags add a significant measure of safety, even
as they realize widespread availability is still in the future.  Once
several manufacturers offer the technology as standard equipment,
others are likely to follow quickly, in a manner similar to the way
front airbags proliferated after automakers discovered many buyers
consider them essential.

  ...Truck Buyers See it Differently 

     Even as some luxury car buyers are eager to buy cars equipped
with the latest safety gear, it appears demand for the equipment
depends, in part, on perception, perhaps even more than on hard facts. 
One salesman told us people looking for pickup trucks are sometimes
convinced the size of the vehicle makes airbags unnecessary.
     "In the past year, I don't think one customer has asked me if the
vehicles have airbags," he said.  Some buyers inquire about safety
features after the sale, he said, underscoring the dichotomy between
buyers of different types of vehicles when it comes to safety issues.
     Still, federal regulations will compel at least a driver's side
airbag to be installed in all trucks sold in the United States within
the next few years.
     All passenger vehicles will come with two front airbags standard
not long afterward.  The burgeoning demand for airbags--front systems
as well as side-impact units, is good news for airbag makers Bosch,
Siemens, TRW and Breed Technologies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>