
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B31-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B011-112</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec82.html 205.156.212.5 19970114214922 text/html 23225
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:47:37 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:08 GMT
Content-length: 23038
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec82.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COMPUTERIZED PROCESSES via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>SEVENTH ANNUAL CORPORATE CONTINGENCY PLANNING&nbsp;SEMINAR & EXHIBITION SCHEDULED FOR MARCH 25-27</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DISASTER RECOVERY JOURNAL DEDICATED TO BUSINESS CONTINUITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(841 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>TECHNO-THEFT IS COSTING MANUFACTURERS AND CONSUMERS MILLIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1578 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>IBM TO MARKET EMS MANUFACTURING SOFTWARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(186 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>WORLD'S FIRST VME64 POWERPC 604 BOARDS&nbsp;WITH PMC IN CONDUCTION AND AIR-COOLED&nbsp;MODELS UNVEILED BY RADSTONE TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(392 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMPUTERIZED PROCESSES via NewsNet
January 1996

SEVENTH ANNUAL CORPORATE CONTINGENCY PLANNING
SEMINAR & EXHIBITION SCHEDULED FOR MARCH 25-27

Do you want to attend the largest conference and trade show in
North America focusing on Disaster Recovery? Are you
interested in contingency planning and business continuity?
Are you responsible for your company's Disaster Recovery
Planning team and need to learn valuable information from
industry leaders?  Then you will not want to miss the Seventh
Annual Corporate Contingency Planning Seminar & Exhibition
hosted and sponsored by the Disaster Recovery Journal (DRJ).

All presentations, workshops and exhibits at this seminar
relate directly to corporate contingency planning and disaster
recovery. Participants at the conference can become qualified
to take the CDRP certification exam and earn Continuing
Education Units (CEU's).

New attractions and highlights include the following:

-Issue and Answers Session: This session provides a forum for
attendees to find answers to questions or problems they're
having in their business environment. This networking
opportunity allows various answers to be presented, so
attendees may choose the best solution for their situation.

-Expanded General Sessions: General Sessions have been
extended to allow more time for attendee participation. The
longer sessions will feature more detailed information and
allow more time for questions and answers.

-Three-Hour Workshops: Six workshops have been added to this
year's agenda. These work- shops provide in-depth information
about the hottest issues in the industry. These workshops are
available at no additional cost.

Attendees sign up for their choice of two sessions as well as
one workshop. General sessions, held each morning, are for all
attendees. The Issues and Answers segment is also open for all
attendees. Evening hospitalities and exhibitor product
demonstrations are optional events which can be attended. No
registration for the latter event is required.

For a complete brochure, and information on exhibition or
presentation possibilities, call the DRJ office at
(314)894-0276 or Fax to (314)894-7474.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COMPUTERIZED PROCESSES via NewsNet
January 1996

DISASTER RECOVERY JOURNAL DEDICATED TO BUSINESS CONTINUITY

The Disaster Recovery Journal is the premier magazine
dedicated to business continuity since 1987. With a growing
number of subscribers (exceeding 40,000), the Disaster
Recovery Journal is considered the best resource for those
involved with corporate contingency planning. A subscription
to the Disaster Recovery Journal is free to any individuals in
the U.S. and Canada involved in the field of disaster recovery
or business continuity.

The DRJ holds two conferences a year; one in Atlanta, Georgia,
and the other in San Diego, California. Our next conference,
The Seventh Annual Corporate Contingency Planning Seminar &
Exhibition in San Diego, will be held March 25-27, 1996. This
conference is North America's largest corporate contingency
planning and business resumption seminar. Guest speakers have
a broad range of expertise and are on the cutting edge of the
industry. Participants at the conference can become qualified
to take the CDRP certification exam and earn Continuing
Education Units (CEU's). Ask the conference registrar how you
can sign up for the conference. Act fast; Special rates will
not be available for long.

For those with Internet access, be sure to browse the DRJ's
web page at http://www.drj.com. There you will find the
current issue of the magazine as well as special reports,
contingency planning group forums, an advertiser section and
the ability to E-mail our international Editorial Advisory
Board. The staff of the DRJ will be glad to help your company
establish an Internet web page to promote your products or
services. If your company has an existing web page, the DRJ
can provide a direct link to your page for a small fee. Call
the office and ask for our "web master" who will be glad to
discuss the possibilities the DRJ can offer your company with
regards to the Internet.

The Disaster Recovery Journal offers a series of videos that
detail the dramatic events that occur during a disaster. The
Disaster Recovery Flood Video shows amazing footage designed
to inform contingency planners of the devastation which can
affect businesses during a disaster. The chronological video
features coverage of the Great Flood of 1993, the 1994 Georgia
flood, and the Johnstown dam break. Lesser known floods which
have affected businesses in the past are also showcased. The
Disaster Recovery Earthquake Video illustrates firsthand the
damage that earthquakes can do. This chronological video
features coverage of the 1994 Northridge Earthquake, the 1989
San Francisco Earthquake, the 1995 Kobe Earthquake and many
others throughout the world. The Disaster Recovery Video
Volume II is the perfect solution for convincing your boss
that your company needs a disaster recovery plan. Set to
music, this video features fascinating footage of famous
disasters throughout history such as Hurricane Andrew, the
Oakland Fires, the World Trade Center Bombing and many more.
All videos am available for $24.95 each, plus shipping and
handling. Future videos will cover tornados, hurricanes and
terrorism.

Other products offered by the DRJ are the Directory and
Directory On-Line. The Directory is a comprehensive listing of
over 2,000 companies involved with the field of disaster
recovery. Hotsites, coldsites, consulting services, emergency
equipment, and training facilities are a few examples of the
detailed listing the Directory. The Directory On-Line is a
Windows based software package which allows you to add, delete
or take specific notes on all of the companies in the listing.
You can also search for selected companies by category. The
Directory is available for $75.00 and the Directory On-Line is
$99.00, plus shipping and handling. The Directory On-Line will
soon be available on CD-ROM.

If you are researching a DR plan, or looking for articles
relating to recovery situations, then the DRJ's World and
World II may be what you are looking for. World and World II
are the authoritative reference volumes from the Disaster
Recovery Journal since its inception in 1987. The World covers
all the articles published from 1987 to September 1991. The
World 11 includes all the articles published from October 1991
to July 1993. World M, due out in January 1996, will cover all
articles from October 1993 to October 1995. The World's are
$45.00 each, plus shipping and handling.

The Disaster Recovery Journal's BIA & Beyond is a training
session on video which will act as a supplement for anyone
interested establishing or building upon a disaster recovery
plan. These innovative training tools feature narration and
information from Geoff Wold of McGladrey and Pullen. The first
video focuses on Business Impact Analysis (BIA). A workbook,
especially designed for the video, will be included at no
additional cost. This workbook includes all the forms
necessary for gathering data and compiling a data analysis.
This video provides an inexpensive, accessible way for all
contingency planners to learn from an expert in the field.
They are a must for anyone interested in furthering their
disaster recovery knowledge. BIA & Beyond can be purchased for
$160.00, plus ship- ping and handling.

To place an order, or inquire about the conference, contact
the Disaster Recovery Journal at (314)894-0276, or fax at
(314)894-7474.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COMPUTERIZED PROCESSES via NewsNet
January 1996

TECHNO-THEFT IS COSTING MANUFACTURERS AND CONSUMERS MILLIONS

A dozen well-dressed men walk calmly into the front lobby of a
large corporation. Noting the visitors, corporate attire,
employees figure these are legitimate businessmen on their way
to a company meeting. They couldn't be more wrong. Surprising
everyone, the suit and tie executives suddenly pull out
automatic weapons and order employees to lie on the floor. In
a few terrifying minutes, they pillage the company's
computers, remove valuable memory chips and flee with
components having an estimated value of $5 to $12 million!

This latest chapter in an ongoing story of international
intrigue is not a scene from a James Bond movie. California
and is merely a small part of the disturbing trend of rising
computer theft and other "Techno-Crime."

In California's Silicon Valley alone, it is estimated that $1
million in components are lost to Techno-Thievery each week.
Worldwide, overall costs to electronics and insurance firms
are approaching a staggering $8 billion a year and are
expected to soar to $200 billion by the year 2000, according
to the Technology Theft Prevention Foundation in Clinton, New
Jersey.

The Foundation was started by insurance companies who, after
paying out millions in computer theft claims, wanted to
develop ways to curtail the rising Techno-Crime Wave.

According to FBI and other law enforcement agencies who are
working with the Foundation, Techno-Crime can come in many
forms that may or may not be considered thievery. But as far
as theft is concerned, although everything from motherboards
to modems and disk drives are targeted by Techno-Thieves, CPUs
(Central Processing Units) and SIMs (Single In-Line Memory
Modules) represent the crown jewels of computer theft.

"Basically, these parts are non-traceable, said Keith Lowry,
sergeant for the San Jose Police Department. "They are very
liquid just like gold, and the market for resale is fantastic
because there aren't enough products to go around;

It's big business and it's opportunistic," Lowry noted.
Manufacturers and consumers alike are being short changed
because Techno-Crime is having a substantial effect on the
quality of available memory products on both the wholesale and
retail markets.

Although electronic and computer buyers believe they are
getting a good deal, they are frequently getting ripped- off.
And the Techno-Crime Crime itself is sometimes not an obvious
one, such as that mentioned in the beginning of this story;
often the crime is difficult to identify and the price paid
can't be quantified--but consumers are paying the price. For
example, consumers are often attracted to flashy packaging,
which shows a product in its best light. Upon closer
inspection, however, the product within may not live up to the
advance billing given on the box. It is not uncommon for the
module inside not to have been manufactured or assembled by
the company shown. It is important that the consumer knows who
the real manufacturer of the product is and that it is a
reputable company--one that is respected throughout the
industry, no t just at the store on the corner.

"Everybody and their brother is slapping together cheap little
memory products," explained Jim Wong, president of Micro
Solutions, Inc., in Corvallis, Ore., designer of systems for
highly demanding users with specialized applications. "You
have to be very careful about who you buy from and what you
buy." cautioned Wong. "I've heard horror stories from people
who haven't been, but are now our customers because they can
constantly rely upon the quality we provide," Wong said.

With SIMMs comprising up to 50% of a computer system's cost,
and providing much of the computing power, the quality of
memory has become paramount, which has been a boon to
manufacturers putting emphasis on quality.

One such firm is Century Microelectronics, Inc., in Santa
Clara, California. Century, an industry leader in the
manufacture of computer memory, has implemented extra measures
to ensure its memory modules maintain the highest quality
standards.

One way Century does this is by dealing directly with only the
largest, most reputable DRAM manufacturers who have strict
internal controls. Century then adds its own quality
protective measures. For example, each assembled module bears
the Century name to insure strict accountability. The consumer
can clearly identify that the module has been assembled by
Century and not another third party manufacturer with lower
standards. Unless the circuit board manufacturer puts their
name on the board as Century does, there is virtually no way
to trace the product back to the manufacturer when troubles
arise.

Companies like Century use the highest quality components not
just in the DRAM, but in the design and manufacture of the PC
board as well. This philosophy has so far served companies
like Century well in the marketplace where wholesalers,
retailers and consumers have voiced concern over the affect of
Techno-Crime on overall product quality. "A big part of my
business is the ability to give my customers the reliability
that they are getting a first rate part," said Gary Barlow,
owner of RAMTECH in Boulder, Colo., the computer memory
supplier to a majority of users in that area.

"Most of the time price is not the issue as long as you're
reasonable," Barlow explained citing his reason for relying on
Century as his prime memory supplier. "I've been in this
business a long time and I believe Century has the highest
quality parts available," he said. Micro Solutions' Wong who
often utilizes Century products because of their inherent
reliability, agreed with Barlow on stressing quality. "We're
just a small company so what's really important is who our
clients are and the type of machines that we configure," Wong
explained. "We have some pretty major clients like Hewlett
Packard who buy our memory products for insertion into their
own machines so quality is very important to us."

To less scrupulous suppliers, however, price, not quality, is
the primary motivator. Because of competition from makers of
cheap "clone" systems, keeping costs down has become paramount
to both supplier and manufacturer. In this market climate,
even well known original equipment manufacturers (OEMS)
sometimes offer to buy back old memory chips as credit towards
new memory purchases. These suppliers then reuse the memory,
which, since it is used, has a shorter life cycle.

While this might not appear to be an obvious Techno-Crime to
the consumer, such as armed theft or the like, it is, in fact
Techno-Crime in its worst form because while the monetary cost
is just as severe, the crime itself is all but impossible to
detect.

Another factor in the link is when OEMs put pressure on chip
suppliers to step-up production so that increasing market
demand can be met. To please their OEM customers, memory
brokers with limited resources are often tempted to purchase
substandard parts in the "gray market" because they are being
offered a deal that is too good to pass up.

Of particular concern to manufacturers is that substandard
parts within the gray market have often failed to test to
"grade All specification and instead of ending up as scrap or
in a lower performance non-computer application as intended,
the y often end up in machines where they are not up to the
task.

A chip that shows a 60 nanosecond (60ns) rating, for instance,
could really only be able to perform up to a 70ns level.
Pressed for time, unscrupulous suppliers can't be bothered
with checking for quality so substandard memory batches are
either mixed with those having passed inspection, or are
simply remarked with the higher rating that OEMs require.

To remark a product, third party manufacturers will actually
sand the identifying marks off of chips, remark them so that
they appear to be higher performance chips than they actually
are, and resell them to unsuspecting buyers. The
manufacturers, then, end up installing the lower quality
components in their machines because many trust their memory
distributors to bench test the chips. But unfortunately, many
distributors in need of quick revenue unload the components
without testing them. Installed in machines they weren't
intended for, these parts fail immediately, or after a few
months of use.

And while a substandard chip may only cause a computerized toy
to go haywire, it could just as well put a glitch into the
navigational system of a commercial airliner or cause a
surgical device to malfunction, putting patients at risk. Even
if only a small percentage of available computer chips are
faulty, but are resold as acceptable, the implications are
frightening.

Because popular new software programs require more memory than
ever to operate efficiently, technology market analysts say
the demand for memory modules is likely to remain higher than
the supply. Manufacturers will probably continue to experience
periodic chip shortages which will drive up the value of
memory modules, and drive more OEMs into the gray market.
Consumers should understand that they can easily fall victim
to Techno-Thievery without realizing it because Techno-Crimes
are not always obvious. Unless buyers take extra precautions
to ensure the quality of the product they are buying, they run
the risk of purchasing substandard components that could not
be able to perform up to advertised specifications, or could
fail altogether causing disastrous results.

In light of all this, consumer awareness is increasing and the
demand for superior computer components from the highest
quality manufacturers is expected to be greater than ever.

For further information, call John W. Elliott/Robert Basile
(310)374-1940 or Fax (310)374-1440.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COMPUTERIZED PROCESSES via NewsNet
January 1996

IBM TO MARKET EMS MANUFACTURING SOFTWARE

Effective Management Systems (EMS), a leading developer of
manufacturing software, has entered into a marketing agreement
with IBM to supply its Time Critical Manufacturing software on
the giant computer maker's RISC System 6000 manufacturing
process controlling system.

"Our customers want total solutions," said IBM Manufacturing
Segment Manager Randy Oyster. "EMS understands the
requirements of today's mid-sized discrete manufacturer and
provides preintegrated, art-to-part software solutions that
are affordable and offer relatively short implementation time
periods."

Under the agreement, IBM will handle all sales and service
functions associated with its customers while EMS will retain
responsibility for licensing and upgrades.

"We are extremely excited by the agreement with IBM and the
enormous potential in being part of a lead-with strategy for
the discrete manufacturers they target," said Mike Brennolt,
director of market programs (responsible for strategic
alliances) at EMS.

"Forming a partnership with IBM will allow us to make use of
new distribution channels and a dedicated, experienced staff
to further strengthen our presence within a key group of
manufacturers with sales ranging from $10 to $150 million."

For more information, call 414-359-9800.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COMPUTERIZED PROCESSES via NewsNet
January 1996

WORLD'S FIRST VME64 POWERPC 604 BOARDS
WITH PMC IN CONDUCTION AND AIR-COOLED
MODELS UNVEILED BY RADSTONE TECHNOLOGY

The development of the first VME64 PowerPC 604 processor
boards with PMC (PCI) in conduction- and air-cooled models has
been announced by Radstone Technology.

The new Radstone PPC604 family combines the extraordinary
processing power of the ultra high performance next generation
RISC processor -- the PowerPC 604 -- with the versatility of
on-board PMC and the ability to match boards to specific
application and cost needs.

Redstone's new boards are offered in four levels of
environmental durability from air-cooled standard to
conduction-cooled rugged. This provides markets ranging from
industrial to telecommunications to military with the ability
to select the level that best meets the performance,
reliability and budget criteria of the application. The boards
are available in versions for temperatures from -40 degrees C
to +75 degrees C (specials from -55 degrees C to +85 degrees
C), certified to military vibration specifications.

According to Radstone president Pete Yeatman, "The PPC604 is
the first in a new line of boards that truly break new ground
in the VME world. It not only surpasses the performance,
functionality and reliability of previous processors, but
does so with a significant decrease in cost. These new boards
meet the very demanding needs of computer OEM markets that
have changed fundamentally in the last few years. By offering
these boards in a range of air- and conduction-cooled
versions, Radstone is allowing the markets we serve to get
extraordinary levels of performance and meet tougher budget
constraints - including those of the COTS military market,
which now has next generation product available for immediate
development."

Key features of Radstone's PPC604 series include the PowerPC
604 chip, operating to 100 MHz; high speed direct PCI attached
VME64 interface (>70 Mbytes/sec.), and extensive on-board
memory including up to 64 Mbytes of DRAM with EDC for
sophisticated memory protection, plus L2 cache for increased
performance and 1 Mbyte of system FLASH.

Other features include the ability to add function-boosting
mezzanine modules for graphics, FDDI, Fast Ethernet, ATM and
more, extensive operating system support (including LynxOS,
VxWorks and others) plus a wide range of available
shrink-wrapped applications software, and standard on-board
Ethernet, SCSI-2 and serial I/O.

Pricing for an air-cooled PPC604 starts at $4,675. Delivery
is 30 days A.R.O.

For more information, contact Radstone Technology, Corp., 50
Craig Road, Montvale, NJ 07645; 800-368-2738; 201/391-2700;
Fax: 201/391-2899.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>