
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B04-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000616-B002-77</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it43.html 205.156.212.5 19970122023516 text/html 15682
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:33:26 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:18 GMT
Content-length: 15495
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it43.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
CHRONICLE OF LATIN AM. ECONOMIC AFFAIRS via NewsNet <BR>
January 4, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>       GENERAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>POVERTY REMAINS PERVASIVE THROUGHOUT LATIN AMERICA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1245 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>      CUBA</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>CUBA: OFFICIALS PREDICT CONTINUED GROWTH IN TOURISM&nbsp;AIDED BY EUROPEAN & LATIN AMERICAN INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(965 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
CHRONICLE OF LATIN AM. ECONOMIC AFFAIRS via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

POVERTY REMAINS PERVASIVE THROUGHOUT LATIN AMERICA

     According to a new report by the UN's Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), released in late
December, only a "handful" of countries in the region made any
sustained progress in cutting poverty during the first half of
the 1990s.  In fact, ECLAC reports that the fallout from
Mexico's financial crisis last year severely eroded even the
small gains in living standards that some countries had
previously achieved.
     In early 1993, ECLAC published an extensive survey on
poverty levels in the region that showed that the ranks of the
poor and indigent swelled dramatically during the 1980s.
According to that study, between 1980 and 1990 the number of
people living below the poverty line climbed by 60 million--
from 136 million to 196 million--thus raising the percentage
of the total population considered poor from 41% to 46%.  At
the same time, the number of people living in extreme poverty
grew from 62.4 million to 93.5 million, or from 19% to 22% of
the total regional population (see Chronicle, 09/22/94).
     ECLAC must yet carry out another comprehensive survey
such as the one released in 1993.  Nevertheless, preliminary
estimates made by ECLAC in October suggest that, during the
first half of the 1990s, the absolute number of people living
in poverty may have grown by another 34 million.  If
population growth during the period is taken into account,
that would mean that about 48% of the total population may now
be living below the poverty line (see NotiSur - Latin American
Political Affairs, 10/20/95).
     In its latest report in December, ECLAC did not offer any
new statistics on poverty.  Rather, the commission announced
that between 1990 and 1994 it was only able to identify six
countries that registered slightly reduced rates of poverty:
Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Peru, Panama, and Uruguay.  And, even
in those countries, there was only a relative improvement at
best in general living standards.
     "Even in countries where economic liberalization programs
were judged a success, such as Chile, the problem of endemic
poverty remained a stubborn reality," reads the report.
     Moreover, ECLAC reports that in 1995 three countries--
Mexico, Costa Rica, and Argentina--appear to have "lost the
ground in the fight against poverty that they had gained in
the preceding years."   The economies of those countries were
the most seriously affected by the currency crisis that
exploded in Mexico in December 1994, leading to a sharp
decline in growth in all three nations last year (see
Chronicle, 11/16/95).
     In fact, ECLAC said that Mexico and Costa Rica
represented "worrisome cases" because poverty is now on the
rise again following years of decline in both countries.
     In general, ECLAC says that, even in the most successful
economies, growth in recent years has not generated enough
jobs to keep pace with population growth.  Unemployment rates
in Latin America seldom dip below 20%, and more often average
30% for the poorest sectors of the region's population,
according to the report.  Real incomes for middle- and lower-
income sectors have fallen in comparison with 1960 levels.
     "A new group of poor people is now emerging that is
creating novel characteristics among the impoverished masses
of Latin America," said ECLAC executive director Ruben
Kaztman.  "The newly poor are by and large educated people who
had previously enjoyed higher patterns of consumption and
access to basic services that they now lack.  The
traditionally poor groups had already been living in severe
poverty, but those who had previously belonged to the middle
classes are now also impoverished."
     According to ECLAC, poverty continues to grow much more
rapidly in Latin American cities than in the countryside,
largely because of the acceleration in rural to urban
migration in recent years.  In a separate study by ECLAC
released in November, the commission reported that about 351
million people--more than 73% of the total population--now
live in urban areas throughout Latin American and the
Caribbean, making the region's cities some of the most densely
populated in the world.
     According to ECLAC, of the world's 15 most populated
cities, four are in Latin America: Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro,
Mexico City, and Buenos Aires.  And, even though migration to
the largest cities has slowed somewhat in recent years, poor
campesinos continue to flood into medium- and small-sized
cities in search of better opportunities.  ECLAC predicts
that, if the present trend continues, within 30 years Latin
America's urban population will have swelled to 576 million
people, or 85% of the population, even after accounting for
the expected increase in the total number of inhabitants.
     As a result of the demographic explosion in urban areas--
which, for the first time, is making poverty in Latin America
an overwhelmingly urban phenomenon--infrastructure is being
stretched to the breaking point.  For example, in another
ECLAC study also released in late December, the commission
estimated that there is a shortage of 20 million living
quarters in urban areas throughout the region.  In addition,
of the estimated 93 million living quarters that do exist,
only about 56 million, or 60%, meet minimally acceptable
standards.  About 20 million are "damaged" and the remaining
17 million are in a "precarious" state.
     Notwithstanding the severity of ECLAC's estimates, some
regional experts offer even more dismal appraisals of poverty
levels and even graver predictions for the future.  According
to Bernardo Kliksberg, executive director of the Inter-
American Institute for Social Development--which was set up by
the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)--as of 1990 at least
50% of the total regional population already lived in poverty.
And, Kliksberg estimates that by the year 2000, about 57% of
the population will have slipped below the poverty line.
     Kliksberg, who was the keynote speaker at a regional
conference on poverty held in Venezuela in mid-November, says
that at present about 1.5 million people die each year as a
result of poverty in Latin America.
     The rapid spread of poverty has begun to alarm even the
multilateral lending institutions, which now promise to
channel much more aid into social development projects in the
region.  In unusually candid terms, IDB president Enrique
Iglesias recently stated that the increase in poverty is
largely a result of the structural adjustment programs pushed
by the IDB, the World Bank, and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) since the early 1980s.
     "During the last decade, the central concerns were how to
overcome hyperinflation, survive economically, and maintain
payments on the foreign debt," said Iglesias in an interview
with the Uruguayan magazine Posdata, published in early
November.  "As a result, efforts to deal with the social
conditions of our citizens were postponed, and those
conditions grew worse.  Now that the economies of the region
have become more manageable, we must begin to focus on social
problems, especially the appearance of large groups of newly
poor who have emerged as a byproduct of structural adjustment
policies."
     Iglesias warned that governments must begin to deal with
social problems immediately, before those problems spin out of
control.
     "Marginalized social groups, whose problems have largely
been ignored, are making their presence known in stark forms
throughout Latin America, such as the uprising of Indian
communities in the Mexican state of Chiapas and the recent
popular revolts in some provinces in Argentina," said
Iglesias.  "Those episodes clearly demonstrate that there is
a growing social activism that can no longer be ignored."
[Sources: Inter Press Service, 10/05/95; La Jornada (Mexico),
10/06/95; Notimex, 10/25/95; Reuter, 10/13/95, 12/05/95;
Agence France-Presse, 09/26/95, 10/17/95, 10/29/95, 11/01/95,
11/09/95, 11/17/95, 12/14/95; United Press International,
12/28/95; Excelsior (Mexico), 01/02/96]



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
CHRONICLE OF LATIN AM. ECONOMIC AFFAIRS via NewsNet
January 4, 1996

CUBA: OFFICIALS PREDICT CONTINUED GROWTH IN TOURISM
AIDED BY EUROPEAN & LATIN AMERICAN INVESTMENT

     The Cuban tourism sector finished 1995 with a strong
showing in the number of travelers visiting the island.  Gross
receipts from tourism may soon become the country's most
important source of hard currency.
     Meanwhile, as the government concentrates on hotel
expansion and carefully planned cruise-ship projects with
European and Latin American investors, US travel executives
worry that the US economic embargo will shut them completely
out of the promising Cuban travel market.
     Economy and Planning Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez
announced in November that the government expects earnings
from tourism to surpass sugar export earnings.  Poor sugar
harvests in the last three years have underlined the high cost
of dependence on sugar.  A sugar-for-oil barter deal with
Russia, signed Oct. 15, 1995, may prove disappointing because
of lower-than-expected results in the early stages of the
1995-1996 harvest, despite a US$200 million investment in
trucks, spare parts, and other harvesting inputs (see
Chronicle, 10/12/95).  As a result, planners now see tourism
as a more stable source of convertible currency.
     The Center for Cuban Economic Studies (Centro de Estudios
de la Economia Cubana) estimates that the planned development
of 67 tourist destinations on the island with a capacity to
accommodate 10 million tourists in 200,000 rooms will
eventually gross as much as US$15 billion annually.  While
this is a far cry from the US$1 billion predicted for 1996,
the Tourism Ministry (MINTUR) estimates that it will have
close to 50,000 rooms in place and will gross US$3.5 billion
annually in just four years.
     To finance such massive expansion, MINTUR is counting on
foreign investors covering much of the US$2.4 billion required
to develop the 67 resorts.  At present MINTUR is involved in
negotiations with over 200 prospective investors from 28
countries, and total foreign investment already secured
amounts to US$300 million.
     MINTUR predicts that 900,000 tourists will visit the
island in 1996.  This compares with an estimated 745,000 in
1995 and 630,000 in 1994.  Part of the increase in tourism
last year is explained by the gradual dissipation of the
negative public image that resulted from the August 1994
exodus of 30,000 Cubans who sailed for US waters in rafts.
     In addition, during the past two years, Cuba has improved
its tourism infrastructure with new hotel construction and
cruise-ship terminals.  On Dec. 2, 1995, Havana's new terminal
received its first ship, the 500-berth Costa Playa owned by
Italian cruise operator Costa Crociere.  The terminal is
housed in an 80-year old customs building renovated by Costa
Crociere as part of a US$12 million joint venture with the
Cuban government.  Costa Crociere has also renovated a
terminal in Santiago de Cuba in southeastern Cuba and plans to
build a third terminal in Mariel, west of Havana.
     It took Costa Crociere chairman Alfonso Lavarello two
yeise lines have
sent representatives to Cuba to negotiate cruise-ship
contracts, including the London-based P&O line and Kloster
Cruises Ltd., a subsidiary of the Norwegian Vard line.
     Nevertheless, Cuban tourism planners are moving slowly
into the cruise business.  Growth in the number of cruise
lines calling on Cuban ports will be controlled as part of an
integrated tourism strategy.
     Central to that strategy is hotel construction, while the
cruise-ship sector will be kept at between 4% and 5% of the
tourism industry's gross receipts.  Cuba now has 25,000 hotel
rooms, double the number it had in 1989, and new construction
financed by foreign investment is in the works.  For example,
the French hotel company Accord plans to build 1,330 hotel
rooms on Cayo Coco off the northern coast of Cuba.  The
Mexican Grupo Domos, which is heavily invested in Cuban
telecommunications, and the Canadian mining firm Sherritt are
both planning to expand into hotel and resort ventures.
     Thousands of additional rooms rented out by private
citizens for a fraction of the price charged by resort hotels
augment the industry's capacity.  In recent months the
government has taken steps to control dollar distribution and
to tax private services that have sprung up since late 1993,
when the economy was opened up to a degree of private
enterprise (see Chronicle, 10/26/95).  But rather than
clamping down on unauthorized room rental businesses, MINTUR
has begun to regulate them and has set up an agency called
Dulce Hogar to place tourists in private houses and
apartments.
     While European and Latin American investors move into the
growing Cuban travel market, their US counterparts are showing
increasing impatience with the 33-year old economic embargo
and restrictions on travel by US citizens to Cuba.
     In early December, a group of executives from US credit-
card companies, travel agencies, and other travel-related
businesses went to Havana to talk with MINTUR officials and to
visit hotels and other tourist facilities in and around Havana
and Santiago de Cuba.
     The visit was surrounded by some secrecy as the names and
affiliations of the visitors were not made available to the
media.  But Cuban officials said it was the largest group from
the US travel industry to come to Cuba since the triumph of
the revolution in 1959.  John Kavulich, president of the
US-Cuba Trade and Economic Council, which coordinated the
visit, said it was a "private, familiarization trip."
     But at a White House Conference on Travel and Tourism in
November, the subject of Cuba was not on the agenda.  However,
Darryl Hartley-Leonard, chairman of the Hyatt Hotels
corporation said, "Everybody discusses Cuba.  All the time."
     "I think we're losing it," Hartley-Leonard said.  "Have
we completely lost out?  No.  But we're losing an opportunity.
All of us encourage continual review of our policies toward
that country.  It's the next great international opportunity,
far more than the East bloc.  But Congress, in its wisdom,
chooses to reinforce the embargo."  (Sources: San Jose Mercury
News, 11/05/95; Miami Herald, 11/01/95, 11/23/95, 11/24/95,
12/02/95; Reuter, 11/25/95, 12/03/95; Inter Press Service,
12/20/95)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>