
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B037-89</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te41.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045931 text/html 60470
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:58 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:00 GMT
Content-length: 60283
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te41.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 12, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>CONSUMER ONLINE AUDIENCE TOPS 11.3 MILLION USERS, UP 79% DURING&nbsp;1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2647 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>INTERCHANGE OFFLINE NETWORK? </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(812 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INTERCHANGE PARTNERS PREPARE TO MOVE THEIR CONTENT TO WEB</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(484 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>MUSCULAR ENTRANT INVADES INTERNET ACCESS MARKET </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(314 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>MICROSOFT AND NBC UNVEIL MULTIMEDIA ALLIANCE </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(602 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BELLCORE HEADS TO THE WEB TO EXPAND NEW MEDIA REACH </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>PRODIGY FACES SURPRISING SETBACK  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(722 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CompuServe SELF-CENSORS AFTER GERMAN OFFICIALS COMPLAIN </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(534 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>CAMELOT CORP. CUTS NORDIC INTERNET PHONE DEAL </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Will 1996 Turn Out to be the YEAR OF THE GHOST SITE? </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>GE TAKING INTERNET CONTRACT BIDS </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CONCENTRIC ROUNDS UP $25 MILLION </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(147 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>PRODIGY TARGETS GENERATION X </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>GET A VIRTUAL LIFE </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Just Bits</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(622 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CONSUMER ONLINE AUDIENCE TOPS 11.3 MILLION USERS, UP 79% DURING
1995

By Gary H. Arlen, Senior Contributing Editor

     Expanded marketing campaigns by the leading consumer online
services during the fourth quarter, plus brisk response to the
launch of the Microsoft Network (MSN), brought the consumer online
audience to 11,304,200 customers at the end of 1995 - a staggering
78.9 percent increase above the 6,320,650 tally at the end of 1994. 
During the fourth quarter of 1995, for the second consecutive
period, the subscriber base grew at a rate of 15 percent.

     As the biggest online services get bigger, smaller ventures
(mostly ones with regional or specialty focus) continue to survive,
validating that niche services with unique content and reasonable
prices can survive, if not thrive.  The six largest national/global
online services now represent 96.9 percent of the customer base, up
from 92 percent three months ago.  The three largest operators
alone reach 10.1 million users, or 89.3 percent of the total
audience.

     America Online Inc. (AOL) continued to fuel the growth at an
18 percent pace; the company expects to pass the 5 million user
mark by early February - benefiting (as are all the major
operators) from the sign-ups by consumers who got new computers or
modems during the recent holiday season.  MSN jumped 200 percent in
the October-November-December period, to 600,000 users.

     Not only has the subscriber base grown, so has the usage.  AOL
last month marked the first time its single-day accesses exceeded
1 million hours - a benchmark accompanied by denied log-ons and
slow processing, as many users have noted.

     CompuServe Inc.'s growth was boosted by strong overseas
increases, especially in Europe, where its subscriber base climbed
by 25 percent.  AOL is expected to begin registering offshore users
this year, either directly or through its alliances in Europe,
Australia and other regions.

     Among the largest systems, Prodigy Services Co. dropped
slightly, amid reports by IISR sources that its parent companies
are seeking to sell (or possibly give away) the operation.  GEnie,
which has been unable to attract a buyer in the last several
months, continues to limp along at about 70,000 users.

Dramatic Changes On the Way

     The year-end tally comes just as the nature and direction of
online services is about to change dramatically.  The online
industry's relationship to Internet services (beyond offering World
Wide Web and Internet access) still is being refined.  In addition,
existing operations will be overhauled, starting with this month's
migration of Delphi Internet Services Corp. into parent company
News Corp./MCI Online Venture's Web-based "iGuide" service.

     Online newspapers and banking services also are showing
increasing vitality.  Several publishers are abandoning or cutting
back their traditional online services (notably the Los Angeles
Times backing off from Prodigy) to concentrate on Web sites.  Other
major publishers, notably The New York Times, are preparing for
their imminent Web debuts while maintaining online presence (such
as @Times on AOL, in this case).

     USA Today stopped charging for its proprietary service as it
concentrates on its Web site.  The St. Louis Post-Dispatch's
PostLink system, one of the earliest online newspaper services,
closed at the end of December to be replaced by a Web site during
the next few months.

     Nearly 40 major banks are just starting to roll out services
based on the software deals made last year to build home banking
systems based on Microsoft Corp.'s "Money," Intuit Corp.'s
"Quicken" or Meca Software LLC's "Managing Your Money" financial
programs.  The pioneering banks still are leery about revealing
initial sign-up responses.

Around the Online Circuit

     Delphi Internet (which has existed in various incarnations
since 1982), officially will be absorbed this month by "iGuide,"
the Web-based service that has been developed by News Corp./MCI
Online Ventures.  Existing customers have been invited to
participate in a beta test of the new service.  Since Delphi itself
has done no promotion since early 1995, attrition has lowered the
user base.

     Prodigy's 7 percent drop in users comes despite a new
marketing campaign aimed at finding younger, hipper customers; the
decline indicates that customers are churning off at a faster pace
than new ones are signing on.  Part of the problem with measuring
Prodigy's precise audience is the company's acknowledgment that it
reaches about 1.6 million homes; Prodigy also contends that each
household has about two users, up slightly from the 1.8 average of
the past few years.  A company spokesman insists that the company's
"official" tally is "more than 2 million users," even though the
data suggest that just over 3 million customers (1.6 million homes
with two users each) access the service.

     Prodigy officials also decline to discuss the company's future
ownership status.  Independent sources indicate that IBM Corp. and
Sears, Roebuck & Co. have been unable to find any buyers for
Prodigy.  Sears even attempted to unload its interest to IBM. 
There even have been indications that the broker representing
IBM/Sears has offered to "give away" the service to another online
company if a suitable arrangement could be developed for IBM/Sears
to own a share of the acquiring entity.  None of the companies
involved will discuss the 1996 outlook for Prodigy.

     GEnie's fate is similarly fuzzy, although parent General
Electric Information Services Co. is trying to spruce up the
operation before a sale.  Connection speeds of up to 28.8 kilobits
per second (Kbps) were introduced in late 1995, and full Internet
access has been implemented.  Earlier in the year, GEnie introduced
a new graphical user interface and eliminated prime-time
surcharges.  The company claims it has the "biggest group of loyal
members" among the nationwide online services - a selling point in
its effort to find a buyer.

     CompuServe is adding 200,000 subscribers per month and now has
reached 4,000,000 subscribers.  Of these, 200,000 are in the United
Kingdom and 300,000 elsewhere in Europe.  The company said it
"plans to double" the United Kingdom figure in the next 12 months,
and has added machine translation capabilities to translate
electronic mail, forum messages and other documents between
English, French, Spanish and German at the user's request.

     ImagiNation Network (INN) has been testing lower weekday rates
from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. for its subscribers who do not use preferred
access nodes of parent company AT&T Corp.  The special rates, which
began Nov. 22, 1995, are scheduled to expire Jan. 15.  INN is
evaluating whether to continue the lower rates or adopt another
marketing incentive.

     Reuters Money Network will introduce several new services
during the coming months as part of an overall upgrade of the
service; details are not yet available.

     New York Online has stopped promoting its current online
service as it makes the transition to a Web site, due to debut at
the end of January.  Web content will be updated daily.  The
company now calls its 2-year-old online service "an intermediate
step" to the Web and "more of a brochure."

     Mnematics Videotex Inc. has added points of presence in
Rockland and Orange counties, New York, expanding the reach of its
metropolitan New York City service.

     In addition to operating its own stand-alone service, MPGNet
provides interactive multiplayer games on the MSN; the company said
there are other providers of games to MSN but that only MPGNet has
interactive games.

     SeniorNet has 78 centers across the country and currently
serves about 5,000 subscribers.  The service, long available via
America Online Inc. (AOL), now also is accessible on the MSN and
via its Web site at www.seniornet.org.

     PSINet Inc., which recently launched a regional radio
advertising campaign for its consumer Internet access service, is
compiling an aggregate subscriber total for its three systems -
Pipeline USA, Pipeline New York and PSI InterRamp.  The company
will not break that count into each component service.

Community Services Grow Slowly

     Although the big push toward the Internet has not hindered the
creation of new regional and local services, most are including
Internet access in their offerings.

     The Well has put its conferencing system on its Web site,
which can be accessed at www.well.com.

     Hawaii FYI is "renovating" its service and logs about 160,000
minutes of use per month.  It has created a Web site, and bridged
the service with its Internet server Jan. 2.  Its subscriber base
of 15,000 "has been stable for about a year."

     Greater New Orleans Free-Net, which began in 1994 under the
aegis of the University of New Orleans, has become an independent
nonprofit organization and now reaches more than 12,000
subscribers.  Three major groups fund the organization:  the
Chamber of Commerce of New Orleans and the River Region, the New
Orleans Public Library and nine parish school boards.  The service
is text-based only; graphics are available only for content
providers that must also be nonprofit organizations.

     Heartland Regional Net (which has dropped its "free-net
appellation) now counts 8,500 subscribers, of whom 1,900 log on
each day.  It offers an enhanced level of service for users who
contribute $35 per year.  That fee covers two-thirds of its user
budget; 69 percent of those using the enhanced service sign up
again in succeeding years.

     National Capital Freenet of Ottawa celebrated reaching the
50,000-subscriber mark with a ceremony attended by the mayor of
Ottawa and other government officials.  The service expects to have
a Web site in operation by the end of the second quarter.

     Toronto Free-Net is developing a Web site through Lynx and
Gopher; it will be available in the first quarter.

Newspapers Finding More Web Homes

     USA Today Online has dropped all charges for its online
service, and it no longer main-tains a subscriber count.  Its Web
site (www.usatoday.com) contains 15,000 pages and is designed to be
supported by advertising revenues.  The Web site is averaging 1.6
million hits per day.

     TimesLink, the online service of the Los Angeles Times,
dropped its presence on the Prodigy platform Dec. 31.  TimesLink
will offer its current base of about 17,000 subscribers the
opportunity to participate in a beta test of its new Web site, now
under development and due to be available to the public late in the
first quarter.

     Houston Chronicle Interactive (HCI), the cyberarm of the
Houston Chronicle, unveiled a partnership with Prodigy in November
in an attempt to leverage the best of both the online and Web
worlds.  HCI, a Web-based service, promotes Prodigy as the
preferred method to access its Web site, and receives a bounty for
each new Prodigy subscriber it generates.  For its part, Prodigy
maintains an HCI-branded area on its service, allowing its members
to access the HCI Web site and providing the Texas newspaper with
a higher profile than possible on the Web alone.  The two companies
will share revenue based on traffic in the HCI Web site and the
HCI-branded area on Prodigy.

     Mercury Center, the online service of the San Jose Mercury
News, uses as its subscriber number the figure for all AOL
subscribers in the Mercury News circulation area.  The service
declines to disclose the number of hits on its own Web site.

     Electronic Trib, the online service of the Albuquerque
Tribune, has added business news from Financial Times.  The service
features prices of the 1,600 most active stocks on the New York
Stock Exchange and 3,000 of the largest mutual funds.

     Access Atlanta is redesigning its 1996 Olympics Web site and
developing new home pages, the first of which will go online by
March.

     PostLink, the online service of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch,
closed Dec. 31.  It is to be replaced by a Web site during the next
few months.

     StarText, the online service of the Ft. Worth Star-Telegram,
started its Web site in December (www.startext.net).  Rates are
$19.95 if StarText is the sole Internet provider and $4.95 for
readers who use another Internet provider.

     Tampa Bay Online developed a College Bowl Game package
covering all the New Year's weekend bowl activities.  It also
launched a Web site at www.tampatrib.com.

     Fred the Computer, the online service of the Middlesex News,
has 2,200 subscribers to its free service.  That figure represents
readers who have logged on through any of the six newspapers in the
Massachusetts region served by the parent Community Newspaper
Company.  The service has doubled the number of news groups
requested by local customers, and it currently is developing
Internet projects.  Content includes news, Usenet and e-mail
Internet access.

Telebanking Services Added in Some Regions

     Citibank on the PC, the free online banking service of
Citibank, quietly rolled out in Florida; service is being promoted
to customers in Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties and the
cities of Clearwater and Madeira Beach.  Heavy promotion is slated
for the coming months after a low-key, unpromoted "live test" that
began last fall.

     Bank of America's "HomeBanking" online service is being
updated to integrate into commercial online and Internet services. 
The Internet package can be reached at www.bankamerica.com.  An
AOL-accessible version will debut by March; when that occurs, the
proprietary service, which has not been marketed for years, will be
restructured and promoted.

     Chase Direct, the heavily promoted online banking service of
Chase Manhattan Bank, has received 110,000 telephone queries and
7,400 e-mail inquiries about the service, and has mailed out 31,000
information kits.

     US Order has teamed with Colonial Data Technologies Corp. to
introduce Telesmart 4000, an analog display services interface
(ADSI) telephone with several advanced functions.  The phone can be
used to send e-mail via the Internet, pay bills and bank
electronically, type and send messages directly to pagers, shop
from catalogs electronically and receive advanced new forms of
Caller ID from telephone companies.  It can access electronic
directory assistance to search national databases and visually
display telephone numbers and addresses.

Outlook for 1996

     Aside from the fate of GEnie or Prodigy and or the shifting
status of the MSN, there is no reason to believe that the industry
will not continue to grow and its market presence expand in 1996.

     The largest services - AOL and Compuserve in particular - will
remain strong even as they try to weigh the trend toward Internet
and Web-based services and cement their relationships with content
suppliers and customers.

     At the same time, content suppliers are trying to determine
the best - and most valuable - outlets for their material.  The
generally small fees paid by commercial online operators may exceed
the pittance generated via the Web's current financial structure. 
Hence, some information providers may choose to stay with and
support online ventures because of the known (albeit small) revenue
they generate.

     And meanwhile, although brokerage firm Stratton Oakmont agreed
to drop its $200 million libel suit against Prodigy (see story, p.
8) for remarks made about the company on one of the company's
bulletin boards, the judge handling the case rejected Prodigy's
attempt to reargue his finding that Prodigy is a publisher and thus
responsible for all content on its bulletin boards, so the suit
technically is still alive.  However, the telecommunications reform
bill pending in Congress contains a clause that protects online
services from libel suits such as that filed by Stratton Oakmont,
and, if passed, that effectively would nullify the judge's attempt
to set a dangerous and expensive precedent for the online industry.

     This also will be the year the heavy hand of government will
be felt by the online services.  There has been a well-publicized
yearlong battle on the part of some members of Congress to curb
allegedly obscene material online.  But also looming are efforts by
federal lawmakers and regulators to control online shopping
services and ban online gambling outright.  Moreover, a number of
states are considering levying taxes on users of online services,
a move that could turn operators into tax collectors and dampen
consumer demand for online services.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

INTERCHANGE OFFLINE NETWORK? 

      AT&T Corp. plans to take its Interchange Online Network, an
elegant, albeit it woefully undersubscrib-ed proprietary publishing
platform, offline.  AT&T's New Media Services division will instead
redirect its online efforts at developing Web-based services.

     "The Interchange Online Network as we know it today will phase
out over the course of the next year," said Michael Kolowich,
president of AT&T New Media Services.  By that time, he said, "the
Web will be a superior environment to online services." 

     Kolowich's comments were made during a teleconference to
announce that AT&T's fledgling online service for professionals,
AT&T Business Network, will be available as a Web-based service by
midyear.  By the close of 1996, Kolowich said, the Web will replace
the company's Interchange Online Network as the principle means of
distribution for the service, which will be known as AT&T Business
Network Version 2.

Business Network Moves to Web

     Exactly how much access to "Version 2" will cost has not been
disclosed, nor is it clear how much of Interchange's look and feel
will be retained in cyberspace.  The current Interchange-based
service costs $39.95 a month for 10 hours of use, and $2.95 for
each additional hour.  The Business Network offers Internet access,
the Netscape Navigator Web browser, and content from the likes of
Dow Jones & Co. Inc., Dun & Bradstreet Corp., Cable News Network
and others.  

     Whether New Media Services will charge for full access to its
pending Web-based service or adopt a pay-as-you-go approach also
has yet to be determined.  Although "Version 2" will be available
to anyone with Internet access and a Web browser, Kolowich said,
New Media Services plans to market the new Business Network service
together with AT&T's WorldNet Internet access service.

     Although the Jan. 4 announcement was designed to center around
the migration of the Business Network to the Web and all its
inherent advantages, the real news was the fact that Ma Bell
effectively has given Interchange the kiss of death.  Along with
Interchange, New Media Services also has abandoned its
much-explained-yet-much-misunderstood strategy of acting as a
proprietary publishing platform for other online services, a
business model that failed to bear much fruit, or attract many
subscribers.

     Indeed, since Interchange was launched last June, the combined
subscriber base of its various services that include  Ziff-Davis
Interactive, The Gartner Group, the Washington Post's Digital Ink
and Star-Tribune Online only numbers in the several tens of
thousands (AT&T won't say exactly how many), which is about as many
customers as America Online Inc. signs up in a good week.

     Kolowich said all of Interchange's "publishing partners" also
plan to launch Web-based services, and added that AT&T is
supporting their endeavors to that end.  The Gartner Group, for
one, announced just such a move earlier last week, and the
Star-Tribune released a similar statement hours after the AT&T
announcement (see story, p. 4).  When all AT&T and its "partners"
have abandoned ship for the Web, AT&T will pull the plug on
Interchange, a bleeding-edge product before the advent of the Web.

Taking a Write-Off

     Although New Media Services repeatedly has stressed its
commitment to open standards and Web-based products since its
inception little more than a year ago, the unit was in fact built
on a proprietary foundation - Interchange's software - for which
AT&T now is paying the price.  Kolowich acknowledged AT&T will be
taking an undisclosed write-off for Interchange, which the company
purchased from Ziff Communications Inc. for a reported $50 million
in late 1994. 

     An AT&T spokeswoman, however, stressed that New Media Services
will not be affected by the massive round of layoffs announced by
AT&T last week.

     New Media Services will release what is likely to be
Interchange's final upgrade later this quarter, and an upbeat
Kolowich claimed the division has received more than 100,000
requests for Business Network software in the past several weeks.

     With the announcement, AT&T joins an expanding club of online
service providers whose best-laid proprietary plans were undermined
by the phenomenal rise of the World Wide Web during the past year. 

      In December, Microsoft Corp. announced its intention to
reposition its Microsoft Network as a Web-based service.  In late
November, Europe Online, which had planned to launch a service
based on AT&T's software platform, prefigured its partner (and 9.8
percent shareholder) by abandoning Interchange in the 11th hour and
launching a Web-based service Dec. 15.  And in September, Apple
Computer Inc. announced that its eWorld online service will become
an Internet-based service by midyear.

     Although the "Big Three" proprietary online services continue
to add subscribers at a dizzying pace, some industry watchers
predict they eventually may be relegated to a role as gatekeepers
for the Web, packing and selling easy access to a greater wealth of
information than they ever could hope to assemble on their own.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

INTERCHANGE PARTNERS PREPARE TO MOVE THEIR CONTENT TO WEB

      Once a captain announces he is abandoning ship, it's only
natural that his passengers won't be far behind.  So when AT&T New
Media Services announced it would move its AT&T Business Network
online service from its AT&T Interchange Online Network to the
World Wide Web, it was not surprising to learn that its "publishing
partners" are plotting similar moves.

     The Gartner Group Inc. unveiled plans last week - two days
prior to the AT&T announcement - to roll out a Web-based version of
its online service, @vantage, an online service offering analysis
and advice for information technology executives, by the second
quarter of this year.  Although Gartner said it has no plans to
abandon its presence on Interchange, at least while it exists, it
made clear that the future of the online world belongs to the Web.

     "While AT&T Interchange Online Network, the platform on which
@vantage was launched, is superior today, we expect the Internet to
become the pre-eminent platform from a functionality perspective,"
said Bruce Barlag, executive vice president of The Gartner Group's
Interactive Services.  "By the end of 1997, the Internet will be
the primary channel for the delivery of corporate information,
ranging from research reports to marketing literature," added Dave
Taylor, Garter's research area director for business operations.

Related Announcements Follow

     Another Interchange partner, The Star-Tribune Online, issued
a press release just hours after AT&T's announcement.  "The
Star-Tribune announced two weeks ago that it would develop a World
Wide Web version of Star-Tribune Online as a companion to the
Interchange version.  In response to AT&T's announcement, the
Star-Tribune will speed the development of its World Wide Web
edition."

     Star-Tribune said the first version of its Web edition will be
available in early February, while it maintains its presence on
Interchange.  When the Star-Tribune no longer is available on
Interchange, the Minneapolis-based service added, it will offer
members Internet access so they can connect to its new home on the
Web.

     While the Washington Post's Digital Ink service issued no
formal statement, vice president Fred Singer acknowledged that the
service is planning a shift to the Web as well.  Singer said the
Interchange announcement was not a surprise.

     "We see this as a natural evolution," he said, adding that
Digital Ink has been developing its Internet capabilities for
several months and will continue to publish on Interchange until
its Web-based service is ready.  Singer would not say when exactly
Digital Ink will be available on the Web, adding that an
announcement will be issued when the time arrives. 

     In related news, on the same day AT&T dropped the bomb on
Interchange, the Washington Post reported that Digital Ink editor
and publisher Don Brazeal had resigned but said his departure was
unrelated to the AT&T announcement.

     The Gartner Group is at (203) 316-6793; Star-Tribune Online,
at (612) 673-4818; Digital Ink, at (202) 334-5310. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

MUSCULAR ENTRANT INVADES INTERNET ACCESS MARKET 

      Whenever Internet executives gather to contemplate potential
new competitors, the discussion invariably dwells on the dreaded
Baby Bells, the seven local phone companies created when Uncle Sam
dismembered Ma Bell, a.k.a. AT&T Corp.

     However, what many often overlook is the fact that America's
largest local phone company is not Bell.  Gee.  No, GTE.  And the
$20 billion GTE Corp. just announced its intention to enter the
Internet access business with its new cyberarm, GTE.net.

     GTE's Intelligent Network Services (GTEINS) division will
begin offering GTE.net service to residential and business
customers in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area early this
year.  GTE.net, which will be rolled out to additional U.S. markets
throughout 1996, will offer World Wide Web access via Netscape
Communications Corp.'s Navigator browser, which GTEINS just
licensed.

More Than Just Internet Access

     GTE.net services will be available for $24.95 per month for
unlimited access, or $8.95 per month for five hours, with $1.95 for
each additional hour.  Business customers also can purchase
dedicated Internet access and a number of other options, including
Web site, firewall, electronic mail, encryption and transaction
processing services.  Access speeds will vary from 14.4 and 28.8 to
dedicated line speeds up to 45 megabits per second (Mbps) (T3) and
integrated services digital network (ISDN) lines at 128 kilobits
per second (Kbps).

     "Entering the Internet access business is the first step GTE
is taking to build a nationwide data network infrastructure that
will allow us to enter new markets and develop new products and
services," said Bill Wall, general manager of GTE.net.  "These new
services will include virtual private business networks, specific
business Internet applications focused on education, law
enforcement and government plus other market segments under
development.  Long term, we believe these services will become part
of a broader integrated service offering that includes voice, data
and video services."

     GTE is at (203) 965-2853. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

MICROSOFT AND NBC UNVEIL MULTIMEDIA ALLIANCE 

      Microsoft Corp. and NBC deepened their corporate commitment
to one another last month, but fell short of exchanging vows, as
some had predicted.  The media and software giants announced the
formation of a joint venture to deliver news via broadcast, cable
and the Internet.  Microsoft and NBC each will commit approximately
$200 million over the next five years to fund the venture, which
includes a new online service, MSNBC Online.

     In addition, Microsoft will pony up an additional $220 million
for a 50 percent interest in NBC's "America's Talking" cable
network, which is being repurposed as a 24-hours-a-day news network
and renamed MSNBC Cable.

     The alliance is designed to leverage NBC's news gathering
operation, broadcast and cable television outlets, and brand-name
awareness with Microsoft's software expertise, online service and
"connection to the PC [personal computer] user."

     The three-pronged approach apparently is aimed at consumers
with plenty of time on their hands, since the partners clearly
expect viewers/subscribers to avail themselves of all three media
to stay informed.

     The companies intend for viewers to look to NBC News for
headlines from around the world, tune in to the cable channel for
in-depth analysis and click into the Microsoft Network (MSN) for
comprehensive information customized to the viewers' preferences.

     "We are excited by the opportunity to work together in global
commerce with the proven entrepreneurial capabilities of Microsoft,
the most exciting company of this decade," said Jack Welch, chief
executive officer of General Electric Co., NBC's corporate parent.

     "We will be working with NBC to create innovative interactive
news content and an integrated media experience," said Bill Gates,
chairman and chief executive officer of Microsoft.  "Advances in
digital technology will give people new control over news and
information.  They will be able to watch breaking news on TV and
then be able to get more in-depth information on things of interest
to them online." 

All Things to All Media?

     NBC News, MSNBC Cable and MSNBC Online will work in unison,
share content and cross-promote one another in an attempt to become
the "leading source for news" in each of their respective media. 
The  MSNBC news services will be international in reach, due both
to the nature of the Internet and NBC's outright ownership or
partial interest in a number of broadcast and cable properties in
Europe, Asia and Latin America.

     MSNBC Cable will feature NBC News correspondents, live
coverage of world events and local coverage from NBC affiliates. 
MSNBC Online, which will be accessible through the MSN, will
repackage NBC and MSNBC content "to offer the ability to get a very
broad online view of news."  MSNBC Online also will be distributed
by cable operators when high-speed cable modems become available.

     "By linking the local, national and international 
newsgathering capability of NBC and its affiliates, as well as NBC
News archives, with Microsoft's technological leadership in
software development and commitment to Internet online services,
MSNBC will create a continuum of news delivery that meets viewer
needs at all levels," said Bob Wright, chief executive officer of
NBC.

     MSNBC Cable will be managed by NBC News, while MSNBC Online
will be jointly managed by NBC and Microsoft.  The partners,
however, took pains to emphasize the fact that NBC News will retain
"complete editorial control and integrity" of news content in
either service.

     So presumably, if the Justice Department forces Microsoft to
"unbundle" MSN from Windows 95, or if NBC News suffers another
"Dateline" scandal, viewers can turn on MSNBC Cable or log onto
MSNBC Online for all the unexpurgated, unburied and unwhitewashed
details. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

BELLCORE HEADS TO THE WEB TO EXPAND NEW MEDIA REACH 

      After 18 months of searching for new opportunities to expand
its business beyond the Baby Bells, Bell Communications Research
Inc. (Bellcore) finally settled on the Internet as one ticket into
the new media market.  Leveraging its networking strength, Bellcore
is offering an in-house product line called Adapt/X, services and
third-party products to get companies into business on the World
Wide Web.

     Bellcore announced its Internet focus and new applications at
the December World Wide Web Consortium conference in Boston.  The
Adapt/X products include online publishing, transaction, back-end
infrastructure and security components, and Bellcore will offer
integration and support services with these products, although they
can be purchased as stand-alone applications.

     Bellcore also signed letters of intent with Sun Microsystems
Inc. and Netscape Communications Corp. to cooperate on software and
consulting services.  "We see a market window where we can put our
network knowledge to work," Ken Branson, Bellcore spokesman, said.

     These are the first of many alliances Bellcore hopes to make
with leaders in the Internet market to exchange technology and
establish reseller arrangements.  Aside from its Adapt/X line,
Bellcore wants to offer a wide range of products and services for
large corporations that wish to create commercial Web sites for
selling products and conducting business-to-business transactions
on the Web.

     As part of its arrangement with Sun, Bellcore will join the
company's Independent Software Vendor program to receive advance
information on new technologies such as Java.  Bellcore also may
act as a system integrator for Sun in the future.

     As part of its effort to go after high-end customers, Bellcore
partnered with marketing and advertising firm Adler Boschetto
Peebles & Partners to handle design and content-creation services. 
The firm's ABP Interactive unit will work with Bellcore to offer
package services to clients.

     Bellcore is at (201) 829-2165. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PRODIGY FACES SURPRISING SETBACK  

      Although Prodigy Services Co. believed it finally settled the
troubling Stratton Oakmont lawsuit last October, the presiding
judge had other ideas.

     In late December, New York Supreme Court Judge Stuart Ain
rejected an attempt by Prodigy to reargue his May decision that
found the online service liable as the publisher of defamatory
remarks directed at Stratton Oakmont, a New York brokerage firm,
posted on one of the Prodigy bulletin boards.

     The two parties were reconciled in October when Prodigy
expressed its regret at the remarks and Stratton Oakmont agreed to
drop its $200 million libel suit (IISR, Nov. 3, 1995, p. 3). 
Further, Stratton Oakmont agreed to not oppose Prodigy's effort to
reargue Ain's decision with additional evidence in an attempt to
convince the judge that it is not a publisher and thus not
responsible for the content of its bulletin boards.

Former Policy Created Problems

     Prodigy originally got itself into trouble over its
since-discarded but much-publicized policy of policing its bulletin
boards.  Although the online service did once employ staffers to
read every single piece of e-mail on its boards, that practice was
abandoned as unworkable in 1992 when the volume of mail began to
hit 60,000 to 75,000 messages a day.  It was this change of policy
(i.e., a conscious decision to not exercise complete editorial
control over its bulletin boards) that Prodigy hoped would change
Ain's mind.

     But in an unexpected turn of events, despite the fact Stratton
Oakmont dropped its suit, Ain rebuffed Prodigy's arguments.  "The
court finds that this is a developing area of the law, so that
there is a real need for a precedent," Ain said, according to a
Reuters report.

     If Ain's ruling stands, it may well set an expensive precedent
for the industry that could make the original $200 million suit
seem like chump change by comparison.  For online services may now
be held liable for every message posted by their subscribers, the
number of whom varies by service but can total in the millions.

     "The fact he views Prodigy as a publisher is a potentially
troubling precedent for the entire industry," said Bob Smith,
executive director of the Interactive Services Association.  "If
any commercial online operator is responsible for all content, even
if it has no control over it, then that's a huge problem."

     According to Brian Ek, Prodigy's vice president for government
affairs, the company has two options:  appeal Ain's decision or do
nothing.  And depending on what trans-pires in Congress on the
telecommunications reform bill, the latter may be the more
attractive option.

     Although "it's pretty clear there is not much point in going
back to this particular court," Ek said, Prodigy's luck might
change in appeals court.  For one thing, he said, the case involves
two parties that no longer are involved in litigation.  Further, Ek
asserted, Ain's denial had more to do with technicalities than the
validity of the new facts presented.

     "It is more of a procedural issue than anything," Ek said. 
"The judge admitted the facts were different, which certainly puts
us in a better position."

Waiting for Gingrich

     However, doing nothing may be the best course and, as far as
Prodigy's legal fees are concerned, the cheapest.  The "do nothing"
option is a gamble based on the final shape of telecommunications
reform legislation crawling through Congress.

     Ek said the legislation contains what he calls a "Stratton
Oakmont clause" that specifically removes liability for services
that make a good faith effort to apply rudimentary control over
content.

     "If this bill goes through, Stratton Oakmont will become a
footnote," Ek said, noting that such a law would pre-empt any state
legislation to the contrary.

     However, that's a big "if," especially given the fact that
telecommunications reform has taken a back seat to the budget
battle in recent weeks.  And time is a luxury Prodigy can ill
afford, since the clock is running on the opportunity to file an
appeal.  Ek said Prodigy probably will reach a decision within the
next week, adding that the rest of the industry hopes it will opt
to do nothing.

     "None of the other services are anxious for us to throw more
dollars at this one," Ek said.  "Everybody is looking at the
legislation going forward." 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CompuServe SELF-CENSORS AFTER GERMAN OFFICIALS COMPLAIN 

      CompuServe Inc. continues scrambling to devise a
technological fix that will allow its almost 4 million non-German
members to regain access to more than 200 sexually explicit
Internet news groups.

     On Dec. 28, in response to an order by the government of
Germany, CompuServe suspended access through its service to the
controversial news groups, according to spokeswoman Daphne Kent. 
Bavarian law enforcement officials, Kent said, told the world's
second-largest online service that the content of the news groups
was illegal under German law.

     Since then, CompuServe officials and the public prosecutor's
office in Munich have traded denials in the media about who said
what.

Just Following Orders?

     Last week, authorities in Bavaria, Germany's most conservative
state, issued a statement claiming that they only had asked
CompuServe to "scrutinize" a list of potentially troublesome news
groups, and that it was the online service's decision alone to deny
access to the groups.  CompuServe maintains it was merely following
orders from Bavarian prosecutors who specified exactly which news
groups were illegal and therefore to be blocked.

     However, given the fact that under German law executives are
held personally responsible for the actions of their companies,
CompuServe may well be playing it safe in order to prevent its top
management from spending any time in a Bavarian cellblock.

     Complying with the German order forced CompuServe to deny its
entire worldwide customer base of more than 4 million users access
to the smut-based news groups, prompting an outcry among both
subscribers and the entire Internet community at large, which
accused the service of cybercensorship.

     CompuServe meanwhile is trying to devise a method of blocking
access to questionable content on a country-by-country basis, but
cannot say when such a solution will be ready.  Kent would not
speculate as to when, or even if, access would be restored, but
said the company is "always concerned" that blocking access to
information could cost the company customers.  Kent said no other
online service was similarly restricted and said "we were likely
targeted because of our size." 

No Other Service Targeted

     Although somewhat smaller than its chief competitor, America
Online Inc. (AOL), CompuServe has the greatest overseas presence of
any consumer online service.  In Germany it claims 100,000 members. 
The number is insignificant, however, in comparison to the more
than 1.8 million individuals who use the Internet in Germany and
whose access to the same news groups is harder to restrict,
depending upon their method of access.

     AOL, which recently launched a German online service with
German publisher Bertelsmann AG that relies heavily on
Internet-based content, has yet to encounter any similar
difficulties.  AOL spokeswoman Pam McGraw said the company is
investigating the CompuServe issue, but has yet to receive any
notification from the German authorities.

     "To the best of our knowledge, we have not received any
requests from the German government," she said.

     However, McGraw added, AOL offers users the ability to block
access to news groups, which may be its saving grace.  Although
CompuServe's Internet division offers Internet access software with
the ability to block access to adult content, the company's
flagship online service does not offer the same capability. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CAMELOT CORP. CUTS NORDIC INTERNET PHONE DEAL 

      Camelot Corp., a holding company whose subsidiary, Third
Plant Publishing, "publishes" DigiPhone, a software product that
allows users to place phone calls over the Internet, is trying to
establish a presence in what is arguably Europe's most
Internet-centric region, Scandinavia.

     Camelot has penned a deal with Copenhagen-based Telepartner
A/S to distribute its DigiPhone and DigiPhone Deluxe software
throughout Denmark, Norway and Sweden.

     In exchange for exclusive distribution rights, Telepartner has
agreed to pay Camelot $1 million in the form of 2.7 percent of its
share capital.  Camelot also secured the right to acquire a further
7.3 percent of Telepartner for approximately $2.7 million. 
Telepartner, which is valued at $37 million based on these
transactions, intends to offers its shares to the public on the
Copenhagen Stock Exchange by March 1997.  Should this proposed
initial public offering (IPO) fail to take place, Camelot has the
right to request that Telepartner buy back its 2.7 percent stake
for $1 million in cash.

     In addition, Camelot Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Danny Wettreich also was appointed a director of Telepartner, a
telephone database services firm with more than 500,000 companies
on file.  "Telepartner's marketing expertise in Scandinavia and its
access to corporate clientele will ensure a speedy market
penetration in this very important European region," Wettreich
said.

Other Camelot News

     In other Camelot-based news, the company reported growing
revenues for its quarter ended Oct. 31, even as losses increased
slightly.  Revenues rose to $527,144 from $350,479 one year ago,
while the company reported a loss of $798,693 for the quarter,
compared to $644,787 during the same period in 1994.  Camelot
attributed its results to start-up costs for its various divisions.

     Camelot's Third Planet Publishing began shipping DigiPhone
into retail stores, and expects to record larger sales in the next
quarter.  By the end of October, Camelot had opened five Mr. CD-ROM
Stores as part of its goal to launch 100 of the specialty retail
outlets by the end of 1996.  Camelot Distributing also is in the
building stages, as the company hired personnel and explored
relationships with retailers.

     Camelot is at (214) 733-3005. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

Will 1996 Turn Out to be the YEAR OF THE GHOST SITE? 

      Microsoft Corp. Chairman Bill Gates has been known to be
right on the money, and in his latest book, "The Road Ahead," his
analogy that compares the Internet and multimedia feeding frenzy to
the American gold rush may be a harbinger of things to come.

     Unfortunately, as a new study by International Data Corp.
(IDC) notes, after the gold ran dry in the 1800s, ghost towns were
left behind.  The research and consulting firm predicts that 1996
will be a "year of disappointment" for investors and corporations
in the online marketplace, reflecting sluggish development of a
significant consumer base.  In addition, 20 percent of the Fortune
500 companies that have commercial Web sites will close or stop
maintaining them, resulting in "ghost sites."

Lots of Interest, Not Much Content

     IDC also said the leading online information service providers
such as CompuServe Inc., America Online Inc., Prodigy Services Co.
and the Microsoft Network will realize more than 50 percent of
their revenues from offering access to the World Wide Web by the
middle of 1997, and that two of the four services will struggle for
survival.

     "Though we predict the overall growth in online subscribers
will continue to be very strong, we expect 1996 will show a high
turnover rate as users underwhelmed by the content on the Web
cancel their subscriptions and turn on their TVs," said Frank Gens,
senior vice president of research at IDC.  "Still, 1996 will be a
strategic investment year for businesses that expect to compete in
the growing electronic marketplace, because during the next five
years, the number of wired (i.e., online) users will rise to more
than 200 million, and by 2010, it will exceed 1 billion."

     Financial services companies, retailers and publishers will
bail out in the initial "hangover" period, Gens said, leaving the
door wide open for new leadership and the downfall of current
giants.  However, IDC predicts Microsoft will have a great 1996,
and its revenue will not be affected by potentially weaker holds on
the industry it may have with technology such as object linking and
embedding (OLE) and Visual Basic.

     Gens also forecasts that manufacturers of Internet appliances,
which allow users to access online information, will slash prices
in half by the end of 1996.  "The game console crowd is already
slicing away at the pricing for simple Web surfing devices," he
said.  "Within two years, Internet appliances will emerge as
giveaways - [from] less than $100 to free - by businesses that want
customers to access their online services."

     IDC is at (508) 935-4282 or http://www.idcresearch.com. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

GE TAKING INTERNET CONTRACT BIDS 

      Seeking to streamline its operations, General Electric Co.
launched the GE Trading Process Network (TPN) last week to let
suppliers bid for GE contracts over the Internet.  TPN primarily
will use electronic mail to solicit bids from outside contractors,
and GE hopes to conduct about $1 billion in transactions over the
network this year.

     This would quadruple the amount of online business-to-business
transactions GE already handles through a private electronic data
interchange (EDI) network run by subsidiary GE Information Services
(GEIS), which was roughly $250 million last year.

     GE will distribute the TPN software to suppliers that will be
able to receive information from the World Wide Web and submit bids
for projects through e-mail.  The GEIS unit has been promoting this
brand of electronic commerce for online trading between companies
as part of the International Business Exchange (IBEX) project,
officially launched last September with AT&T Corp., Dun &
Bradstreet Corp., the Global Business Alliance, the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, Chase Manhattan Bank and other partners.

     IBEX is promoting an electronic mail-based service for
companies to solicit and bid on contracts online.  While GEIS is
involved in this effort, its parent company opted for a proprietary
solution instead of IBEX for handling its in-house suppliers.  

     GE is at (203) 373-2039. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CONCENTRIC ROUNDS UP $25 MILLION 

      Internet access provider Concentric Network Corp. has secured
a $25 million private offering though Montgomery Securities, an
investment bank specializing in high-tech firms.  Proceeds from the
offering, which were raised through a group of institutional
investors, will be used to expand Concentric's network throughout
North America and to fund further sales and marketing efforts. 
With a frame relay network encompassing 214 points-of-presence,
Concentric enjoys alliances with Netscape Communications Corp.,
Intuit Inc. and Ameritech Corp.

     "We believe the key to success in the Internet access business
is to align the business with unique content and to offer 'virtual
private networks' that provide affordable access to the content
while maximizing reliability, performance and security," said Todd
Dagres, senior technology analyst for Montgomery Securities.  "We
believe Concentric is pursuing such a strategy as evidenced by its
relationships with Intuit, Sirius Publishing and others."

     Concentric is at (408) 342-2808. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PRODIGY TARGETS GENERATION X 

      Prodigy Services Co. apparently is trying to shed its image
as the leading family-based online service by broadening its appeal
to attract a more tragically hip audience.  Prodigy has acquired an
undisclosed interest in SonicNet, a Sunshine Interactive Network
division and producer of a World Wide Web site devoted to
alternative music and other cultural content for the nose-ring set.

     The move marks Prodigy's first investment in a Web-based
content provider, and was carried out under the aegis of its new
"Wildflower Partners" division, which, like America Online Inc.'s
"Greehouse" program, supports promising content providers with
money and distribution.  Under the agreement,  SonicNet will
provide Prodigy with original and exclusive content, including
celebrity chat sessions, marketing and a seamless link to
SonicNet's home page.  Prodigy will finance SonicNet's effort to
develop content, enlarge its staff and expand into new areas. 
SonicNet content includes chat areas with alternative rock
anti-heroes, the "Loser's Guide to New York" and links to "rockin'
sites on the Web."  

     In other Prodigy-based news, the service recently won the
Information Industry Association's Online Access 1995 HotShots
Award for the Best Consumer Web access.

     Prodigy is at (914) 448-8000; SonicNet, at (212) 741-5106. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

GET A VIRTUAL LIFE 

      Internet addicts who do the lion's share of their socializing
online soon may have even less reason to pry themselves away from
their machines and venture outdoors.  PSINet Inc. and Worlds Inc.
annouAnced an agreement that will bundle the latter's 3-D
interactive Internet applications with the former's Internet access
service.

     Under the agreement, PSINet's Pipeline service will bundle
Worlds Inc.'s Worlds Chat - a 3-D chat environment that allows
users to interact via cartoonlike alter egos known as "avatars" -
as well as AlphaWorld, another 3-D environment in which residents
can own land and build on it, among other things.

     Details of the deal, which the companies claim is "pushing
forward the future of online social interaction," were not
disclosed.  

     PSINet can be reached at (703) 904-4100; Worlds Inc., at (415)
281-1300.

Individual Launches Financial Service

     Individual Inc. announced the addition of a new service Jan.
9.  Alert, a customized, "intra-day," Internet-based financial news
service.  Alert is designed to pull breaking stories from major
news wires and deliver them via the Internet to the e-mail boxes of
customers.  Alert allows customers to track up to 40 publicly held
companies per profile without any limit on the number of stories
delivered each day.  

     "There is a definite need for many of our customers, such as
those in public and investor relations, to track breaking news
stories throughout the day," said Yosi Amram, chief executive
officer of Individual.  

     Alert is available for individual users at $215 per year, or
$1,000 per year for workgroups of up to 10 users.  

     Individual can be reached at (617) 273-6000. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

Just Bits

     Breaking News...

     ...  Sit tight and sell high.  Top executives at America
Online Inc. enriched themselves late last year with an insider
selling spree, unloading approximately 415,000 options after a
six-month lull, The Wall Street Journal reported.  According to
tracking firm CDA/Invest, AOL executives including Chairman Steve
Case (95,000 options), President of AOL Services Ted Leonsis
(40,000 options) and Chief Financial Officer Len Leader (40,000
options) cashed in their shares at prices from $38.45 to $40.13,
taking advantage of the 83 percent rise in AOL's share price since
the last round of insider selling six months ago.  Some analysts
speculated that the sell-off represented a hedge against the
not-too-distant future, when AOL and other online services will be
forced to compete with the World Wide Web rather than each other. 
Whether or not that's the case, they've certainly socked away
enough for a few rainy days.  You do the math....

     ...  More Web-based casualties?  Following the axing of
Interchange (see story, p. 3), other changes may be in store for
AT&T Corp.'s other online ventures.  Although a spokesman said no
alterations were planned for the company's Imagination Network, he
said AT&T and General Magic Inc. were investigating the feasibility
of transforming the proprietary Personal Link messaging service
into an Internet-based product....  Angry over the budget impasse? 
President Clinton, the nation's first cyber-savvy leader, has
received a death threat via the Internet, according to a Reuters
report.  An e-mail message originating from a university in
southern Taiwan reportedly said:  "President Clinton, when you are
out for a visit, we will assassinate you."  As if he didn't already
have enough problems here in Washington.

New & Noteworthy...

     ...  A kinder, gentler Internet?  The McKinley Group said it
intends to flag Web sites devoid of adult-based or X-rated content
though its Magellan Internet directory (http://www.mckinley.com). 
McKinley intends to place a "green light" icon in the listing of
Web sites it reviews as a sort of seal of approval to steer uses to
"safe sites."  If nothing else, McKinley's approach should help
Internet surfers in search of smut avoid wasting time in fruitless
sites....  Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and the New York Times Information
Services Group have reached a content-sharing agreement.  As of
Jan. 1, subscribers to the Dow Jones News/Retrieval online service
will be able to access full-text archives of The New York Times as
far back as 1981....  Microsoft Corp. and NBC (see story, p. 6) are
teaming to cash in on the Super Bowl advertising frenzy with a
World Wide Web site that will sell interactive ads and offer Super
Bowl-based content.  The only announced advertiser to date is, um,
Microsoft, but executives hoping to drum up interest from other
advertisers at a press conference said they expect the site will
generate "millions and millions" of hits.  Maybe during the
commercials?  Point your beer-soaked, salsa-stained mouse at
http://www.superbowl.com.

Over the Transom...

     ...  Germany, which has suffered more than its share of bad
press this century, has managed to alienate much of cyberspace as
well by ordering CompuServe Inc. to block access to questionable
news groups on the Internet (see story, p. 9).  And to add to the
Sturm und Drang, a San Francisco gay rights group said it has
called for a boycott of two German-brewed beers to protest the
Internet censorship.  The blocked discussion groups include topics
such as homosexuality and AIDS....  Need to know the relative troop
strength of Myanmar vis-a-vis Burkina Faso?  Check out the CIA's
World Factbook 1995, now available for the first time on CD-ROM. 
The Windows- and Macintosh-compatible CD-ROM boasts current
geographic, political, socioeconomic, cultural and military
information on more than 250 countries, and is available for $30 at
http://www.fedworld.gov/ntis/ntishome.html.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>