
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000621-B040-59</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te85.html 205.156.212.5 19970122053441 text/html 47224
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:32:46 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:56 GMT
Content-length: 47037
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te85.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
June 19, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* THIS WEEK'S LEAD STORIES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>DEAN WITTER TO DELIVER MARKET DATA TO BRANCHES&nbsp;VIA PARENT SEARS ROEBUCK'S TERRESTRIAL NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1621 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>NEW YORK TELEPHONE SET TO BRING T.1 ISDN&nbsp;TO WALL STREET USERS AS EARLY AS NEXT MONTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(915 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* BRANCH SUPPORT *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>MCDONALD COMPLETES ROLLOUT&nbsp;OF 29-BRANCH VOICE DATA NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>INTERSTATE/JOHNSON LANE ADDS&nbsp;FUNCTIONS TO VSAT NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(685 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* MANAGEMENT & STRATEGY *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>AMID UNCERTAINTY, CTFI BUILDS&nbsp;BACKUP FOR WALL STREET FIRMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1116 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* VIDEO *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>DOW JONES, NYNEX PURSUE PLAN&nbsp;FOR WALL STREET VIDEO SERVICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1187 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* BRIEF TRANSMISSIONS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>  Telekurs (North America) Inc. has increased the bandwidth of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

DEAN WITTER TO DELIVER MARKET DATA TO BRANCHES
VIA PARENT SEARS ROEBUCK'S TERRESTRIAL NETWORK

  In what may have been a fait accompli, Dean Witter Reynolds
Inc. has opted to use the IBM System Network Architecture (SNA)
terrestrial network of parent Sears Roebuck & Co. to deliver
market data and other information to its 350 retail brokerage
branches nationwide.

  The firm last week announced an exclusive, 7-1/2-year, 10,000-
workstation market data contract with Thomson Financial Services
Inc.'s ILX Systems Inc. market data subsidiary. ILX will oust
incumbent quote terminal providers Quotron Systems Inc. and
Automatic Data Processing Inc.

  Dean Witter had enough problems choosing a market data vendor
for its new firmwide branch system without monkeying around with
the networking piece. Dean Witter had been bedeviled by its
earlier attempts to create a homegrown market data system, using
workstations running IBM's OS/2 operating system and --
possibly -- satellite delivery. That quest was eventually
abandoned last fall (Inside Market Data, Nov. 15, 1991). The
firm then opted to look at solutions driven by the market data
vendors, a process that ended with the selection of ILX and
Sears Technology Services (STS), a subsidiary of Sears Roebuck.

  STS sells voice, video and data services internally to other
Sears units, according to Gary Weis, STS senior vice president of
networking and technology. Weis also has management
responsibility for Sears Communications Co., which sells the same
services to non-Sears companies. He says that SCC is "actively
engaged" in discussions with another brokerage firm that would
bring a DWR competitor onto the network.

  As part of its plan, DWR, the brokerage arm of Sears' Dean
Witter Financial Services Group Inc., will expand its use of the
terrestrial facilities provided by STS, operator of one of the
largest SNA networks in the country (see box). The firm already
uses STS for branch applications, and to provide local
concentrators to handle market data provided by Quotron and ADP.

  "We're glad it's over," says Fred Frohne, executive vice
president and director of information services at DWR. "It was
like giving birth."

  Dean Witter's choice of STS isn't surprising, given the
corporate relationship and the fact that STS is an incumbent of
sorts. But Frohne insists the selection was based on
functionality and sound business reasons rather than family ties
alone.

  "The reason we're using STS is because it's got good pricing,
the right kind of uptime, and over the years the network managers
have become very sensitive to the nature of Dean Witter's
business." Other Sears units on the network are Coldwell Banker,
the real-estate brokerage; Allstate Insurance; Discover Card
merchants; and Sears Payment Systems. Non-Sears customers include
Radio Shack, Goodyear and major petroleum companies.

  "The arrangement within Sears is that where it is the prudent
thing to do, Sears will provide the network services," Frohne
says. "That's not something cast in stone if, in fact, there is a
reason to make a business case to do something the network cannot
provide."

  The rollout is already underway with the installation of 12 386
and 486 IBM PS/2 broker workstations at DWR's branch at 2 World
Trade Center in New York. It will continue with "a dozen or 15
additional locations -- the shakedown group" -- that will allow
the firm to identify and deal with installation difficulties
before moving on to the rest of the 350 branches. According to
Frohne, DWR will continue with the full-scale rollout in the
fourth quarter. Sources say the project is scheduled for
completion by the end of 1993.

  The new network contract covers data only. The firm's voice
vendor is Sprint, managed by STS; the hoot 'n' holler vendor is
AT&T, and DWR already has plans to move its shoutdown services
onto the STS network. There are no plans for video near-term,
though STS's T.1 and T.3 backbone has sufficient bandwidth to
handle video, Frohne says.

                        Back at the Branch

  "The big change is that we took market data and will be
broadcasting that through the network," says DWR senior vice
president George Ross. The ILX ticker plant on Fulton Street in
lower Manhattan will be connected directly to the Sears SNA wide
area network. "It will save us money. The bottom line is we could
have packaged that with a quote vendor, but STS is so big they
can deliver the package more cost-effectively than the vendor
can."

  DWR currently employs a mix of Quotron and ADP market data
terminals for account executives on a broadcast-only basis. The
data passes from the vendor's network into regional DWR
concentrators, and from there on to individual branches via the
STS network.

  Until now, DWR brokers have been using the STS SNA network for
applications related to broker-client services rather than market
data. These applications include account information and
servicing, and internal research. Even so, the volume from the
350 branches is enormous. More than a million inquiries per day
arrive via the STS WAN at the Sears data center in Dallas,
according to Frohne, making it one of the largest such IBM-based
data centers in the country. The new agreement with STS will "add
traffic for opening accounts and placing orders for the
branches," Frohne says.

  In the firm's official announcement of the branch system, DWR
promised the introduction of "a broad range of new services for
account executives and clients. These new features will include
portfolio management tools, spreadsheet packages, word
processing, expanded market data, and market and research alerts,
along with many other applications customized for Dean Witter."
Despite this official pronouncement, Frohne says the network as
such "will not play a role in new product development." STS will
not be adding capacity for the new DWR applications, but he says
"they will absorb us within the network."

  The new implementation on the STS network will increase the
speed of access for DWR brokers from a 14.4 kilobit/second
multipoint access, to point-to-point 56 or 64 kilobit/second
access.

            Sears Has Everything -- Except Satellites

  STS has a 100 percent terrestrial T.1 and T.3 backbone for its
nationwide IBM System Network Architecture network. Frohne says
that STS has "the largest single image SNA network out there."
There are some "400,000 logical devices connected to that
network," he says, including PCs, mainframes, minis, printers and
fax machines.

  Ross says redundancy is built into the network. He describes
the network as a "family of T.1s" linked to more than 50 major
nodes throughout the U.S. These nodes, in turn, are serviced by
T.3 circuits linking the major processing centers in Schaumburg,
Ill., Columbus, Ohio, and Dallas. Columbus has 15 large 900-
series IBM mainframes, according to Ross; it is the central site
for Sears' Discover and merchant applications, and is the backup
for Dean Witter. DWR's main processing facility is in Dallas.

  "It's like a universal virtual network," Ross says. "If we lose
any one data center, the users will never know it happened. I am
of the opinion we could lose two of the three and still be all
right."

                        By Land or by Air?

  DWR's relationship with STS goes back to 1984, when the broker
first began to use STS for the firm's branch applications
networking.

  DWR never considered another terrestrial alternative. But the
firm did look closely at end-to-end satellite services provided
by market data vendors, including ADP's Brokerage Information
Systems Group and ILX. Quotron and U.K. market data vendor
Reuters were also considered, as was Hughes Network Systems Inc.,
a vendor of very small aperture terminal (VSAT) networks.

  "We really did look at all of the networking options," says
DWR's Ross. "Satellite is excellent, it works very nicely.... The
bottom line is there were no dollars to be saved by going off the
reservation to a satellite environment. STS developed their
network with Dean Witter first because we were the most sensitive
users to downtime in the world of Sears. If they could make us
clowns happy, then they knew they had a product that can meet the
needs of the rest of Sears."

  DWR explored satellite options through market data vendors,
thereby underlining the importance of a networking strategy for
these players. Ross says Quotron had no satellite option, but "we
addressed totally unbundling all services" -- so this shortcoming
didn't rule out Quotron for the rest of the pie.

  "We went to Hughes directly," he says, "but if we had chosen to
go satellite, it made more sense to go through ADP -- the reason
being we would have had to set up a group to manage that process
rather than leave it in the hands of the vendor." Under an accord
signed last fall, ADP provides some customers with two-way
satellite communications using Hughes' VSAT technology. Ross says
Dean Witter looked at Reuters "casually" -- although Reuters had
proposed a pilot using its Satellite Delivery System 3 (SDS3)
network.

  "We would not look at any terrestrial solution offered by
anybody else," Ross says. "Being very candid, it was not an
option we had. And they [STS] do not offer satellite. Really, it
[satellite vs. terrestrial] is kind of a wash, to be very candid
with you. It's an iffy type advantage. Satellite means antennas,
roof rights on buildings, and there are dollars involved with
that. So it's a wash overall, nationwide."

  "In any given LATA, [Local Access Transport Area], we have
sufficient density to make long-distance and local access less
expensive than using VSAT technology," says Weis. "Because of the
size and density of the network, it is net cheaper."

                      **********************

                      NETWORK SIZE AND SCOPE

                      **********************


                * 3.6 Trillion Characters of Data
                  Transmitted in March 1992

                * 1991 Dial Connect Minutes:
                  30.2 Million

                * 32,000 Data Circuits

                * 268 T-1 Facilities

                * 90 NET IDNX T-1 Multiplexors

Source: Sears Technology Services



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

NEW YORK TELEPHONE SET TO BRING T.1 ISDN
TO WALL STREET USERS AS EARLY AS NEXT MONTH

  New York Telephone is on the verge of receiving approval for a
tariff filed for ISDN Primary Service that would bring T.1 ISDN
capacity to Wall Street for the first time. If the New York State
Public Service Commission approves the filing, the service could
become publicly available as soon as July 24.

  If approved, ISDN Primary Service would join Basic Service as
New York Telephone's two-headed ISDN offering. The Centrex-
equivalent Basic Rate ISDN, which is comprised of two B channels
and one D channel, has been available since April 1991, but has
been almost invisible on Wall Street. Only Shearson Lehman
Brothers Inc., Merrill Lynch & Co., and Citibank -- the three
participants in the recently completed New York State ISDN
trials -- have experimented with the technology in any depth.

  These trials have, however, suggested the variety of
applications that ISDN can bring to the desktop. Shearson, the
most ambitious participant in the trial, tested branch training
applications that take advantage of ISDN's capability to deliver
voice and data simultaneously: both the trainer and the student
can look at and make changes to the same screen while they talk
on the telephone at the same time.

  Merrill Lynch experimented with ISDN as a way to more closely
control telecommunications costs. And Citibank implemented an
international video teleconferencing application using the
facilities of Teleport Communications Group's TC Systems unit.

  New York Tel has been hampered by the scarcity of its ISDN
switching technology. According to Jean Altenau, staff director
for ISDN Product Development for NYNEX's Telesector Resources
Group, Basic Service is available only from Central Offices in
Manhattan on West 42nd Street; in White Plains, N.Y.; and in
Garden City, Long Island. Both Basic Service and Primary Service
can carry integrated voice and data over a single ISDN line, and
both flavors eliminate the need for a modem of any kind.

  NYNEX has remained reluctant to announce a more specific ISDN
deployment schedule. "Right now, deployment is limited," Altenau
says. "But we expect additional deployment through 1992 and
1993." Mary Cooke, associate director for NYNEX ISDN Market
Planning, told a recent forum: "As money comes rolling in, we'll
be able to increase our deployment 50-fold."

                  Primary Service: A Definition

  NYNEX's ISDN Primary Service operates at 1.544 megabits/second,
typically broken down into 23 64 kilobits/second B channels for
transmission and one 64 kilobits/second D channel for signaling;
or 24 B channels under the control of a D channel in another
Digital Transport Facility (DTF), defined in the filing as "a 1.5
Mbps facility between a subscriber's premises network interface
and a port." The B channels can carry voice or data, while the D
channel carries the out-of-band signaling necessary to control
its associated B channels.

  The Primary Service's circuit-switched voice provides digitized
speech or voiceband data access for features like Direct Inward
Dialing, Outward Dialing, WATS long-distance service, and 800
services. The service also allows subscribers to utilize the D
channel for signaling to dynamically allocate B channels on a
per-call basis.

  The full 24 channels will be available at what New York Tel
calls the "suitably equipped" CO's DS-1 port termination via
dedicated lines. According to the New York Telephone filing,
subscribers to the Primary Service have the option to use either
"a subset or all of the channels at the port termination or [to]
have multiple ISDN Primary Service ports to connect to multiple
DTF's."

                         The Commitments

  New York Tel will require a minimum service period of 12 months
"subject to the availability of facilities and node software and
hardware"; additional commitments must also be for a minimum of
another 12 months. All subscriber-based equipment must conform to
the published AT&T and Northern Telecom ISDN Primary Service
specifications.

  One caveat in the filing pertains to the controversial
Automatic Number Identification feature plaguing public utility
commissions everywhere. The filing warns: "The subscriber may not
resell, or otherwise provide to third parties any information
obtained through the use of the Calling Line Identification
feature."

  Pricing is complex. On a per-month basis, the cost of a Digital
Transport Facility to the subscriber will be $332.25 for "the
first half-mile or fraction thereof"; and then an additional $300
for each DTF to the same premises. Ports with 23 B channels and
one D channel are priced at an additional $595 per month, and
Interoffice Termination is priced at either $595 (23 B channels
and 1 D channel) or $545 (24 B channels).

  As for interoffice facility charges, rates are based on NYNEX
Superpath 1.5 megabits/second service. There are optional monthly
charges for backup D channels ($50 each); calling line
identification per port ($150); and channel configuration per
trunk group established ($10).

  If subscribers choose a three-year contract, they will save a
few dollars per feature. DTF, for example, would cost $315.65
rather than $332.25. A five-year contract would reduce that same
charge more substantially, to $299 per month. There will be
nonrecurring charges for service establishment ($250); for any
change from NYNEX FLEXPATH to ISDN Primary Rate Service ($225);
and for any changes to service ($200).

  So far no one has intervened -- a sign that perhaps not even
advocacy groups understand the full implications of ISDN service.
Given the lack of ISDN-capable COs, and NYNEX's reluctance to
move more quickly than its customers, it will be up to Wall
Street firms to create a future that includes ISDN capabilities.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

MCDONALD COMPLETES ROLLOUT
OF 29-BRANCH VOICE DATA NETWORK

  McDonald & Company Securities Inc. of Cleveland, Ohio, has just
gone live with a final network link to its Jersey City, N.J.,
office, the last of 29 branches to be tied into an integrated
voice-data network. The new network supports some 400 users at
branches in Ohio, Indiana and Michigan.

  The McDonald rollout illustrates why securities firms are
becoming reluctant to turn over their network destiny to market
data vendors, and how easy it can be to underestimate network
management demands. It also underscores the importance of
integrated voice-data networks in driving down firmwide
telecommunications costs.

  At the same time as they were implementing a new networking
strategy, McDonald took the opportunity of swapping out its
quote-terminal system for a new one developed with New York
systems integrator American Real-Time Services Inc. The ARTS
system, which handles branchwide distribution and display of
Reuters' Marketfeed 2000 digital data feed, replaced some 290 ADP
FS One terminals at McDonald and 75 Quotron Q1000 terminals at
Gradison & Co., a firm based in Cincinnati and owned by McDonald.

                          Who's Driving?

  The driving forces behind the switch to integrated service were
both cost and speed. ARTS and McDonald consider the new network
unique because it will carry three types of data simultaneously:
voice (eight kilobits/second); hoot 'n' holler (16
kilobits/second); and market data in the form of news and quotes
(32 kilobits/second). Boris Gettig, vice president of management
information systems at McDonald, says that voice-data integration
has meant savings "on the order of $250,000 per year."

  McDonald was using ADP Brokerage Information Systems Group's
terrestrial data network for back-office purposes. The ADP data
network is based on analog 9.6 kilobit/second data circuits.
McDonald was using half that capacity to receive market data and
half for back-office traffic.

  Using the ADP analog network, a broker in a branch could
connect to a Tandem Computer Corp. processor in Cleveland and
pull up customer accounts, but response time was sluggish: up to
17 seconds for a full screen to be painted on a broker's
terminal. Once a broker hit the carriage return to make his or
her request, the request data was sent to ADP's data center in
Mount Laurel, N.J., for processing; on to McDonald's Tandem in
Cleveland; and then back out to the branch office. The new,
higher-speed network was able to cut response time to an average
of five seconds, with some requests taking only from two to three
seconds.

                           It's a No-No

  "Neither ADP nor Quotron would allow us to stick an arbitrary
protocol on their network," says Gettig. For McDonald's network
link to ADP, the firm had developed a special program running on
the Tandem to convert standard 3270 data into the proprietary
protocol necessary for transmission to the ADP data center in
Mount Laurel. Nonetheless, according to Gettig, "The protocol
conversion was pretty ragged."

  "With our own new network, we have the flexibility of linking a
PC LAN into the WAN if we want to," he says, "but [ADP and
Quotron] wouldn't allow us to. Essentially, their networks are
used for doing quotes, and other securities firms are using the
same lines to get to the same places. They are quote vendors and
not communications vendors. Both Quotron and ADP said we'd have
to encapsulate our protocols within theirs."

  AT&T lost out after the analog hoot 'n' holler network came
under close scrutiny. McDonald was also paying for long-distance
AT&T circuits -- a pair of 9600 baud digital circuits -- for data
delivery to ADP for back-office processing, a system distinct
from the analog voice network.

  The new integrated network configuration will give McDonald "a
lot of things we never had in past," says Joe Perez, a McDonald
vice president and assistant manager for communications, "like
dial backup in case the network goes down. We have total control
of remote loopback testing, and signal gain and loss testing.
Before, we were pretty much at the mercy of AT&T to tell us
whether or not the circuit was good, and you know how that
goes -- if something goes wrong, it turns into a finger-pointing
match. Now we can do the trouble-shooting and provide the
solution ourselves."

  The switch to digital also means better quality for McDonald
using less bandwidth. The 16 kilobit/second of bandwidth required
for compressed voice provides "much better quality with full 64k
analog circuit," according to Perez. "It's super -- that was a
surprise to us."

  The digital circuits running from the firm's main office in
Cleveland to the branches are T.1s provided by Litel
Communications Inc. International, a regional long-distance
provider that will carry traffic at 56 kilobits/second. The
McDonald segment of the network uses X.25 connections; a packet
assembler/disassembler (PAD) in each branch is linked with an
Infotron 8020 multiplexer that communicates with another Infotron
mux located in the branch.

  Gradison, in contrast, is reliant upon TCP/IP and its link
between the UNIX-based LAN supporting broker workstations in
Cincinnati and the Internet Protocol: a Proteon router at
Gradison in Cincinnati is connected via two 56 kilobit/second
lines to a Proteon router in Cleveland.

                        Switch and Cut Bait

  At first, McDonald installed four PC-based Level 2 packet
switches, at a cost of just $15,000 each, as the center cloud.
The firm bought Netrix X.25 software. But the PC-based packet
switches were too slow to keep up with the UNIX processors in the
branches. As a result, the X.25 connection was cleared, and the
branch users were forced to log on again.

  "The whole circuit went down," Gettig says. "It was as bad as
going up with a pair of cutters and cutting the line. We couldn't
find the problem, because it was difficult to tell where the
clear was coming from."

  To solve their problem, McDonald executives invested in Level 3
hardware. That doesn't come cheap -- the Infotron Streamline 2550
cost McDonald in the neighborhood of $140,000.

  McDonald worried the Streamline 2550 might be overkill. But it
has worked well when combined with network-monitoring equipment.
Network management personnel at McDonald are now able to see
where the clears are coming from via a graphical map displayed at
headquarters in Cleveland: they can then run tests to a given
branch, and Litel can loop back to a different part of the fiber
circuit until they are able to isolate the origin of the problem.

  "One of the main things we learned was not to try to scrimp on
the cost of the hardware," Gettig says. "We got halfway rolled
out -- six or eight branches -- and that thing [the PC-based
solution] was enough to drive us out of a job. We ended up taking
a big hit from the small inexpensive network. Nobody could put a
dollar value on management and troubleshooting, but those are the
things that gave us sleepless nights. We knew there were problems
but we couldn't find them."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

INTERSTATE/JOHNSON LANE ADDS
FUNCTIONS TO VSAT NETWORK

  Charlotte, N.C.-based Interstate/Johnson Lane Inc. has begun to
migrate its hoot 'n' holler branch application from AT&T land
lines to the ADP satellite network the firm has already installed
for market data delivery to more than 62 branches in the
Southeast. The regional broker believes the hoot 'n' holler move
to satellite will save the firm $150,000 per year once it's
completed this summer.

  Interstate has set up three sites to test the ADP network in
anticipation of a branch-wide hoot 'n' holler rollout scheduled
for Aug. 1, according to Glenn Mabry, first vice president,
telecommunications.

  Interstate was the first ADP customer to receive the FS Partner
data service via very small aperture terminal (VSAT) network, a
conversion process that began in October 1991 and was completed
this past February.

  Interstate/Johnson Lane was also the first ADP customer to use
Personal Earth Stations from Hughes Network Systems (HNS) as part
of Hughes' exclusive agreement with ADP for VSAT network
services. The ADP contract gives Hughes exclusive rights to the
installation and maintenance of the earth stations at ADP's
clients.

  Metromedia Communications Corp., a long distance vendor based
in East Rutherford, N.J., will remain the primary vendor for
Interstate's basic voice service; the firm has no immediate plans
to implement video on the network.

                        Making the Switch

  As part of the firm's switch to a VSAT network, an HNS Personal
Earth Station has been installed at each Interstate branch in
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. A Direct Indoor Unit
(DIU) interfaces with the VSAT dish to deliver both the hoot 'n'
holler application and FS Partner to the IBM PS/2 servers in
place at Interstate branch offices.

  The ADP/Hughes satellite network can support speeds of 512
kilobits/second outbound and 128 kilobits/second inbound.
Interstate, however, doesn't expect its traffic to exceed 64
kilobits/second. The ADP network traffic is downlinked to the HNS
hub in Spring Creek, N.Y. The company will not be incorporating
its own information with ADP's market data.

  In 1989, the Interstate/Johnson Lane network was 100 percent
terrestrial, with long distance lines provided primarily by AT&T
and MCI. But I/JL was plagued by what Mabry calls "the
vulnerability of land lines" -- mainly downtime and noise on the
line. Another factor in its switch to VSAT was speed of
installation and/or relocation. With AT&T any change or new
installation generally took from 60 to 90 days; I/JL is trying to
negotiate a 30-day turnaround time with ADP.

  Interstate examined three VSAT options: Avdata Systems in
Atlanta; Hughes on its own without ADP; and ADP using Hughes'
technology. Despite the cost savings that comes from integrated
voice and data, the four chief criteria for selection, according
to Mabry, were quality service; guaranteed uptime (with automatic
dialup backup); the ability to integrate voice and data; and "the
flexibility of relocation or installation."

  ADP had both feet in the door. The company had been
Interstate/Johnson Lane's back-office vendor since 1985, and its
market data provider since 1986. "We needed to get their service
into us in the most efficient way," Mabry says. "They came [to
the VSAT network discussions] as our quote service vendor."
Interstate conducted a pilot with ADP and Hughes before making
its final choice.

  Interstate is one of several regional firms exploring VSAT for
branch communications. In 1988, before ADP's deal with Hughes,
Edward D. Jones & Co., a regional broker based in St. Louis,
awarded HNS a $30 million contract for a VSAT network expected to
reach more than 2,000 broker sites by the end of this year.
Hughes is also installing a 400-node network for A.G. Edwards.
Additionally, ADP is in the early stages of a network rollout
with regional broker J.C. Bradford & Co., based in Nashville.

  "They are more receptive to satellite technology," says Pradman
Kaul, president of Hughes Network Systems, "because they all have
the same requirements: rapid response time, high-quality
transmission of data, flexibility if they move or install a new
office, and specialized applications like hoot 'n' holler."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

AMID UNCERTAINTY, CTFI BUILDS
BACKUP FOR WALL STREET FIRMS

  Three years after 14 Wall Street Telecommunications Association
member firms announced plans to develop a hot site in case of a
network disaster, no contingency planning facility has been
built, and the vendor selected by the WSTA group has been forced
to market its facility with nothing more than the consortium's
endorsement to show for its winning proposal.

  Contingency Trading Facility Inc., based at MetroTech Center in
Brooklyn and majority-owned by competitive access provider
Metropolitan Fiber Systems Inc., was selected as the "winner" of
the request for proposal issued by the Disaster Recovery Hot Site
consortium. The consortium was formed in 1989 by the 14 WSTA
member firms, but now that CTFI has been selected as the hot site
vendor, the group agreed that its work was complete and has
disbanded. CTFI has won an endorsement with no explicit dollar
value from a WSTA group that no longer exists.

  "The award allowed us the right to go out and market to the
WSTA member firms," MFS vice president Kathy Perone says. "But it
did not guarantee any number of seats, or that the 14 WSTA firms
would use the site. We got an endorsement, and we are marketing
to all financial firms."

  "The [WSTA] group basically looked at their experience with
Wall Street requirements," says a key member of the Hot Site
consortium. "We looked at the proposal, and the recommendation
was based on networking flexibility and the location of the
facility. Based on those, CTFI had the wherewithal -- they were
better than the closest alternative."

  At least one member of the Hot Site consortium has committed to
a rival that "lost" in the bidding process -- Exchange Resources
Inc. of Minneapolis.

  "It was difficult to understand what it is you would win," says
one of the "losers" in the RFP process. "It was extremely
nebulous throughout, and we have since found there was nothing to
be won -- nothing to win."

  The purpose of the contingency facility is to provide
alternative network routing and access to market data feeds for
traders should a disaster cripple their own facilities. Though
MFS is claiming that 55 percent of the seats at the as-yet
unbuilt CTFI MetroTech Center contingency site have been sold,
Wall Street firms have been required only to put down deposits to
reserve seats.

  A "shared" seat at the facility costs $4,000 per year; a "semi-
shared" seat is $6,000 per year; and a "dedicated seat" is priced
at $11,000 per year. Contracts are for a minimum of three years.
Dedicated seats are 100 percent guaranteed under all
circumstances. Sharing guarantees subscribers will have access
to, at worst, a percentage of the seats contracted for: 50
percent for semi-dedicated; 25 percent for shared.

  CTFI plans to go live before year end. Other than the original
14 consortium firms, CTFI principal Jim Loizidez says his company
is in discussions with "another 25 WSTA companies" and that CTFI/
MFS are "now prospecting about 75 customers" in all.

  "They are actually waiting for the Wall Street community to
come in with some commitments," says the source. "I don't know if
there are enough to go forward.... I believe we are basically on
hold while we wait for the CTFI to formalize commitments."

  For $2,000 each, the 14 Hot Site consortium firms were able to
formulate requirements for a site that few felt they could afford
on their own. But it is also clear that needs have changed in the
time since the Hot Site consortium surveyed WSTA members and
first disseminated its RFP in October 1991. The RFP was designed
to delineate common requirements, but in fact MFS has been
deluged with requests for additional data feeds and
customization.

  Customers are asking for things outside the scope of the
original RFP: additional market data services, connections to
international carriers, access to their long-distance
providers -- and even storage space and the ability to bring
nontrading functions to the CTFI facility.

  Ironically, one of the prime beneficiaries of the "endorsement"
from the WSTA member firms will be MFS competitor New York
Telephone, which operates the Securities Industry Automation
Network. According to one source, MFS has already ordered some
200 lines from New York Tel; MFS has also announced a partnering
agreement with NYNEX Computer Services to provide consulting
services for disaster recovery to Wall Street customers. New York
Tel is even involved in designing the CTFI facility.

                           The Hot Site

  At the Brooklyn Hot Site, CTFI will provide a 60-button V Band
Corp. digital turret at each seat, with market data delivered by
a Reuters Triarch 2000 data distribution system. CTFI will
provide the Reuters Selectfeed and Telerate TDPF feeds for each
trader position. Quotron, ADP and Telekurs are under evaluation
to provide equities data.

  There are plans for five separate trading rooms of 50 seats
apiece at the facility in Brooklyn, each with a Novell local area
network connected to a Digital Equipment Corp. VAX minicomputer;
the VAX will act as feed handler and local controller for
incoming and outgoing communications.

  Subscribers will also have the option to connect feeds from
their back-office operations to traders' temporary stations in
Brooklyn via a System Network Architecture (SNA) gateway to the
DEC VAX. This allows for the interconnection of the traders'
back-office information to the CTFI VAX, accessible from
workstations.

  Individual voice and data lines can be re-routed through the
fiber networks of MFS or the Securities Industry Association
Network. According to Perone, MFS can switch the lines from the
New York Telephone Central Office (CO) that feeds the trader "and
shoot it into Brooklyn."

                          Discount Data

  CTFI also has the capability to pre-configure up to five
additional data feeds available through Reuters' Triarch 2000.
"We end up getting it cheaper than the traders' would
themselves," Loizides says, "because market data vendors realize
this is a backup site and they are giving us discounted feeds."

  Perone says the setup gives CTFI/MFS the ability "to turn them
on within 24 hours." The MFS network has direct fiber connections
from the company's midtown and downtown New York locations to the
MetroTech Center in Brooklyn.

  "The important thing is they are both fiber-optic-based
networks," Perone says. "That allows us to essentially look at a
circuit in two directions. If something happens, you can swing
the broken location to a third location. The Digital Cross-
Connect System acts as a controller -- it essentially allows you
to take one end of a private line and reconfigure to a third
location, such that traffic would appear to be transmitting over
the normal path. The duplicate services in Brooklyn would look
exactly like the traders are used to."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

DOW JONES, NYNEX PURSUE PLAN
FOR WALL STREET VIDEO SERVICE

  Dow Jones and NYNEX aren't about to let the failure of Reuters'
TV 2000 in 1990 to stop them from exploring the market for both
store-and-forward and real-time video programming on Wall Street.
In an ambitious test of video over fiber already well into the
planning stages, both companies are trying to surmount the
technical and programming difficulties inherent in delivering
broadband services.

  The resulting product is expected to allow users of market data
to use digitized video in much the same way they use data now. If
Dow Jones and NYNEX are successful, users would be able to
monitor, store, and retrieve both real-time video and historical
video databases. Digital video with the properties of data could
open up a new revenue stream for network and market data vendors
on Wall Street -- and a new way of monitoring developments in the
financial world.

  For NYNEX, the project is the first thrust into video
programming since the restraints of the Modified Final Judgment
were lifted by an appeals court. For Dow Jones, it means a
chance to turn a glaring weakness in its Information Services
operation -- television programming -- into a presence in video
on Wall Street.

                           In the Field

  A prototype testing both the NYNEX network and the Dow Jones
programming is scheduled to be up and running by the end of the
year; if all goes well, a field test is set for the third quarter
of 1993. The operation will be based at Dow Jones headquarters at
One World Financial Center in New York, and at NYNEX's Science
and Technology Laboratory in White Plains, N.Y. The project will
be managed on the NYNEX side by its Telesector Resources Group
(TRG) as part of Dow Jones Television, headed by senior vice
president Peter Skinner, who reports to Dow Jones president Peter
Kann.

  The test will rely at first on "standard DS-1 connections,"
according to Joe DeMauro, director of new product development at
TRG. In the near-term, that means deploying the existing
dedicated point-to-point facilities of NYNEX Superpath, the 1.2
to 256 kilobit/second packet-switching service marketed by New
York Telephone. With Superpath, users have the capability of
establishing either permanent or temporary switched virtual
circuits between locations.

  DeMauro does expect the pilot will move to the 1.544 megabit
ISDN Primary Rate Interface -- once Primary Rate ISDN is tariffed
by the New York State Public Service Commission. A decision is
expected by July 24 (see story, page 1). Superpath relies on
dedicated facilities at two locations; ISDN PRI, by contrast, is
a switched connection that can be delivered to anyone with an
equivalent facility. ISDN will also allow for an end-to-end
digital connectivity.

  These networks will permit VCR-quality broadcasts: a step down
from broadcast quality, but probably good enough for a first-
generation business-to-business broadcast. The good news is that
the pilot will not suffer from "motion artifacts," the jumpiness
that often plagues video teleconferencing at lower baud rates. At
the slower data rates, any motion at all makes it look to the
viewer as though the signal itself has broken up, and the quality
of the picture is muddy compared to a network broadcast.

  The two companies have broken out the project into three
pieces: production of the programming; storage and distribution;
and delivery of the video service at the customer's premises. Dow
Jones will take care of the video programming piece, while NYNEX
will handle storage and distribution. The line has not yet been
clearly drawn as to how customer premises will be handled -- or
by whom. Should the service go commercial, Dow Jones expects that
third-party business alliance partners will perform the
integration function within the customer's premises -- as they
now do with other data feeds. As yet, no customer sites for the
prototype or the pilot have been announced.

  "The first step is technological," Peter Skinner says. "We have
to figure out how one transports a video feed over fiber in a
fashion that allows users to manipulate, store, and recall
programming the way you do now in an electronic database. We have
to figure out how one digitizes, stores, and retrieves video
information."

                          Easy Answers?

  NYNEX and Dow Jones have the advantage of trying to answer
those questions at a moment when international standards for the
transmission of digital video have stabilized. For store-and-
forward video, NYNEX will rely on the groundwork of the Motion
Picture Experts Group and its MPEG standard.

  For real-time video, DeMauro expects the partners will turn to
the international H.261 CCITT standard for transporting video to
codecs, the compression/decompression devices that are analogous
to modems for data. Thus, the test will benefit from standard
interfaces to codecs, and compatibility with the hardware and
software of a variety of manufacturers of video teleconferencing
products and services.

  NYNEX has to tread lightly when it comes to issues of content,
considering that cable and telephone companies are still barred
by federal law (the 1984 Cable Act) from entering the business of
the other; NYNEX has nicely side-stepped any immediate
controversy by leaving the programming side to Dow Jones. The
technical hurdles pertaining to delivery of video-on-demand
services are nothing compared to the programming issues Dow Jones
will have to conquer to grow the pilot into a commercial service.

  Dow Jones failed in its attempts to acquire Financial News
Network Inc. last year when the National Broadcasting Co.
absorbed FNN into the CNBC cable channel. Dow Jones may be an
information powerhouse in most media, but video has limped along
as a weak sibling. All that Dow Jones has to show on the
television side under its Dow Jones Television unit is the limpid
Wall Street Journal Report, a syndicated television show usually
shown at off-hours over the weekend on just 70 stations. With a
weekly magazine format, that half-hour show is broadcast by only
17 people total, a staff that also has responsibility to deliver
syndicated inserts into the broadcasts of news shows in local
markets and in Japan.

                      Are You Experienced?

  This dearth of video experience is daunting, considering that
Skinner is talking about Dow Jones providing everything from
"real-time breaking news to analytical, historical, archival, and
other programming we haven't thought of."

  "We have a lot of ideas about programming," he says. "Part of
our effort is to experiment with various types of programming."
Skinner said the "issue is open" as to relying on outside
suppliers of programming for the pilot. Of course, Dow Jones has
the option of drawing on the other parts of the company to
provide programming, but then so did Reuters when it came to the
defunct TV 2000.

  Exploration and exploitation of a new technology are two
different things, and video to date has been a minefield on Wall
Street, in large part because programming is a black hole. Don't
be surprised if Dow Jones and NYNEX fall into the programming
chasm between prototype and pilot. Jumping the technology hurdles
could turn out to be the easy part.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WALL STREET NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
June 19, 1992

  Telekurs (North America) Inc. has increased the bandwidth of

  Telekurs (North America) Inc. has increased the bandwidth of
its Telekurs Ticker Service digital data feed from 19.2
kilobits/second to 56 kilobits/second. The increased speed brings
the Ticker feed up to a level comparable to Reuters' Marketfeed
2000 and PC Quote Inc.'s HyperFeed. The move was made because of
a planned expansion of the Ticker's content and "the beginnings
of a bandwidth problem," in the words of Steve Williams,
Telekurs' product manager for real-time systems.

  The seven Regional Bell Operating Companies and three
independent telcos have endorsed plans for local frame-relay and
switched multi-megabit data services. The RBOCs (Ameritech, Bell
Atlantic, BellSouth, NYNEX, Pacific Bell, Southwestern Bell
Telephone, and US WEST) and the independents (Cincinnati Bell,
GTE, and Southern New England Telephone) have given their support
to an agreement similar to one already announced by long-distance
carriers AT&T, Sprint, MCI, and BT North America. Frame-relay
service will begin this summer in the Ameritech region, and
multi-megabit transmission will be available on GTE facilities in
Los Angeles.

  Teleport Communications Group has appointed Charles "Chip"
Cleary as vice president of national markets. Cleary will be in
charge of selling TCG's local services to telecom carriers
nationwide. He had been director of ITT's Communications Services
division, and, most recently, he directed Eastern and Midwestern
sales for Metromedia Communications.

  Users of Instinet Corp.'s Order Management System have found it
can be used as a continuous crossing network, performing some of
the same functions as Morgan Stanley & Co.'s MatchPlus Patient
Trading system, according to sources at Grantham, Mayo, Van
Otterloo & Co., a test site for the system.

  If nothing else, the recent Chicago flood has forced another
round of CAP-think among telephone operating companies. "There
are two ways to deal with a bear that's in your territory: fight
it at all cost or sit down and have dinner," says Richard
Vanderwoude, president of Central Telephone Co. of Illinois, a
subsidiary of Centel. "Demand is growing so it's not a zero-sum
game. You look for that as a saving grace. We can share the pie
because the pie's getting bigger." Some telephone companies --
RBOC and independent -- consider that philosophy to be heretical.
But Vanderwoude believes the flood will lead "toward multiple
types of services -- two different paths, two different routes.
We'll see more and more of that. Customers want it now."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>