
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B33-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B027-129</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec80.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224201 text/html 22740
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:39:49 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:07 GMT
Content-length: 22553
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec80.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>CHIRON AWARDS HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE CONTRACT&nbsp;TO SEPRAGEN FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(366 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCES SOFTWARE FOR DIGITAL UNIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>INTERNET ACCESS SOFTWARE BUNDLED&nbsp;WITH PLUG & PLAY MULTIMEDIA MODEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(585 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES MDA SOFTWARE RUNNING&nbsp;ON ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(533 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>DIGITAL AND MACROMRDIA PROVIDE DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM&nbsp;FOR CROSS-PLATFORM AUTHORING ENVIRONMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(957 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet
January 1996

CHIRON AWARDS HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE CONTRACT
TO SEPRAGEN FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS

Sepragen Corporation (NASDAQ: SPGNU, SPGNZ, SPGNA, SPGNW), of
San Leandro, CA, has signed a contract to build multiple
QuantaSep LS (large-scale) systems for Chiron Corporation. The
contract, valued at approximately $400,000, includes hardware,
software, documentation and validation. The systems have been
designed to meet the specific needs of Chiron's drug
manufacturing efforts.  Delivery is scheduled for January
1996.

"The interactive team efforts between Sepragen and Chiron
engineers resulted in the custom design of the process
purification systems. These will enable the rapid purification
of large quantities of two new potential Chiron drugs for
their clinical trial needs," said Vinit Saxena, president and
chairman.

"This is part of our overall strategic plan to provide
state-of-the-art, large-scale purification systems to
biopharmaceutical companies to enhance and optimize their
manufacturing processes.

"We selected Sepragen for this purchase based on the
exceptional service that they have provided to us in the
past," said Mark Pemberton, director of Bulk Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing at Chiron Corporation.

The QuantaSep LS is a large-scale, computer-controlled
chromatography workstation consisting of hardware,
electronics, software, sensors and detectors.

"Sepragen's advanced technologies have added significant
economic value to the manufacturing processes of many FDA
approved pharmaceutical drugs worldwide," Saxena said.

Sepragen Corporation is a pioneer in the field of large-scale
chromatography - the next generation technology in the
separations field. The company markets a patented radial flow
chromatography (RFC) technology that utilizes a novel
hydrodynamic column design in which the flow is directed
radially from the outside to the center of the column. The
surface areas are larger and the radial flow path (bed depth)
is shorter. The combination of these features results in
higher flow rates, lower back pressures, and increased
volumetric productivity over traditional axial columns. This
is further magnified in large-volume chromatography
applications.

Sepragen also markets computer-controlled process
chromatography workstations and process technology to the
biotechnology, food and environmental industries. The
company's products are being used by leading biotech
companies to reduce manufacturing costs and commercial
production time to market, as well as by food and
environmental companies to produce new value-added products
and processes. Based in San Leandro, California, the company
markets its proprietary RFC technology and services worldwide.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet
January 1996

TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCES SOFTWARE FOR DIGITAL UNIX

Texas Instruments (TI) Software will begin shipments of
Composer for Digital Equipment Corporation's Digital UNIX.
Texas Instruments Software's Composer is a market-leading
component-based development tool for client/server application
development.  Standards-compliant, high-performance Digital
UNIX is the industry's leading 64-bit UNIX operating system.

The combination of Composer and Digital UNIX provides the
maximum performance, modularity and scalability available in
the client/server application development market today. With
Composer, users can design, develop and deploy flexible
client/server applications that allow maximum use of computing
resources regardless of the client/server architecture. In
combination with Digital UNIX, Composer gives users the high
performance needed to run client/server applications in a UNIX
environment. Applications developed with Composer can be
deployed on the Digital's Alpha* workstation running Digital
UNIX or OpenVMS*.

"Digital UNIX offers Composer customers an industry standard
high-performance UNIX operating system that lets them move
today to the next generation of open computing," said Susan
Morgan, alliance manager for Texas Instruments Software. "This
TI and Digital solution enables customers to develop and
deploy client/server applications in a reliable, distributed
environment where top transaction processing performance is a
must and customers can be assured of scalability that meets
business growth needs," Morgan added.

"We're pleased that TI has decided to port its market-leading
application development tool to Digital UNIX," said Mark
Silverberg, UNIX product marketing manager at Digital
Equipment Corporation.

"The combination of Composer, Digital UNIX and 64-bit Alpha
platforms provides users with the ideal combination of
flexible tools and robust power to develop mission-critical
client/server applications."

The Implementation Toolset module of Composer will be
available for Digital UNIX. This module, which ensures the
automation of the compilation, linking and installation of
Composer-developed applications, allows migration of the
developed code to the target deployment system.

As part of its strategy to provide customers with many
development and implementation options for software
applications, Texas Instruments Software provides Composer for
a broad range of operating systems. In addition to Digital
UNIX, these operating systems include Digital OpenVMS, IBM
MVS, Tandem NonStop Kernel, Tandem NonStop-UX, Hewlett-Packard
HP-UX, IBM AIX, Sun Solaris, Sequent Dynix/ptx, Pyramid
DC/OSx, Siemens/Nixdorf SINIX, AT&T GIS SVR4, Microsoft
Windows 3.1 and NT, and OS/2.

For information on U.S. pricing and availability call (800)
838-1843.

About Texas Instruments Software

Texas Instruments Software is the market leader in software
application development and assembly tools and services for
department and organization-wide implementation of
client/server technology. Texas Instruments Software is a
division of Texas Instruments Incorporated (NYSE:TXN), a
high-technology company headquartered in Dallas, Texas, with
sales or manufacturing operations in more than 30 countries.

For more information on Texas Instruments Software and its
products, please visit the division's World Wide Web site at
http://www.ti.com/software/software.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet
January 1996

INTERNET ACCESS SOFTWARE BUNDLED
WITH PLUG & PLAY MULTIMEDIA MODEM

Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. has announced Q1 1996
availability of the Hayes ACCURA 288B V.34 Message Modem. This
new internal plug & play modem features full voice
functionality, including full duplex speaker phone, Radish
VoiceView, digital voice messaging, and automatic paging,
bringing professional office messaging capability to SOHO
users.

"Hayes ACCURA 288B Message Modem offers a low cost alternative
to traditional high cost answering services, with the added
benefit of message management features such as automatic
paging and message retrieval," said Dennis Hayes, Chairman and
CEO, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. "The marriage of
computer and telephone communications in this product bridges
the gap between SOHO users and their office, making them more
responsive to their customers needs."

ACCURA 288B Message Modem features:

Features Benefits

Full Duplex Speaker Phone Superior, low cost, hands-free
speakerphone operation.

Digital Voice Messaging High quality voice mail system for a
professional business image.

Automatic paging To get that urgent call or fax while you are
on the road.

Remote Message Retrieval With 24 hour remote access to
messages, you can provide instant response to callers.

Plug & Play Simplifies installation and configuration of
Windows 95 operating system. (In internal modems only.)

VoiceView Allows easy switching between data, fax, and voice
modes during the same call.

Caller I.D. Provides in-bound caller identification without a
costly display phone.

Distinctive Ring Directs calls to voice, fax, or data modem.

Fax-on-demand Enables callers to select from a menu and have
their selection faxed back to them.

Data/Fax/Voice Modem automatically and transparently
Discrimination recognizes and handles data, fax, and voice on
one phone line.

The full duplex speaker phone capability in this product
allows for simultaneous hands free communication and together
with its VoiceView capability can even exchange data\fax files
with remote sites during the same call. Hayes ACCURA 288B
Message Modem will answer incoming calls, play recorded
greetings to the calling party, and store voice messages as
digital files to a PC's hard drive. The product also has a
high quality, built in microphone which easily integrates into
a desktop PC's existing speakers.

"With the enhanced security features of the ACCURA 288B
Message Modem, users can establish password protection,
manage or forward messages to others, and secure private
messages," said Bob Meara, Senior Product Manager, Consumer
Products, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. "Along with the
modem's ability to do fax scheduling and receive
fax-on-demand, users now have a powerful and secure messaging
system that is flexible and easy to use."

Hayes ACCURA 288B Message Modem supports 28,800 bits/s data
transmission and up to 115,200 bit/s throughput with ITU-T
V.42bis compression. The modem also supports 14,400 bits/s fax
transmission and Class 1 and 2 fax capabilities. SRP for the
ACCURA 288B Message Modem is $259.

The product comes bundled with Hayes Smartcom Message Center,
a full-featured voice, fax and data product, as well as
Internet access software packages, and complimentary America
OnLine and CompuServe software that come with 1-month free on-
line memberships.

Best known as the leader in microcomputer modems, Hayes
develops, supplies and supports computer communications
equipment and software for personal computers and computer
communications networks. The company distributes its products
through a global network of authorized distributors, dealers,
mass merchants, VARs, system integrators and original
equipment manufacturers.

For further information please contact:

Andrew W. Dod Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. Phone:
770/840-9200 ext. 6365 Facsimile: 770/441-1238 Internet
Address: adod@hayes.com Hayes World Wide Web Site:
http://www.hayes.com



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES MDA SOFTWARE RUNNING
ON ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS

Digital Equipment Corporation has demonstrated its complete
family of Alpha-and Intel-based systems, all delivering
exceptional performance, running the industry's leading
Mechanical Design Automation (MDA) software applications at
Autofact '95.

"AlphaStation workstations are the world's best in performance
and offer customers a choice of leading 2D and 3D graphics
options and three operating systems -- Digital UNIX, Windows
NT, and OpenVMS. The workstations allow for real productivity
breakthroughs in MDA. Digital's new line of personal
workstations, from Intel- based models through to Alpha-based
models, are economically priced NT-based solutions and offer
easy CISC-to-RISC migration," said Herb Shumway, vice
president of Digital's Software Partner Group. "Digital's
complete range of workstations and servers deliver customers
the best performance at every key price point, providing
design engineers with the power they need for complex models."

Running Circles Around the Competition

Competitive MDA application benchmark demos in Digital's booth
will show the outstanding performance of AlphaStation
workstations. EDS Unigraphics and Pro/ENGINEER applications
demonstrated in the booth will run almost three times faster
on an AlphaStation 600 5/300 workstation than on SGI Indigo 2
R4400/200 and Sun SPARC station 20/71 workstations, and almost
twice as fast as an HP 9000 J210 workstation.

In addition, the Bentley MicroStation CADbench benchmark
running on the AlphaStation 600 5/266 workstation, and on the
Alpha XL 266, Celebris XL 5133, and Celebris XL 6150 Personal
Workstations, will demonstrate the range of systems available
from Digital -- both Intel-based and Alpha-based -- that run
popular Windows NT applications.

Leading MDA Applications Perform Best on Alpha-based Systems

Leading MDA software vendors are demonstrating their products
running on Alpha systems in their own booths, including,
Autodesk, Bentley, Matra Datavision, and SolidWorks, among
others. The following Digital Business Partners will be
demonstrating their application software in Digital's booth:

o ANSYS, Inc. -- ANSYS 5.2 is a multi-purpose design analysis
software for engineers who want multi-purpose finite element
analysis with versatile design analysis and optimization
capabilities.

o Bentley Systems, Inc. -- MicroStation with Modeler
MicroStation Masterpiece is a feature-based parametric solids
modeler and high-end engineering visualization software that
includes ray tracing and animation.

o CIMLOGIC, Inc. -- Toolbox is a set of application tools that
enhances AutoCAD and Designer and performs a number of
functions including 2D and 3D design, detailing, and
dimensioning. The company develops and markets design
automation and drafting annotation applications for AutoCAD.

o Computervision -- Optegra, TDM-Lite for Microsoft Windows NT
is a cost-effective way to bring the benefits of data
management to PC users. It is a member of Computervision's
Optegra enterprise data management family.

o EDS Unigraphics -- Unigraphics is complete CAD/CAM/CAE
software solutions and services that enable optimal individual
productivity, comprehensive design through manufacturing, true
collaborative engineering, and advanced process automation.

o MacNeal-Schwendler Corporation -- MAC/PATRAN and MSC/NASTRAN
is leading analysis software.

o Parametric Technology -- Pro/ENGINEER is a parametric,
feature-based solid modeling system for the design-through-
documentation of mechanical parts and assemblies.

Pro/MECHANICA is design optimization software for easy
evaluation of design form, fit, and function.

o SolidWorks Corporation -- SolidWorks 95 is the first
production-level solid modeling system to be built
specifically for Windows NT.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL AND MACROMRDIA PROVIDE DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM
FOR CROSS-PLATFORM AUTHORING ENVIRONMENT

Digital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (San
Francisco) have forged an agreement to create a development
solution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,
the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.
Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will be
bundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, and
Macromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimedia
applications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximum
revenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part of
their agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in joint
technical development and marketing, and provide technical
support to developers.

"We've already achieved critical mass with the number of
telecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in their
trials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director of
worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and Interactive
Information Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoring
technology with Digital's Mediaplex Application Development
System, we can offer both the platform and middleware strength
of Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoring
capabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkey
content creation solution."

"Because we already have the Director Player running on a
variety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position to
bring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the device
they have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,
Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With their
cost-effective architecture and strong understanding of what
broadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is an
ideal partner."

Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, Sasha
Magee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,
said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already using
Director, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with a
smooth and continuous path to move our business to the
broadband marketplace, particularly because both companies are
committed to delivery on multiple computing and set-top box
platforms."

Complete Authoring Resources

The Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporate
several Macromedia authoring solutions, including: Macromedia
Director 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creating
multimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution image
editing and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering and
animation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge by
Sonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content for
the World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an application
for compressing and playing Director files on the World Wide
Web -- is included.

These products will enable developers to create client
applications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fully
integrated with the streaming capabilities of the media
server. For custom client/server applications such as
interactive home shopping, distance learning, and home
banking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit
(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes of
application services on the server.

Robust Content Design and Testing Platform

The Mediaplex Application Development System also includes
complete hardware resources for creating applications,
including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and a
Pentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using this
configuration, developers can design content on the PC and
test their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.
Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia network
extensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, the
World Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments from
Apple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).

The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equipped
with a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of hard
disk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,
and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. A
dual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIX
for testing interactive broadband applications, or Microsoft
Windows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating point
processor capabilities for graphics rendering and video
editing. The Mediaplex Application Development System comes
with Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.

The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentium
processor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB of
hard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,
16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, and
Ethernet connectivity.

Pricing and Availability

The Mediaplex Application Development System, with this full
complement of hardware and software resources, is priced
starting at $33,900, with significant discounts available for
qualified developers, and will be available from Digital in
the first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one year
membership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access to
support forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital's
SDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced as
separate options.

About Macromedia

Macromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts software
tools, offers a full range of products for the Windows and
Macintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:
Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design and
illustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standard
animation and authoring tool for multimedia production;
Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoring
environment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the most
powerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,
the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;
Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design and
editing; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentation
application.

About Digital

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, and
Westminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunications
companies using Digital technology include US West's trial in
Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in the
Northeast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's servers
are also being used in production environments to insert
advertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TV
headends served by Adlink in California, and to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>