
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-66</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt26.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033820 text/html 193363
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:35:55 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:30 GMT
Content-length: 193175
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt26.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Cover Story:  Room Service</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2936 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Stack Attack</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1129 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Workplace:  Pass The 10q, Partner</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3425 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Clippings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1850 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>The Last Word</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Short Takes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2095 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Taking Stock Of the January Effect</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2203 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>The 1996 Business Strategist's Software Directory</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(7542 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Special Focus:  Taking Technology In Hand</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2722 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Special Focus:  A Tale Of Three Web Sites</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3730 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Special Focus:  Cyber-Strategy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2500 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Cover Story:  Room Service


TURN THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF 51ST ST.  AND SEVENTH AVENUE in New York and
you're at the doorstep of the Michelangelo.  No hawking awnings herald its
presence, only two discreet brass plaques:  one, with its name, the other,
identifying it as a Summit International hotel.

Down the avenue at 48th St., an antique clock atop Victorian lettering
introduces the Renaissance amid a visual onslaught of the Times Square
neighborhood neon.  Like the Michelangelo, its entrance is conspicuously
simple.

Welcome to "hospitality heaven," anchored at 45th and Broadway to the south by
the Marriott Marquis in the heart of the theater district, and to the north by
the New York Hilton at 53rd St.  and the Avenue of the Americas, extending
east and west for another half-dozen blocks.  This stretch of rooms with and
without views runs the gamut from glitzy to sedate, with clientele from
tourist to first class.  The names on the marquees are familiar:  Holiday Inn,
Sheraton, DoubleTree, Embassy Suites.

Beyond the guest room doors, the bars and restaurants and shops, however, a
highly competitive business battle is being waged to win the hearts and minds
of upscale business and leisure travelers.  It involves a savvy blend of
marketing and financial strategies that boil down to a common denominator:
service.

But service comes in many forms.  Both Renaissance Hotels International and
Utell International are service and management companies.  Neither owns the
hotels that are their clients.  For the Renaissance group, equity stakes in
some of these clients will broaden the income base.  Utell's client base has
grown from the vast network of travel and reservation agents and Utell member
hotels around the globe that use its reservations and booking systems, to
hotels that carry the Summit International brand, like the Michelangelo, and
are part of Utell's sales and marketing network.  Whether it's reservations or
financial services for travel agents, state-of-the-art technology is the glue
that holds it all together.

Each company has set out to create a niche in a highly competitive environment
that is rebounding from the rampant hotel expansion in the last decade that
sapped profitability.  Now, with an improving global economic climate, a
resumption of leisure travel, and an explosion of business travel, these
competitors are charting strategic courses to guide their businesses into the
next century.  And the name of the game is branding.

When Renaissance Hotel Group N.V.  launched an initial public offering in
September on the New York Stock Exchange at $17 per share, branding was a key
factor.  The IPO is aimed at reaping a return on the investment of its parent,
New World Development Co.  Ltd., a publicly traded Hong Kong company, while
concentrating on what Renaissance does best:  hotel management.  Renaissance
calls itself the only "pure" hotel brand management company in the field:  no
contracting services for laundry and restaurants, no casinos, no
entertainment.  The restructuring brings together its three international
brands-Renaissance, New World, and Ramada-and converts the 28 Stouffer hotels,
acquired in 1993, to the Renaissance brand.

Utell, whose hotel reservations system is considered by travel industry
professionals as the industry standard, has evolved into an integrated sales
and marketing business in the past 25 years.  In 1991, Utell created Summit
International, while it continues to serve travel agents and hotel owners
around the world.  Since its founding in 1930 by travel writer Henry Utell,
the company has passed through three owners and now is part of Reed Elsevier,
the Anglo-Dutch travel and publishing giant.

While their approaches differ, both companies have some common strategies.
They rely on regional management and organization, with local management from
the operating country.  Service is the driver, and enhancements are aimed at
the business traveler and conference organizer seeking first-class
accommodations.

Renaissance has 109 hotels under management around the world, as well as
Ramada Inns in the U.S.  under a master franchise agreement.  The company has
equity stakes in some of the properties under management.  It operates an
integrated reservations system, and is one of five hotel companies
participating in American Express' Membership Miles program.  Renaissance has
its own incentive services, too.  Club Express is a frequent stay guest
program with an email address, Meeting Express is aimed at conference
coordinators, and the RSVP Club rewards people who book guest rooms for other
individuals.  Reaching out to the business traveler, the Stouffer Renaissance
Chicago Hotel a year ago was the first U.S.  hotel to offer a 24-hour retail
Kinko's on-site business center.

Utell represents 6,500 hotels in 164 countries, with 44 sales and reservations
offices.  It is connected to the Global Distribution System (GDS) through
450,000 airline reservation systems terminals worldwide.  Through central
offices in Omaha, Neb., London, and Singapore, it runs a sales and telephone
reservation network that circles the globe.  Among the cornucopia of
technological services afforded to reservation and travel agents is
UtellVision, which offers guided tours via computer terminal of
Utell-represented hotels.  Utell's global reservation service, and sales and
marketing activities, are available to its Summit International hotel members.

"This business is all about sales, marketing, and image," Michael Ball says of
Utell's focus, and its strategy of launching the five-star Summit
International brand.  "Hotel owners still want to build up their hotels.  They
don't want to give up their identity and exclusivity."

Ball wears many hats.  At Utell, he is the worldwide sales and marketing
director, with executive responsibility for the development and implementation
of strategy.  At Summit International, he is the managing director, where his
watch also includes Insignia Resorts.  And in several months, he will add
another topper when the company launches a third brand.

One would not be off course to include the Utell "brand" with those of the
company's branded hotels when the talk turns to strategy.  Utell does not own
hotels.  Indeed, the Michelangelo's owner is Star Hotel Group, an Italian
chain that was seeking a different feel and look for its New York property.
Enter Utell, which handles the chain's reservations system; now, through
Summit International, it provides the marketing savvy.  Sitting in the lobby
lounge of the Michelangelo, Ball points to the hotel's midtown Manhattan
"neighbors" as an example of Utell's role in the business.  "Owners are
competing with all these other brand names within a 10-square block.  They're
saying, 'We need marketing to compete.' Branding in America is everything;
it's not as strong in Europe."

For Renaissance, which posted first-quarter fiscal 1996 net income of $7.8
million on revenues of $29.1 million, building the brand meant consolidating
businesses that joined the New World Development family through a series of
acquisitions:  Ramada, Stouffers, Penta, New World Hotels International.  By
bringing the United States based business under one name, Renaissance aims to
bring added value to the parent and pull in its own return on investment.
Today, Renaissance manages 53 hotels in the Americas, 49 in Europe, and 35 in
the Asia/Pacific region; 94 management contracts have remaining terms of more
than 5 years.  Licensing the Ramada name in the U.S.  contributes close to $20
million per year in cash flow.  The company has 27 new hotels under
construction or development worldwide.

Robert Olesen, chief financial officer and the strategist behind the IPO,
notes that the Renaissance hotels represent $30 million of balance-sheet
equity and $500 million in market equity that were buried in the parent
corporation.  Now New World Development owns 55% of Renaissance, 34% is
publicly traded, and the balance is held by private investors who had owned
50% of New World Hotels International, the Asia/Pacific-based brand that is
part of the revamped company.

Public Access

"For us to sit on their books as a $30 million asset, it's very difficult for
the shareholders of that company to see the value of what's buried in that
very large conglomerate," he says.  New World Development has extensive real
estate interests in Hong Kong and China, and is the largest foreign holder of
land use rights in China.  New World Infrastructure, another unit that went
public at the same time Renaissance was listed, is a partner in developing a
toll road in south China, and is participating in construction of a power
plant.

"Shareholders can't value conglomerates," Olesen observes, citing the
difficulty of assessing values to assets that have different growth prospects,
different patterns for business.  "Now it's easier for the investor to give
proper value to it."  The IPO is a value enhancement for the company.  "When
word got out in Hong Kong, it got attention.  The value of New World
Development stock went up and continued to rise despite the Hang Seng Index
going down.  I think the shareholders in Hong Kong appreciate the values being
recognized."

To maximize value, Olesen adopted a two-step plan:  a tax strategy and a
branding strategy.  The tax strategy involved restructuring the assets
geographically.  "We made a fundamental change in the way we do business," he
explains, "restructuring what was a U.S.  company to where we took the assets
outside the U.S.-the real estate, and management/franchise agreements-and
broke them out from under the U.S.  umbrella.  They're free from U.S.
taxation and are taxed locally.  Then we created a Netherlands company to be
the umbrella.  All our U.S.  assets are in a series of U.S.  companies."

From a management standpoint, this reorganization shook up priorities.  Now,
the first is as hotel managers, and second as managers of real estate.  "It
takes some getting used to.  As a manager, is my goal revenues or
profitability?  And how do I serve the hotel owner?  We view the cash we
generate in a totally different manner than we did four months ago.  We don't
look at that cash as available to invest into new beds, new wallpaper.  It is
to be invested into new hotel projects.  Now we look at hotels, after paying
expenses and fees, as what is the cash flow needed to improve an operation."

New World Development, the Renaissance group's owner, now has hotel capital
expenditures on its balance sheet.  Most of the hotels under Renaissance
management are owned by New World.  Olesen's oversight extends to both the
hotel company and the real estate company.  But Renaissance Hotels is not in
the real estate business, he states.  It is not an owner, but a management
provider.  "Hotel ownership has different investment objectives, lower current
earnings requirements because of the perception of long-term value," he says.
"Management is a fee-based, current earnings business.  It's
profitability-oriented.  In most instances, management agreements give a
percentage share.  Long term, the real estate company is very limited in what
it can do.  Local financing drives the business.  With the management company,
there's not as great a need to go international."

To meet earnings objectives, Olesen is targeting 10% per year growth in the
number of hotels under management.  In the next five years, that translates to
175 hotels.  He expects franchises will hold steady near the current level of
30.  "More would require the acquisition or takeover of another hotel
management company, some outfit with 20 under management," he says.

By focusing on management, Renaissance produces "free cash" that can be
committed to new projects.  "We can buy into equity ownership of the hotel;
that sets us apart from the competition," he says.  A net holding of slightly
less than 20% can be accounted as an investment on the books.  A 20% stake is
worth $5 million.  Currently, five projects are open and operating; five are
under construction.  Olesen would like to add 5 or 10 projects per year with
equity ownership.

Diversification is not part of the plan.  "I'm a strong proponent of focused
business, focused management," Olesen says.  "There are opportunities enough
in the hotel management business that we don't need to get into ancillary
businesses."  He cites consolidation of the hotel industry, and the
consolidation of brands.  "We don't have to focus entirely on internal growth.
There are rebranding opportunities out there all the time."

No Reservations

At Utell, diversification of services is its stock in trade.  Fifteen years
ago, Utell shook up the reservations industry when it broke with tradition on
two fronts.  "Until then, the norm was to represent a few hotels in one
market," Michael Ball recalls.  "To break this approach, we opened offices
worldwide, about one a month until we got to 44.  Also by tradition, hotel
marketing companies don't work with competing products.  We said, 'No.' And we
went from 600 hotels to 6,000.  Most people said it can't work:  'Join Utell,
you join a supermarket.' Those two strategic thrusts kept us busy until the
'80s."

The strategies worked because Utell incorporated a third element:  technology.
In the '80s, PanAm developed Panamac, a joint reservation system for airlines
and hotels.  "We were the first company to recognize the effect technology
would have," he says of Utell's participation in Panamac.  Today, Utell's
reservation system, called UNISON, connects to all of the major GDSs.

"I remember sitting in a room talking about this.  Our view was the business
was going to go to a variable cost business from a fixed cost business," Ball
says.  "Utell became the leading technology agency.  Ask the man in the
street, he doesn't know who Utell is.  Ask a travel agent, he'll say the best
in technology."

Utell's three customers are the hotel, the travel agent, and the traveler.
Half of its marketing is directed at hotels, the other half, at travel agents.
"We're a reservation service.  The market decides where the guest stays.  Our
job is matching expectations."

Expectations within the Utell organization regarding its next strategic move
were another matter.  The 1990s brought a "What's next?"  from management.
"We were faced with the problem of having a successful company that we wanted
to grow by 20% to 25% per annum," Ball says.  "There was the danger of doing
alchemy in reverse:  taking 6,500 hotels and 44 offices and converting that to
a small, traditional reservations company."

Just as dramatically as Utell's numbers had zoomed, growth was capped.  "We
saw the need to build loyalty with existing partners.  So we stopped signing
up hotels and focused on restructuring to build loyalty."  Regionalization
replaced the British-oriented company based in London.  The three head offices
were established, and corporate staff was slashed to a half-dozen from several
hundred.  In addition to London, Omaha, and Singapore, a Mexico office looks
after Latin America, and sales and marketing are based in Secaucus, N.J.
"Thinking global, acting local" became a mantra.  In Europe, Utell has a
policy that all employees must speak three or four languages.  And employees
regularly are transferred to different countries.

To make a success out of its new game plan, Utell capitalized on a company
staple:  cutting-edge technology.  Ball credits this commitment, and the
creation of the Summit International brand, as pivotal in Utell's strategic
success.  As a service provider, technology is becoming Utell's most
marketable product.  Ball draws fine distinctions when describing the roles of
Utell and Summit International in the lodging industry universe, but
ultimately there is a synergistic interplay.  The Summit client, by his
description, does not need the management and finance support, or the neon
sign.  It needs technology.

"Our hotels are concentrating on managing rooms.  We're spending $22 million
in 1995 and 1996 with IBM, and we're halfway through and on track and on
budget," Ball says.  The new system is a response to the enormous changes in
reservation lead times, which have shrunk from 21 days to 6, and the enormous
matrix of rates and terms.  "The new system allows access to the Internet.
We're building a home page for Utell.  And Summit is going live on the Travel
Web in January," he says.  These services will benefit the traditional Utell
client and the independent Summit hotel.

Summit International's 71 hotels include 25 added in 1995.  Ball expects a 20%
increase in 1996.  The corporate target is 250 properties in 80 cities.  "The
biggest challenge to our business is to introduce the segmentation," Ball
says, citing the distinction between the Summit brand and the 45 luxury
resorts that bear the Insignia name.  "We'll double the size of the company
every four years.  We've done it the last 10 years."

Utell's challenge is making its name a household word to the traveler in the
way it is to the travel agent.  The Summit International brand, created to
appeal to independent hotels, is the key, Ball says.  And he believes the
evolution of the lodging business after overextension and retrenchment in the
past decade has created a market for the independent.

"For many years, a lot of 'reluctant owners'-the banks-were making decisions
about hotels.  We saw an enormous growth of branded hotels as a result.  Then
the banks began to realize there were alternatives to the brands.  Technology
is allowing greater competition-you've got 23,000 hotels in SABRE-and some of
the more ambitious finance houses are seeing the benefits of going the
independent route."

The influence that comes with name recognition, he believes, can be
transferred to the independent hotels without compromising their independence.
And Summit International is poised to benefit.  "I'd be horrified in a few
years time if travel agents didn't know the Utell name, and I'd be horrified
in a few years if the traveler didn't know the Summit name," Ball says.  "The
strategy is to play at two different levels.  Our growth?  We attribute it to
daring to be different.  We've taken the threat out of technology."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Stack Attack


Why authors think that just because they have a new angle on
strategy-psychological, self help, or sporty-that the new approach makes the
information fresh, is outta my dysfunctional ballpark.  The only way these new
takes work are with humor, self-parody (unintentional does count), or some
redeeming worth buried in the footnotes.

In most cases, the so-called sport/business books bite off much less than they
can chew and then they choke anyway.  There are only so many Heimlich
maneuvers a reader can do.  Sports as an analogy for business...Sports as
business...Business as sports...Business as an analogy for sports.  Watch out,
because this is where this marketing gimmick is going.


Branch Rickey's Little Blue Book:  Wit and Strategy from Baseball's Last Wise
Man, by Branch Rickey.  Published:  Macmillan, New York.

Author's Credentials:  Rickey teams won eight pennants and three World Series
championships between 1926 and 1949.  The book was edited by John J.
Monteleone from 131 cartons of Rickey "stuff" in the Library of Congress.

Thesis:  Resist any tampering of the status quo if you already are
successfully manipulating it.

Scope:  1880s to 1980s.

File Under:  Manager as coach.

Reason to Buy/Read Longer than a collection of quips, shorter than a
collection of essays, it's more absorbing than the typical boys-of-summer
fling.  Features L.B.  Mayeresque Rickeyisms like "An addition by subtraction"
and interesting excerpts from Rickey's scouting reports (which he called
"Prospects & Suspects").

Placement in Your Life:  On the bedside table in the guest room if you suspect
that your weekend guest has designs on becoming a regular visitor.

How to Read:  Read the shaded boxes (the scouting reports) first as you skip
around.  Thread your way through the locker room lectures (junk) and try to
find Rickey's letters and relatively analytical comments on things from the
High School Rule (one of the status quo items he successfully manipulated) to
the farm team system (which he pioneered).

Irresistable Miscellanea:  Before signing Jackie Robinson in 1947, Rickey
spent several years scouting Puerto Rico, Panama, Cuba, Mexico, and the
Caribbean "only to find that the great Negro players were right in our
country."

You will throw this book across the room if:  Cliches along the lines of "If I
was a ditch-digger at a dollar a day I'd want to do my job better than the
fellow next to me" drive you nuts.

Price:  $14.95

Value:  Rickey fanatics:  $12.95 (wait for the bio, some people are not best
in their own words); all others $7.95.


Birdies in the Boardroom:  Golfing Your Way Up the Corporate Ladder, by Joey
West.  Published:  Push Pull Press, JSA Publications, Oak Park, Mich.

Author's Credentials:  Former caddie, golf humor columnist.

Thesis:  Golf is a paradigm for business success.

Scope:  14th century Scotland to the present.

File Under:  Golf think, golf do.

Reason to Buy/Read It ranges from tall tales to subtle humor.  Everything you
need to know about golf as it relates to etymology, history, personality,
grass analysis, and the Tax Act of 1994.

Placement in Your Life:  One of those non-essentials you've absolutely gotta
have.

How to Read:  Skip the odd bits of very basic golf advice-"This is the ball,
no?"-and read everything else.  The only thing missing in this screamingly
funny book is an index.

Irresistable Miscellanea:  In 1457 James II issued a decree prohibiting the
sport of golf, arguing that his kingdom's defenses were weakened due to a
precipitous decline in the skill of archers (who were on the links).

You will throw this book across the room if:  You tire of the lengths it goes
to justify its title.

Price:  $8.00

Value:  Golf lore/humor:  $8.00; has the business sense of a whiffle ball.


The Breakthrough Team Player:  Becoming the M.V.P.  on Your Workplace Team, by
Andrew J.  DuBrin.  Published:  Amacom, New York.

Author's Credentials:  Professor, psychologist, and "frequent guest on network
television."

Thesis:  You can be a superior team player and still stand out from that dreck
you have to work with.

Scope:  Iacocca-'80s

File Under:  Subtitle:  How to let the glory rub off on you while you appear
to be a team player.

Reason to Buy/Read Missed the business/self-help movement of the past 25
years.

Placement in Your Life:  Un-time management, a treatise on doing it all.

How to Read:  Skip anything in italics and anything that starts with the names
Sara or Mark.  Read Chapter Three, How to Avoid Conforming to Group Norms, for
the true message of the book.  Skip around to pick up neat ways of criticizing
someone else's work while advancing your own cause.

Irresistable Miscellanea:  Bausch & Lomb has uncovered the fact that an
estimated 200 million Chinese people need vision correction.  They figure up
to 50 million are potential buyers of B&L contacts.

You will throw this book across the room if:  You won't-a member of your team
will.  And, if it turns out to be a good idea, you'll get credit.  If it
doesn't, you had nothing to do with it.

Price:  $16.95

Value:  Is that pesos?


Finding a Way to Win:  The Principles of Leadership, Teamwork, and Motivation,
by Bill Parcells with Jeff Coplon.  Published:  Doubleday, New York.

Author's Credentials:  Former head coach of Superbowl-winning Giants.

Thesis:  Winners don't need to be recognized as brilliant.  They should be
dominant.

Scope:  Sportswise, 1964 to present; businesswise, 1980s to present;
Parcells-wise, high school to the present.

File Under:  By way of an analogy.

Reason to Buy/Read Abrasive, sarcastic, demanding person writes book by
screaming at meek journalist taking notes.  Interesting and frank perspective
on the narcotic of winning.

Placement in Your Life:  A vacation book you don't mind leaving behind.

How to Read:  Skip the first couple of dozen pages-they're pathetic in their
attempts to reference anything other than sports into the narrative.  However,
Parcells does share some interesting comments on the difference between skill
and talent, the NFL, the Patriots he "inherited," and dogs ("If they don't
bite when they're puppies, they usually won't bite.")  Was there supposed to
be something else?

Irresistable Miscellanea:  While Lawrence Taylor was the greatest player he
ever coached, Parcells considers Dennis Conner (the yacht racer) the greatest
guy he's seen in sports in the last 20 years.

You will throw this book across the room if:  The overuse of gimmicks like
italics and BOLD TYPE IN CAPS drives you bonkers.

Price:  $23.50

Value:  $5.95 (would've been perfectly priced as a paperback).  u


Bristol Voss is the editor of Operations & Fulfillment.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Workplace:  Pass The 10q, Partner


HOW MUCH DO THEY KNOW AND HOW DO THEY KNOW IT?  These are questions likely to
be circulating more frequently in executive suites as corporate leaders take
another look at their workforces through a new lens.

The knowledge under discussion is not about work rules and labor/management
relations, benefits, and overtime pay.  This is about the bottom line-stock
performance, quarterly reports, strategic decisions, capital investment and
expenditures, the costs of doing business-and sharing.  According to a study
released last month by Ernst & Young LLP, U.S.  workers who are treated as
business "partners" are most likely to be more productive and more motivated
to contribute to their company's profitability.

Innovation, according to Timothy Ridge, national director of human resource
consulting at Ernst & Young, is at the heart of the matter.  The initiatives
needed to educate, motivate, and reward employees apply to private and public
companies, union and non-union shops, and will bridge the gap between the
board room and the shop floor, he contends.

This view has been captured by John Case, author of Open-Book Management:  The
Coming Business Revolution (Harper Business, 1995), who says that by learning
how the business they work for works, employees gain a new appreciation for
the company, feel a more direct stake in its success, and, therefore, work
harder to assure themselves the job security they desire.  With a more
knowledgeable workforce, and one that has a stake in the company through stock
options, employee ownership, profit sharing, and bonus plans, the company is,
indeed, a well-oiled machine where all are working for the common good and
"us" and "them" are relegated to the scrap heap.

It's an ambitious effort, and one that has a track record.  Magma Copper Co.
broke the mold in 1991 when it negotiated a 15-year labor agreement with its
unions that built upon the team concept of labor/management relations.  Cost
reductions have enabled Magma to modernize, launch a major U.S.  exploration
effort, and attract the Wall Street capital to invest in Latin America.  The
strategy paid off:  In mid-December, Australia's BHP made a $2.4 billion offer
for the company.

More recently, Southwest Airlines negotiated a 10-year pact with its pilots'
union that incorporates stock options in lieu of salary increases.

U.S.  Labor Secretary Robert Reich points to Xerox and Ford as two
corporations where economic literacy of the workforce has been fostered by the
establishment of labor/management partnerships.  "It's an extraordinary
revolution of the ranks of organized labor to give up work rules for this kind
of empowerment," he says.

"Employees who really understand where they fit in the company strategy
generate real value," Reich notes.  "Employees are assets to be developed,
they're not costs to be cut."  He points to the dual forces of competitiveness
and competing strategies.  "Getting costs under control is the view of many:
cut payrolls, outsource here and abroad.  But there's no sustainable
competitive advantage.  It only comes from what you do uniquely.  Competitive
strength is a product of teamwork.  There's no way we can sustain recovery and
the economy if workers don't have enough pay in their pockets, if their hearts
and minds aren't engaged."

Knowledge Is Power

The Ernst & Young study, conducted December 4-8, was designed to see if a gulf
exists between employees and management.  The results offer an eccentric mix
of responses to 15 key areas.  Ernst & Young interviewed 146 executives (CEOs,
CFOs, senior vice presidents, vice presidents, directors of human resources)
and 251 "rank and file employees" (including managers, customer service
representatives, administrative assistants) at Fortune 1000 companies.

Employees proved to be very well informed on financial issues concerning their
companies, but surprisingly ill informed about the operations side.
Management turned out to be well plugged into the workforce.  Especially
telling was the one question that did not involve communication, but an issue
that cuts close to the bone:  job security.  Only 35% of the employees are
confident management will make sure they keep their jobs.  When the question
was put to senior management, only 26% believed strongly that employees are
confident in them on this issue.  Both groups expect layoffs in the next 12
months:  27% of management, 28% of workers.

But this study was about information issues, and the responses show some
interesting workplace trends.  Both groups think the company keeps employees
well informed about finances and business performance (senior management, 51%,
workers, 53%).  A whopping 70% of the rank and file know stock price trends in
the past quarter, and both groups believe this knowledge is broad based (63%,
54%, respectively).

But only 15% of workers know the cost to manufacture one of its company's
products or the cost of its services.  Most employees (43%) do not think their
co-workers know these costs, while even fewer executives (39%) think workers
are informed.

Workers indicated a need for specific information that relates to their jobs.
Company communications methods, however, are geared to a broader, general
audience:  Newsletters (91%, 84%) and meetings (82%, 73%) command the lion's
share.  Videotapes (43%, 40%) and video conferencing (25%, 28%), both well
suited to a large audience and easy to customize to meet specific needs, were
at the bottom of the list.

Both groups believe employees would be more motivated if they knew how their
work contributed to company profits (77%, 59%).  And most executives (54%) and
workers (53%) think the company helps employees develop new skills to boost
job performance.

Less confidence was expressed by workers asked if management helps them
develop new skills to earn promotions:  44% agree strongly, 8% disagree
strongly.  Contrast this with 42% of management in the affirmative and 1% in
disagreement.

Ernst & Young found the relationship between performance and contribution to
profitability illustrates a desire by workers to change their roles and assume
more decision-making responsibility to benefit the corporate balance sheet.
Management's response was more optimistic (77%) than workers' (59%), however,
when asked if employees will be more motivated if they know how the work they
do helps the company make money.  The second largest worker response group
27%, agreed somewhat to the notion.

Teams represent the dominant culture (80% for both groups), and both agree
teams make their company more competitive (83%, 78%).  Technology improvements
are credited with enabling employees to increase productivity (63%, 60%).

Battling Economic Illiteracy

Open-book management, and the partnering approach, mean management gives up to
get.  John P.  Stack, president and chief executive officer of Springfield
Remanufacturing Corp.  (SRC) in Springfield, Mo., agrees.  Stack says the key
to the strategy in his company was to create a paradigm:  Wipe out the
economic illiteracy problem among employees.  "It was a way to raise capital
and create jobs," he recalls.  "We had to tell them the success of the company
is derived by the success of the balance sheet."

SRC remanufactures engines and engine components; originally, it was the
remanufacturing plant of International Harvester.  Stack was the plant manager
in 1983 when IH, trying to stave off bankruptcy, was selling off assets.  He
and 12 other managers and supervisors bought the debt-burdened plant and
created SRC as an ESOP.  Hourly workers hold 34% of the stock.

Despite the debt, Stack was able to increase the workforce five-fold, lift
productivity and, with it, the stock price.  Annual sales last year are
estimated at $103 million versus $16 million in 1983.  Growth has been at a
rate of 12% to 15% per year, and debt to sales has shrunk dramatically.  "If
you put $100 in the company in 1983, it's worth $2,700 today," Stack says of
the employee-owners' investment.

At AES Corp., the Arlington, Va.-based global electric power company with $2
billion in assets and revenues exceeding $5 billion, Dennis Bakke's view of
corporate culture takes a page from New Age thinking.  "We need to make the
workplace an efficient place without squelching workforce creativity as the
Industrial Revolution did," AES' co-founder, president, and chief executive
officer, maintains.  "We need a paradigm shift.  We need to eliminate
management, the people who train, strategize, make decisions, the things I
learned at Harvard Business School.  Then we also have to eliminate labor,
people who want to be taken care of."

Radical?  Maybe.  But it works for him.  Bakke's view is guided by a culture
that sees business as more than a money-making venture.  He cites a quartet of
"shared" values:  to act with integrity, to be fair, to have fun, and to be
socially responsible.  Bakke argues that 99% of businesses across the board
"still operate on the assumption we're all interchangeable parts."  To counter
this, create a fun workplace, where using one's skills builds loyalty and
dedication and workers enjoy themselves in the process, he urges.

"It starts with radical power sharing, really giving up power," he says,
explaining the unstructured style at AES.  "We don't have any set
authorization limits, no central budgeting.  We don't send information to
people, we try to generate it.  Information sharing is not sending people
information.  There's no central staff operations, except for accounting.  And
if I could decentralize accounting, and I think I have the software to do it,
I will."

Information is free and flowing.  AES employees don't have to wait for
quarterly earnings reports.  Monthly financials are published in the corporate
newsletter, making all employees "insiders."

Partnering

At the end of the day, opening the information loop stands as the critical
element, and workers as business partners the device to redesign the culture.

"Partners get real information, not what management decides they need to
know," Case maintains.  "In business, real information lies in financials, the
balance sheet, sales reports, what's needed to make decisions.  Partners take
responsibility for the business, the exact opposite of the 'hired hand'
mentality.  When you're a partner, making money is everybody's job."

Jim McCann, president and chief executive officer of 1-800-FLOWERS, cites the
"15 minutes of fame" his company has been able to stretch in the past two
years when it's been "white hot," and the challenge of sustaining current high
growth levels for another three years.  "To make that happen, I have to build
a winning culture," he says.  "My real job is to be a cultural engineer."

A former social worker, McCann built his $250 million company in 10 years.
Today, it is the world's largest florist:  2,000 shops, 150 of them company
owned.  Customer service is at the heart of his business, and he uses it as a
tool to empower his workforce-a function of the cultural engineer.  Creating
an upbeat work environment, giving recognition to a people-oriented workforce,
these are fundamental to his strategy.  Customer service, in effect, becomes
an information channel.

His management style incorporates a kind of retro, back-to-basics approach.
"I was the product of the post-war period.  If you were a shopkeeper doing
really well, you couldn't show it.  You had to be discreet.  That's changed
dramatically in 20 years' time," McCann observes.

In the business marketplace, people want to go to work and work hard, and have
an environment that is compelling.  Creating that environment is McCann's job.
Innovation is the key.  He points to Ben & Jerry's for ice cream, Swatch for
watches, WalMart for retail as shining examples of this approach.  The culture
factor opens a window on why businesses struggle, he adds, pointing to Kmart's
financial woes:  "The difference with Kmart and WalMart, I think, is that Sam
crafted a culture."  That culture carries an openness unheard of in highly
competitive fields like retailing, a strategy McCann emulates.

"You must teach what ownership is all about," Stack says.  "The objective is
to match people with opportunities.  Something magic happens when people begin
to understand (how business works)."  SRC's employee-owners, with their
initial $100 investments 12 years ago, are a perfect case in point.  "The
people who started with our company have $60,000-in Springfield, Mo., that's a
house.  The trouble is, now they want a boat, and all the other things.  But
change shows they can get it."


Going Global:  Exploring The "Intranet"

Networks command a lot of IT management's time, in part because of their
strategic importance and in part because they are complicated and built on
fast-changing technologies.  But there are emerging alternatives to
do-it-yourself networking, starting with the Internet.  About two-thirds of
the companies in a recent Dataquest survey say the Internet is a key part of
their IT strategy.  Of particular interest is the "Intranet"-the corporate use
of the Internet for email and collaborative, groupware-like applications.
"Some companies are relying very heavily on the Internet for internal
communications and abandoning their own efforts to create parallel networks,"
Erik Brynjolfsson, a professor at MIT's Sloan School of Management, observes.

In the area of more robust, international networks, some vendors are starting
to offer global telecommunications services.  Their target customers:
multinationals that traditionally purchased network services on a
country-by-country basis from various local carriers, usually state-owned PTT
monopolies.  The new breed of global service provider intends to do away with
that hassle by offering "one-stop shopping," allowing multinationals to get a
wide range of voice and data network services in all the countries where they
have a presence from a single source.

The advent of global service is the result of political and financial efforts,
rather than technological breakthroughs.  More and more countries have been
deregulating their telecommunications markets, making it possible for a vendor
to offer cross-border, end-to-end service.  But creating a global capability
takes a tremendous amount of capital and technical expertise, a burden that no
provider wants to shoulder alone.  As a result, vendors have been aggressively
forming partnerships, joint ventures, and alliances.

"Each of the major country PTTs and telecom companies are linking up madly in
a series of marriages to be able to provide a global infrastructure," John
Scholes, president of Regent Associates International, in East Hartland,
Conn., says.  These ventures include World Partners, a product of AT&T,
Singapore Telekom, and several other PTTs; Concert, formed by British Telecom,
and MCI; and Phoenix, formed by Sprint, France Telecom, and Deutsche Telekom.
The opportunity for these companies is clear.  For example, after just a year
and a half in the market, Concert offers services across dozens of countries
and has signed up more than $700 million worth of customers.

Despite such rapid advances, true one-stop shopping for global telcom services
is not quite here yet, observers say.  "Pieces of it are in place," Scholes
says.  The remaining portions should come together quickly as deregulation
comes to more markets-including most of Europe's, which are scheduled to be
open in 1998.  As regulatory barriers fall, prices will come down and global
reach will increase.  "There will be more choice," Scholes notes.  "Companies
will be able to buy from a number of partnerships, choosing those that can
offer them the most services worldwide."  -P.H.


Alcoa Builds A Superhighway

At Alcoa, the maxim "Think globally, act locally" is not just a slogan.  It's
a blueprint for the company's organizational structure.

"We do not have a single business.  We have a whole array of businesses, with
very different customers and very different customer behavior," Keith
Turnbull, vice president of strategic analysis/planning and information, says.

Pittsburgh-based Alcoa, the world's largest aluminum producer, posted record
1995 revenues of $12.5 billion.  The company's businesses are in sectors as
diverse as aerospace, transportation, and construction.  Its 169 operations
sites span 26 countries and run the gamut from bauxite mining in Australia to
the manufacture of auto parts in Brazil, building products in Belgium, and
bottle caps in Japan.

So when Alcoa announced in November a $150 million joint venture with
Microsoft and Hewlett Packard to build its own information superhighway to
connect more than 15,000 computers in the Alcoa system, Wall Street pricked up
its ears.

"Better and faster access to information is the lifeblood of Alcoa's strategy
for maintaining product quality, serving worldwide markets, and building
partnerships with our customers," Paul O'Neill, Alcoa's chairman, said at the
time.  Alcoa's corporate strategy has kept the company a Wall Street favorite,
even in tough economic times.  The joint venture, called the Common
Infrastructure Initiative (CII), gives Alcoa the ability to leverage
technology as it leverages its industry position in international
manufacturing joint ventures.  And it takes Alcoa to the next step in the
corporate evolution begun five years ago.

In 1991, to get closer to its broad customer base, Alcoa reorganized a
centralized corporate structure into 22 business units, each with the freedom
to align its processes and products with its customers.  Among other things,
that means those units are free to pick their own information systems.

Initially, these systems were effective in supporting local operations, but at
the enterprise level, they had to be strung together so information could be
moved throughout the corporation.  For example, Alcoa found itself with eight
different email systems.  "We have to put them together, we interface them and
translate them," Turnbull explains, all of which impedes information flow and
adds to the complexity and cost.

Last autumn, Alcoa began rebuilding its systems using the same hardware and
operating system software around the globe.  "The decision was that we would
craft a common infrastructure that would cross over all the business units and
provide a capability for the aggressive and convenient sharing of
information," Turnbull says.  And CII was born.

When completed in mid-1997, CII will deploy 10,000 Microsoft Windows NT
workstations running Microsoft Office and 450 servers running components of
Microsoft BackOffice.  There will be a single, integrated email system.
Hewlett Packard is providing project management through the implementation
phase, hardware configuration and delivery, and ongoing support that includes
a help desk.  In the first phase, now underway, 250 of the servers will be
installed, 4,000 desktop computers will be replaced or upgraded, and the help
desk will be open at some 150 U.S.-based businesses.

This uniformity will make it easier to manage the systems centrally and
distribute software upgrades over the network.  At the same time, it will
leave Alcoa's business units with the local processing power and flexibility
they need to work with specific customers in specific markets.  "This is a
common infrastructure that we can play across," Turnbull explains.  "But we do
not impose a way to run the business."

He likens the CII to building a road.  "The people who design the highway
don't decide who will use it, or how many trucks there will be on it.  But
they do decide what the lane width will be, what the curvatures will be, so
each trucker can make independent decisions about how to travel.  It's just
common enough to make it useful, and just free enough to make it
entrepreneurial and adaptive."

When the project is complete, employees in one part of the company will share
a wider range of information with employees in virtually every other part,
accelerating overall responsiveness and decision making.  "The speed with
which we can deploy questions, draw back the data, clock the responses, and
feed it back for worldwide interaction-you just can't match it," Turnbull
says.  "With commonalities of technology, your ability to bounce that back and
forth is really fast and pretty painless."

The simplified sharing of information will make it easier for business units
to tap into the wealth of knowledge located throughout Alcoa.  While customers
vary, production technologies often are similar.  Business units can learn a
lot from each other by directly sharing breakthroughs and transferring new
technologies and techniques.  "It's very useful to be able to trade best
practices from one location to another," Turnbull observes.  "Ideally, that
trading should not have to climb up some hierarchy and come back down again."

Finally, a common infrastructure helps management keep its eye on more
competitive issues.  If one of Alcoa's automotive units is developing a new
process, "they don't have to decide what kind of desktop hardware or server to
use-and those aren't really going to determine whether your business succeeds
or fails," Turnbull says.  "The infrastructure decisions are already crafted
and deployed, so they get to skip that and concentrate on what it takes to
make a better car.  The efficiencies come from being able to spend more of
your time dealing with the business issues, and less of your time dealing with
infrastructure issues."  -P.H.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Clippings


Teambuilding:  Whoa, team!

Everybody's cheering on corporate teams, but they're not infallible.  From:The
Paradox Principles, by The Price Waterhouse Change Integration Team.
Published by Irwin Professional Publishing, Chicago.

Teams are pervasive.  According to a recent survey, 68 percent of Fortune
1,000 companies were using self-managed work teams in one form or another in
1994.  But not everyone sees teams as effective.  Here are some common
problems:

1.  Teams assigned to inappropriate tasks.  The greatest error of all is to
form a team as a knee-jerk reaction to a problem that an individual ought to
tackle.  Teams too often reflect a manager's reluctance to take action or to
empower someone to "get it done."  Teams are not appropriate for all tasks.
2.  Inadequate commitment to a clear performance objective.  The single most
important determinant of team performance is that each member understand
clearly the team's performance goal and that each be fully committed and
mutually accountable for its achievement.  This is seldom the case.  Many
teams are simply patchworks of people who would like to achieve an objective
but who have no unifying obsession to get it done.  An important corollary
here is that team goals should be explicitly connected to significant
issues-and this connection must be ratified by senior management.  3.
Inadequate (and inappropriate) training.  By and large, team training is a
mess.  People come into teams with diverse experience, technical abilities,
and-most important-social skills.  Seldom is the training crisply focused on
what this team needs to know.  Training is abundant but often unfocused and
unproductive.  When we asked one interviewee what he had learned from a series
of sessions on self-directed work teams, he responded, "I learned that you
need an agenda for meetings"-and in so many words, he added, "and not much
else."  4.  Unrealistic management expectations.  When management sees teams
as a way to transform the organization beyond the teams' specific goals, the
use of teams is likely to disappoint.  There is little evidence that teams
have changed whole cultures or radically altered employee attitudes toward the
organization.  Most teams are groups.  We've been working in groups for
decades amidst cultures strong and weak.  5.  Indecisiveness.  Teams are
rarely as decisive as the individuals who make up the team.  How can they be
when they're struggling to gain consensus, make everybody happy, and craft a
compromise solution?  Teams should produce better ideas.  But those ideas will
be of little use if they arrive too late.

Technology Watch:  Net results

From the keynote address to Comdex/Fall 1995 by Louis V.  Gerstner, Jr.,
chairman and chief executive officer of IBM Corp.

If you look at microprocessors, memory, software, storage, you'll see that the
laggard of the technology family has been communications technology.  PCs and
servers have become enormously powerful, but they communicate through the
equivalent of soda straws.  All that is changing.  Very powerful networking
technologies-principally ATM-will be the next phase of computing what the
microprocessor was to the current phase.  I think the most profound
implication of this new technology is that it will change the nature of
computing itself.

If the communications link between the PC and the network is cheap enough,
fast enough, and has virtually unlimited bandwidth, why not migrate a lot of
the functions that currently reside inside the PC to the network-the
applications, the data, the storage, and even some of the processing?  This is
not a throwback to the mainframe era.  End users will still have the
user-friendly features they value in PCs.  They'll click on applications, and
response time will be just as good, if not better.  And because we won't have
to stuff this new device with lots of technology, it can be much less
expensive to purchase, maintain, and upgrade...

When will network-centric computing arrive?  Well, it's already arriving-just
look at the Internet, the most powerful and important of all networks.
People, organizations, and networks are connecting at a rate no one expected,
and that pace will continue, if not accelerate.

I think we'll see network transactions-electronic commerce-take hold very
quickly.  The final step-pushing the applications, operating system, storage,
and processing up into the network-will take longer.

A lot of people are looking for network-centric computing to pay off in the
consumer space first...but we are seeing it take off first in businesses....
That's because while I've talked a lot about technology driving us toward
network-centric computing, technology is only an enabler of a much more
powerful force:  a whole new way that...companies, have conceptualized their
strategic priorities.  They've discovered a powerful new form of leverage:
the leverage of organizational knowledge as a means to compete more
effectively and to differentiate themselves in the marketplace...

The most important, most valuable, most sought-after content in the world
belongs to corporations and large institutions.  It's created and collected
every minute, around the world:  intellectual property, designs, market
intelligence, supply and demand, customer trends.

The problem is, this knowledge is spread across incompatible computer systems.
It's distributed across PCs in various departments, it's locked up in desks
and filing cabinets, and, yes,some of it is locked in the heads of employees.
Powerful networks can unlock this knowledge and move it to the people who can
use it effectively.  This drives shorter cycle times and allows teams of
people to become more productive and creative.

Computer Analysis:  Shrink rap

If you believe your employees or your customers won't respond to "cold,"
computerized response systems, you may adjust your thinking after reading this
from Reengineering Human Resources, by Lyle M.  Spencer, Jr.  Published by
John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Eliza is a computer program developed by MIT computer science professor Joseph
Weizenbaum in the 1960s to test artificial intelligence ideas about
human-computer interactions.  This program essentially acts as a nondirective
Rogerian psychotherapist.  Rogerian therapists reflect:  they repeat whatever
their clients say in a caring, questioning "tell me more" tone.

When you load Eliza, the screen displays a welcoming message:  "Hi!  I'm
pleased you want to talk with me.  What would you like to talk about?"  If you
type "I'm angry at my girlfriend/ boyfriend," the computer, using
psycholinguistic analysis, identifies the feeling word "angry" and object
(boy*/girl*) in your sentence and asks you:  "Why are you angry with him/her?
Tell me more."  The program continues a slightly stilted but plausible
conversation, politely prompting you to explore your thoughts and feelings for
as long as you want to play with it.

To Weizenbaum's astonishment, the finding regarding computer empathy was that
MIT students and other adults who used Eliza actually preferred the computer
shrink to human psychotherapists.  Clients found the computer more caring,
more accurately empathic, and more responsive.  And, of course, Eliza was
always available, 24 hours a day, with complete privacy, on students' own
terminals, free, or at least immensely cheaper than a $100-an-hour,
hard-to-get-an-appointment-with human therapist.

Marketing:  Can I see your ID?

From Building Strong Brands, by David A Aaker.  Published by The Free Press,
New York.

In Japan, corporate brand-building efforts often are aimed primarily toward
current and prospective employees.  An impact on customers is seen as almost a
bonus, and certainly not as the only benefit.  Japanese firms consider it
vital that employees feel pride in their firm because of its values, purpose,
past success, and future goals.  They believe that workers who feel this pride
will then be more effective and motivated and will buy into the group
activities and culture that are at the heart of the Japanese management style.
Corporate advertising in Japan is thus largely justified on the basis of its
internal impact.  In contrast, employees in the United States and Europe are
rarely considered to be an important audience for the corporate advertising
effort.

Stimulating Strategic and Organizational Change In Japan, firms often engage
in corporate identity (CI) programs, the goal of which is to obtain consensus
among a broad cross-section of employees as to what the corporate identity
should be.  The process not only results in a corporate identity for which
there is "buy-in" among employees but it also provides a vehicle to stimulate
change and renewal within the organization.  For example, in 1985 a broad set
of groups within Asahi Breweries discussed the identity and vision of the
firm.  The result was a new attitude that made Asahi Dry and other programs
feasible.  One tangible sign of the new Asahi was a decision to change the
firm's rising-sun logo, which was more than a century old.


Management:  Language lesson

For managers, powering their own speech patterns may be as important as
empowering their staff.  From The Art of Framing, by Gail T.  Fairhurst and
Robert A.  Saar.  Published by Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.

Linguistic anthropologist William O'Barr and his colleagues have identified
several "powerless" speech forms:

Hedges:  language that reduces the force of an assertion by allowing for
exceptions or by avoiding commitments, such as "sort of," "a little," and
"kind of"

Intensifiers:  language that increases or emphasizes the force of an
assertion, such as "very," "definitely," "very definitely," and "surely"

Hesitations:  "meaningless" expressions, such as "oh well," "let's see," "so,
you see," "uh," "um," and "you know"

Questioning forms:  use of rising question intonation a the end of what would
otherwise normally be declarative sentences, such as "I weigh 125?"  or
"Definitely we could do that?"

Intangible Assets:  Designer labeling

From Why Firms Succeed, by John Kay.  Published by Oxford University Press,
New York.

Reputation is the most important commercial mechanism for conveying
information to consumers.  But reputation is not equally important in all
markets because customers find out about product characteristics and product
quality in many ways.  Sometimes they learn from searching.  Other attributes
become apparent as soon as a product is used.  The importance of reputation
can be seen in those markets-from car rental to accounting-to which product
quality is important but can be identified only through long-term experience.
In these markets, reputations are difficult and costly to create but, once
established, can yield substantial added value.

Empowerment:  If it's not one thing, it's another

Is "power to the employees" your new corporate mantra?  It may not be enough.
From Focused Quality, by Harvey K.  Brelin, Kimberly S.  Davenport, Lyell P.
Jennings, and Paul F.  Murphy.  Published by John Wiley & Sons, New York.

When visiting a major hotel chain's property, the enthusiasm of the staff was
obvious.  A front desk clerk wore a large button that said "I'm empowered."
When asked what that meant, she said, "I can do anything to keep a customer
happy so long as I don't give away the property."  She was asked how and
replied, "If something goes wrong, I can give you one of these green tickets
for a free drink or meal and if needed even a room."  However, when asked
whether she ever looked at the processes to avoid having to compensate for
mistakes, she answered with a worried look, "What's a process?"





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

The Last Word


Intelligence-artificial or otherwise-bombards us from all directions.  It's
not surprising that Steve Martin, playing a cutting-edge neurosurgeon in "The
Man With Two Brains," saw a major business opportunity.  Entire rooms, floors,
even buildings are dedicated to the kinds of technological advances Dr.
Hfuhruhurr couldn't begin to imagine...and that's not counting the "flesh and
blood" thinkers.

So we asked some experts about intelligence, and gave them carte blanche to
pick their descriptive niche.

"Intelligence is understanding what you don't know, and where to find the
answer."

-Donald Dinan, international trade attorney and partner, O'Connor & Hannon


"Intelligence can be knowing where we're not going.  Sometimes an aggressively
executed non-strategy is as good as a strategy."

-Thornton May, vice president, Cambridge Technology Partners


"Intelligence is the product from the gathering of secret information for a
variety of possible purposes, including to support policymakers, in response
to military needs, or to offer conference negotiators an advantage of advance
notice of adversary intentions."

-David Whipple, executive director, Association of Former Intelligence
Officers and 35-year veteran of the Central Intelligence Agency


"Intelligence is a person's ability to assimilate abstract or complex concepts
and present them in understandable terms."

-Douglas C.  Yearley, chairman, Phelps Dodge Corp.


"Intelligence is information that's been analyzed to the point where a
decision can be made.  Anything less is just a lot of information.  And we
have too much of that already."

-Leonard Fuld, president, Fuld & Co.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Short Takes


Blanket Coverage

Boyd, Brown & Co.  has come up with a new way to manage your risk if your
business is international trade.  Risk-Transfer, the trademarked financial
product it developed in partnership with Chubb Insurance as the underwriter,
protects the financing of purchase orders for import, export, and domestic
trade transactions by covering them with proprietary specification compliance
insurance.

This insurance provides the collateral required by lenders, guaranteeing loans
will be repaid either from the transaction proceeds or by the insurance firm.
The cost is approximately 2% of the transaction value.  This compares to 3% to
4% typically charged by government or other private insurers.  Commercial
banks, no strangers to economic and political risk, normally require customers
to post collateral for 100% of the trade finance funds advanced.

Boyd, Brown, based in Chicago, is an international trade banking firm
specializing in purchase order financing.  Worth Brown, president and
co-founder, says Risk-Transfer was created "to move the financial risk of
trade from the risk-averse lenders to the risk-accepting insurance carriers."

Protection is extended to issues of quality and late deliveries by overseas
manufacturers, too.  Shipments are tracked to confirm the transaction has been
completed.  Worldwide on-site inspections are conducted for specification
compliance; logistics management services monitor the progress of
transactions.  And, as an extra feature, Risk-Transfer ensures the parties
responsible for transportation, customs clearance, and delivery "are competent
and adequately insured."

Boyd, Brown thinks Risk-Transfer can help solve the industry-wide problem of
"trade dispute" that arises from quality and finance issues.  These are plain
vanilla problems-wrong size, wrong color, who pays?-but can turn a simple
business transaction into the deal from hell because conventional credit
insurance or export guarantys usually exclude coverage when "trade disputes"
occur.

"There are heated battles all the time," a Boyd, Brown spokesman says.  "With
Risk-Transfer, there aren't any questions.  The insurance company pays."

Start Me Up

So you're thinking of opening a branch office in Chile.  The political climate
is warm, the economic climate the best in Latin America.  You know Chile is
the only country in the region with investment grade bonds, more copper than
anywhere else in the world, good skiing, and some mighty fine wines.  But
where do you set up shop?  What about real estate?

Nacore International has rolled out the welcome mat with its 1996 edition of
its International Starter Kit series, or everything you ever wanted to know
about the business climate-specific to real estate-and culture of foreign
countries.  No fear here.  The trade group's 3,300 members manage real estate
for non-real-estate companies.

The choices are many:  Argentina, Brazil, the Czech Republic, Hungary, India,
the Philippines, Russia, and Vietnam are part of the new edition, joining
Chile, China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Portugal,
Spain, and the United Kingdom.

Each Starter Kit includes economic indicators and benchmark comparisons;
benchmarking data for major market rents worldwide; office and leasing
guidelines; expanded travel tips and cultural and business guidelines; and
tips and contact information written by Nacore members doing business in each
country, an instant networking tool.

Members are entitled to three free kits; after that, each kit costs $20.
Nonmembers pay $25.

The kits are the brainchild of Mark Hoewing, Nacore's executive director.  The
research is by Nacore and Colliers International.  Each kit contains a
"culturegram" from Brigham Young University that describes the particular
country, from its climate to its politics.

Is This the Party to Whom I Am Speaking?

Voice mail and poor diction mangle names and numbers ruthlessly.  As
communicators, we've turned into a nation of spellers.  It used to be only
those of us with complex or eccentric surnames (and I speak for legions)
learned the drill from our parents of patiently spelling it out, complete with
little clues like "F as in Frank" for the difficult-to-differentiate letters.

Are businesses immune from these linguistic gymnastics?  Au contraire.  And
thanks to mergers, acquisitions, buyouts, and creative consultants, the name
you hear at the other end of the phone line may have nothing to do with the
party you thought you were calling.

Last year, 1,154 companies took new names, representing 13.9% of the more than
8,300 companies surveyed by Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc., a corporate
identity management consulting firm based in New York, for its 26th annual
tally of corporate name changes.  The survey tracks companies listed on the
New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange, and the Nasdaq Stock Market,
as well as major private corporations and U.S.  subsidiaries of foreign
companies.

The 1995 results show an increase of 4% from 1,114 changes in 1994.  But that
pace trails the 1,285 changes recorded in 1992, the highest since 1991.

"Corporate managers are realizing that a name change should reflect the new
way the company views itself, or the metamorphosis it has undergone," Jim
Johnson, president and chief executive officer of Anspach Grossman Portugal,
says.  "Like the products a company names or the services it provides, a
company's name and identity have to be sold to the public."

So much for "household words."

Corporate image, interestingly enough, jumped 16% from 1994's 179 changes.  By
and large, though, the new "noms de biz" are born out of a variety of reasons:

* n Mergers/acquisitions:  602, or 53% * New corporate image:  307, or 27% *
NYSE or Amex listings:  78, or 7% * Nasdaq listing:  123, or 11% * Financial
sector:  288, or 25% * Manufacturing/industrial:  172, or 15% *
Communications:  182, or 16% * Health care:  139, or 12%

New York led the geographic list with 139 changes, followed by California
(98), Texas (69), Pennsylvania (56), and Ohio (52).

Mergers and acquisitions resulted in a mixed bag of monikers.  Kidder, Peabody
& Co.  disappeared from the landscape when acquired by the re-dubbed Paine
Webber Group, Inc.  And Lockheed Martin Corp.  came into being when aerospace
giants Lockheed and Martin Marietta merged.

While market research may select a name that better conveys a new corporate
focus, consumers may be in for a reality check.  Take Greyhound Financial, now
doing business as Finova Capital.  Or imagine if you're a customer of
Rochester Telephone, returning from a year's sabbatical in Zambia.  Well, say
hello to Frontier Corp.

Mind the Gap

So you've been posted to London.  You have a flat, a travel card, an adapter
for your appliances.  Your friends in Des Moines are filled with envy.  What
they don't know is that your wages and benefits are below those of your new
colleagues in the same office.

Terence Boudreaux, senior marketing executive for Cigna International's group
and employee benefits division, doesn't buy it.  In his view, expatriate and
third-country national (TCN) employees should be paid under the same plan.

"U.S.  expats and TCNs are often paid on different scales-and they know it,
because they often work side by side," Boudreaux says.  "If their benefits
also differ, it can lead to dissatisfaction-usually among TCNs-and,
ultimately, the loss of talented people who figure prominently in the
company's success."

Furthermore, this plan should be distinct from the parent company's U.S.
plan.  Benefit costs average 10% to 20% higher in the U.S.  than other parts
of the world, he notes, making it more cost-effective to the company to cover
these groups under a "carve-out plan" that takes into consideration the
special needs of foreign-based employees.  And the plan should be portable.

"The plan you create for these groups should be structured to follow them
around the world," Boudreaux says.  "A new assignment shouldn't mean a loss of
benefits or require that the employee meet new preexisting condition
limitations or deductibles."

And he urges companies to demand service at least equivalent to U.S.
standards, basics like having one contact point from any location, direct
claim processing, 24-hour access to claim personnel, and specialized services
like language translation and currency conversion.

"Employees don't want to have to pay a $15 or $30 currency conversion charge
when they try to deposit a $50 reimbursement at the local bank," he observes.


Born to Run?

The eternal leadership debate-born or bred-keeps consultants in business and
business schools in vogue.  As companies restructure and business sectors
reinvent themselves, however, more responsibility, power, and leadership
demands are shifting to people without the formal training and, more
frequently, the natural talent.

Development Dimensions International, the Pittsburgh-based leadership training
experts, developed a quiz that reduces leadership issues to its simplest
terms.  To develop the questions, DDI surveyed close to 1,500 people-from
executives to business associates-from 25 organizations in the United States
and Canada:  13 manufacturing companies with an average 500 to 1,000
employees, and 12 service firms with an average 1,000 to 5,000 employees.

1.  Sharing rationale and personal feelings about decisions with employees is
a sign of weak leadership

True ___ False ___

2.  As a leader, I need to step in and take charge if an employee's project
runs into major problems.

True ___ False ___

3.  Delegating just causes employee resentment, plus it takes less time to do
the work myself.

True ___ False ___

4.  When two of my employees are having a conflict, it's best for me to step
in and resolve the problem quickly.

True ___ False ___

5.  In this era of downsizing and restructuring, it is critical for me to keep
open and honest communication with my staff.

True ___ False ___

6.  Leaders should take every opportunity to tell employees what they are
doing wrong.  This will increase productivity and ensure goals are met.

True ___ False ___

7.  It is important for a leader to act as a catalyst-to inspire or motivate
employees as they work on projects.

True ___ False ___

8.  The best way to build employee confidence is to supervise projects
closely.

True ___ False ___

9.  The most important characteristic of a leader is:

A) Ability to motivate employees and inspire commitment

B) Remaining consistent

C) Willingness to promote teams

D) Enhancing employee's visibility

E) Control the way work is done

SCORING:  For questions 1 through 8, score 5 points for each correct answer;
for question 9:  score 5 pts.  for B, 3 pts.  for A or C, 1 pt.  for D;
subtract 5 pts.  for E.

A score of 41-45 indicates you're an accomplished leader; 31-40, your skills
are inconsistent-analyze your strengths and work on your weaknesses.  If you
scored 0-30, better get to work...and read this magazine!

ANSWERS:

1.  False.  Disclosing your own feelings, thoughts, and rationale about a
situation in a balanced way will instill loyalty, motivation, and enthusiasm
in employees.  2.  False.  Taking over when things go wrong, while tempting,
sends the wrong message to everyone.  A leader's role is to provide support
without removing responsibility and coach people to find their own solutions.
3.  False.  Delegation is an important leadership tool.  The challenge is to
consistently match the right person or work group to the assignment and then
provide support.  Delegation maximizes involvement, productivity, motivation,
and growth for the individual and team.  4.  False.  Taking charge, or even
ignoring conflict, is not the best approach because you remove responsibility
for solving problems from the employee.  As a leader your best choices are to
listen and mediate or provide support as the parties work through the source
of conflict.  5.  True.  Fear is the most common reaction to change.  The best
way to allay fears is for leaders to regularly communicate full, accurate
information so employees understand their role in change and what's ahead for
them and the organization.  6.  False.  Feedback should be used primarily as a
tool for growth.  Always giving people negative feedback is de-motivating.
Feedback should be balanced, specific, and oriented toward learning.  7.
True.  Today's most effective leaders place an emphasis on sharing
responsibility, coaching, providing resources, helping people through change,
and forming partnerships.  A catalyst maximizes and stimulates the talents and
skills of others.  8.  False.  With greater spans of control, leaders simply
don't have time to look over someone's shoulder.  Leaders need to help
employees develop self-leadership behaviors.  By helping others to think
through problems, ideas, and opportunities, leaders create an environment in
which high performers do their best work.  9.  B.  Being consistent ranked the
highest in a survey of most desirable qualities for leaders.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Taking Stock Of the January Effect


By Mike Braude


Stock market investment strategies have one ultimate goal-to buy low and sell
high.  If only it were that easy.  The multitude of options available to
investment strategists and portfolio managers today, coupled with the myriad
of vehicles in which to pursue them, often leaves many perplexed.  Some
business people have a clear advantage-they can sense where the market is
headed.  Many cannot-at least not until now.

Twenty years ago, researchers identified an investment opportunity during the
year-end holiday season that has since been dubbed the January Effect.  The
name refers to the tendency of small stocks to outperform larger, blue-chip
issues at the end of one year and into January of the following year.

Since 1975, analysts have spent a great deal of time studying the January
Effect's various degrees of activity.  While market research doesn't suggest
that the financial markets will trend upward each January, it does indicate
that small-cap stocks tend to outperform large-cap stocks at that time,
whether the general market trend is up or down.

Although this phenomenon has occurred nine out of every ten years since 1926,
it went unnoticed for a long time because it is not apparent from following
the performance of large stocks, such as those that comprise the S&P 500 and
the Dow Jones Industrial Average.  In fact, if you look at the S&P 500 for the
period from 1926 through 1985, you'll find no evidence of the January Effect.
However, if you compare the performance of the S&P to a broader stock index
that includes a number of smaller stocks, such as the Value Line Arithmetic
Index, the Effect is clearly evident a majority of the time.

The January Effect is not limited to U.S.  stocks.  Numerous countries around
the globe have experienced significantly higher stock market returns in
January.  In Belgium, the Netherlands, and Italy, the average stock market
return in January has been greater than the average return for the whole year.
In fact, it is the only month of the year with a positive return for every
country.  In 65% of the countries where stock is traded publicly, January
contributes more than 50% of the total return for the year, excluding
dividends.

Why January?

There are investment-driven explanations for the timing of this trend.
Investors tend to sell losing stocks in December for tax purposes.  The
selling pressure forces stock prices below their equilibrium value, and when
the pressure is suddenly released in January, prices spring upward.  Another
theory holds that secondary stocks come under pressure at the end of the year
from window dressing-a tendency by portfolio managers to "clean out" the
stocks of smaller, lesser known companies from portfolios for reporting
purposes.  Stocks are then repurchased after the reporting period ends.  Still
others subscribe to the notion that renewed interest in buying stocks occurs
after the holidays, when investors search for stocks they consider to be
underpriced.

Whatever the reason, the fact remains that during the January Effect period,
small-cap stocks can achieve returns 10 to 12 times higher than those of
large-cap stocks.  The stocks most likely to achieve these gains are those of
companies valued at less than $200 million; issues that underperformed the
previous year; stocks with high betas (the measurement of stock responsiveness
to the broad market) considered especially volatile; stocks with low
price/earnings ratios; and stocks paying no dividends.

Certainly, small company stocks tend to outperform other stocks in general
because their risk is higher and investors expect to be rewarded for this
increased risk.  But the reward they receive in January tends to be far higher
than in any other month.  According to finance professors Robert Haugen of the
University of California and Dr.  Josef Lakonishok of the University of
Illinois, nearly all the risk premium for investing in small firms is earned
in January.

Futures Key to January Effect Trading

Investment strategists, portfolio managers, and others can take advantage of
the January Effect in a number of ways with varying levels of financial
commitment:  taking positions in individual stocks, trading options on
individual stocks, or trading stock index futures or options on the futures.

Of these alternatives, market analysts often suggest stock index futures and
options on the futures for trading the Effect.  Taking positions in individual
stocks, or options on stocks, does not necessarily ensure a broad
representation of the stock market.  In addition to being subject to broader
market phenomena like the January Effect, stock performance is vulnerable to a
range of factors from earnings reports to labor/management problems.

Stock index futures and options, like many other financial index products,
have the benefit of providing the broader market representation while
requiring only one transaction for investment.  Market analysts often
recommend KCBT Value Line futures and options for trading the effect.  The
Value Line Arithmetic Index, on which Value Line futures are based, is
comprised of some 1,650 stocks.  Each stock is equally weighted, so that a
stock trading at $150 per share has the same weight as one trading at $20.  A
3% minimum fluctuation in the price of a stock with 2 million shares
outstanding has the same weight as a 3% change in a stock with 10,000 shares
outstanding.  As a result, the Value Line is viewed as a good indicator of the
secondary, or small-cap, market.

To capture the January Effect, the Value Line can be spread against stock
index futures representative of blue-chip stocks, such as the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange's S&P 500 Index, a capitalization-weighted index that
measures the performance of 500 of the largest, mostly blue-chip, companies;
the CME's Major Market Index for monitoring a broad section of 20 blue-chip,
heavily capitalized stocks; and The New York Futures Exchange's New York Stock
Exchange Composite Index for measuring the performance of the 2,500 stocks
traded on the NYSE.

Recent studies indicate trading the January Effect is more profitable with
small-cap value stocks than small-cap growth stocks.  A growth stock would be
a stock that has a market value significantly higher than its book value,
while a value stock would be a stock that has a market value below its book
value.

New York Stock Exchange small stocks tend to be primarily value stocks.
Nearly 75% of the 1,650 stocks included in the Value Line index are NYSE
stocks.  For this reason, the Value Line index is a logical index for one side
of a January Effect spread.  It also is the only index with two futures
contracts:  the Value Line and the Mini Value Line.  The latter is one-fifth
the size of the larger contract, allowing for greater flexibility.  In
addition to being a vehicle for trading the January Effect, the Value Line
also is an excellent tool for portfolio and pension fund managers to hedge
their stock market risk.

Trading the January Effect

One easy way to trade the January Effect is with a futures spread.  Selling
one blue-chip stock index futures contract (taking a short position) and
buying one small-cap stock index futures contract (taking a long position)
enables investors to capitalize on the relative performance between the
secondary and blue-chip markets.

To initiate a spread, you could buy a Value Line futures contract and sell an
S&P 500 or an NYSE Composite Index futures contract to capture the blue-chip
section of the market.  Hypothetical performance results compiled by the Moore
Research Center based in Eugene, Ore., reveal that Value Line/S&P 500 and
Value Line/NYSE Composite futures spreads produced positive results every year
the contract has traded.

If both indexes go up, the Value Line leg of the spread would make a profit,
while the S&P/NYSE leg would incur a loss.  However, the Value Line profits
would be expected to be larger than the S&P/NYSE losses, making for an overall
profitable trade.

Trading the January Effect through futures spreads is more affordable than
taking actual positions in each equity, because spreads tend to be less
volatile and therefore have more favorable margin treatments.  Transaction
costs could eat away most, if not all, of the potential gains derived from
January Effect trades conducted with the corresponding basket of securities,
and the market impact would be far greater.  Stock index futures allow
investment through one simple transaction for a small percentage of the
brokerage cost of a similar investment in actual stocks.

Options strategies also can be incorporated.  For example, if you are
concerned a declining market could erode the performance of the small-company
side of your small-cap/blue-chip spread, you could protect your small-cap
component by buying Mini Value Line put options.  By buying a deep
out-of-the-money put, whose strike price is lower than the current market
value, you can lower your option premium and, at the same time, help to insure
against extreme losses on the small-cap leg of your spread.  Like the Mini
Value Line futures contract, Mini options have a value of $100 times each
index point, compared with a value of $500 times each index point for Value
Line futures.

Timing the January Effect

As with any commodities spread, timing is an important aspect of participating
in the January Effect.  Research shows the optimum results occur when
positions are initiated in December and liquidated in January, although some
investors may try to put on positions earlier and hold them later.  Professor
William Ziemba of the University of British Columbia and commodities trader
Ross Clark looked at the Value Line/S&P 500 spread from 1976 to 1986.  Their
study, which included making actual futures trades between 1983 and 1987,
found the best time to initiate the spread-buy one Value Line contract and
sell one S&P 500 contract-was on Dec.  15, with a suggested closing out on
Jan.  15.  The four years of actual futures spreads yielded a mean return of
3.47 index points.

In another study, Ziemba and Bruno Vander Cruyssen of Bankers Trust
International Plc, London, updated the futures market performance information
in the earlier study using data from 1983 to 1993.  They found the average
gains in these 10 years of futures spreads was 4.72 points, while the average
gain for cash spreads between 1976 and 1982 (prior to the introduction of
Value Line futures) was 2.23 points.  This second study points out how the
Effect seems to defy the standard market theory that when investment trends
become more widely known, market efficiency means they will no longer work.
Of all the years Ziemba and Vander Cruyssen studied, the 1992-1993 January
Effect was the most pronounced, and the Value Line/S&P spread continued to
narrow through the end of January as small-cap stocks continued their
outperformance of blue-chips.

According to Moore Research, 1994 was another great year for the
small-cap/large-cap index spread, whether the S&P 500 or the NYSE Composite
was used as a large-cap component.  Interestingly enough, the Value Line/NYSE
Composite spread performed substantially better.  For the 12 years studied,
the average theoretical profit has been $1,000 more for the Value Line/NYSE
Composite trade than for the Value Line/S&P 500 trade.

What About November?

Another seasonal trend similar to the January Effect occurs earlier in the
autumn.  Dubbed by some market watchers as the November Effect, it is less
consistent, with a narrower window of opportunity.  Academic research is
minimal.

Moore Research found the optimum time-frame strategy:  initiate a buy Value
Line/sell S&P 500 spread on Nov.  2 and exit the spread about Nov.  11 using
December futures contracts.  Another way is to use the NYSE Composite Index as
the blue-chip component of the spread, using December contracts, initiating it
on Oct.  27 and exiting Nov.  12.  Moore's hypothetical trading results showed
both spreads were profitable 11 of the past 13 years.  Moore Research found
that once this limited effect ends, the broad market tends to dip in mid- to
late November.

New Year Effect

Does the January Effect have a future?  History suggests it does.  But keep in
mind that a number of factors can influence it in any given year.  Take the
recent bullish stock market.  Some observers say the type of stocks leading
the rally can make an impact on the January Effect.  If blue chips are leading
the rally during the January Effect period, the Effect could be subdued.  On
the other hand, if a rally in blue-chip stocks slows at the turn of the year,
bulls may switch to small-cap stocks, enhancing the Effect.

Currency markets may play a role in the January Effect's performance.  A
strong U.S.  dollar tends to enhance the Effect.  A decline in the dollar can
lessen it because of the presumed positive foreign exchange impact for some of
the large, multinational blue-chip companies.

Whatever the market situation, it is important to recember that history is no
guarantee of future market performance.  And as more people attempt to
participate in the January Effect, the opportunity for profit could be reduced
or eliminated.


Mike Braude is president of the Kansas City Board of Trade, which introduced
the first stock index futures contract using the Value Line Arithmetic Cash
Index in 1982.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

The 1996 Business Strategist's Software Directory


THE STEAMROLLER OF TECHNOLOGY MOVES ON.  OKAY.  SO the 1950s predictions of
robots walking the streets have failed to materialize (so far, anyway).
Still, revolutionary software is transforming strategic planning in ways that
even Jules Verne wouldn't have imagined.

In this directory, we've chronicled a few of the latest software wonders that
are recasting business analysis.  We assembled this year's list after
discussions with a number of business professionals and analysts working in
industries from software engineering to food service.  We present software
that improves management productivity and offers tools for superior decision
making-all packages to support strategic analysis with the goal of improving
the bottom line.

While it's no longer news, the 1993 introduction of Intel's Pentium and
Motorola's PowerPC chips opened the gate for desktop PCs to tackle problems
that had been the exclusive domain of pricey UNIX-based workstations.  The
combination of sheer computer power (Pentium and PowerPC), advanced market
analysis tools (idea-building tools, statistical and mapping analysis
software), and global connectivity (through the Internet) are changing the
rules of international business.  Even small, locally owned companies are
experiencing national and offshore competition.  Profit margins are eroding
across industries and markets.  To meet the challenge, players must employ
cutting-edge technology to penetrate and succeed in the worldwide arena.

To address the internationalization of strategic analysis, in this year's
roundup more emphasis is placed on geographic-analysis products than last
year.  Why?  Because more and more strategic marketing questions are best
identified and analyzed on a map rather than in the form of a 40-column by
40-row spreadsheet.  Products such as the hot, new (and pricey) ProphetPoint
from Equifax might have produced in years past a 200-page analysis with rows
of numbers and cross-referencing.  Of course, it would have been nearly
impossible to interpret.  The same data represented geographically is concise
and easy to understand.  While many organizational issues don't lend
themselves to geographic analysis, almost any market, customer, or sales
question does.

In this opening section of the Directory, we've left out the obvious.  While
all of these tools are testaments to the computer's fast-growing role in
businesses of all sizes, from Mom and Pop store to the marketing department of
every Fortune 500 company, there's no write-up on IBM's newly procured Lotus
1-2-3, and we didn't include the standards such as the heavy-weight statistics
package, SPSS.  Since strategists and marketing professionals already use many
of these products, there's no point in going into detail.  However, we have
created a listing section, which follows this one, that updates Business
Strategy's 1995 software directory.

We recommend that you check into each product's reputation and usefulness to
your problem-solving requirements before signing the purchase order.  Some of
these products are expensive (although we think worth the money), and they may
not match your organization's requirements.

This section focuses on fresh new possibilities that may help you reap a
better bottom line.  It examines 21 tools that can help you identify,
quantify, and take advantage of the global market that looms large as we close
in on the second millennium.

Strategic Planning and Market Analysis Tools

In software, new authoring environments for the Internet are making waves for
net surfers.  Internet tools are becoming easier to use, offering features
that allow users to build Web pages quickly and with little computer
programming expertise.  In fact, word processors and page layout programs are
including basic programming for building Web sites.  In terms of analytical
software, the new Atlas Select, from long-time GIS maker Strategic Mapping,
opens the door to affordable mapping technology with a focus on strategic
market analysis.  And Equifax' hot-off-the-press ProphetPoint is a powerhouse
analytical tool that provides, within minutes, existing locations for 10
million businesses and the ability to forecast business growth not just for
next year, but for five years in the future.  Talk about a crystal ball in a
box!  Just the money saved on visits to a consulting palm reader alone
justifies the purchase price.

Editor & Publisher 1996 Market Guide:  A Wealth of Strategic Data for Just
$395

There's no shortage of companies providing demographic data, but what is
unique about the Editor & Publisher 1996 Market Guide is that for a single
price you receive an enormous amount of information to use for surveying
everything from installed gas meters to local newspapers to climate.  That's
in addition to the standard population, household, and retail business data.
(The disc even includes information on the tap water pH!).  The Market Guide
disc includes its own proprietary search engine, which also can be used to
whittle down information and export it in formats compatible with spreadsheet
and database software, and mapping programs.  Maps are included with the
product, and a paper-based version ($100) is available for further reference.

PLATFORM:  DOS 3.3 or better, or Macintosh 6.07 or better.

PRICE:  $395

DEVELOPER:  Editor & Publisher

PHONE:  212-675-4380

FAX:  212-691-6939

EMAIL:

http://www.mediainfo.com/edpub

EasyStreet:  Market Maps in 30 Minutes

Yes, as seasoned reviewers of mapping technology, we'd be the first to admit
that it's not all that easy to use.  But the results are astounding-a clear
analysis of a problem so sticky that a month pouring over spreadsheets can't
disclose what a map conveys in a glance.

Now there's a new mapping program for the rest of us.  EasyStreet is a mapping
environment that presents a series of eight buttons across the top of the
screen.  Clicking on each in turn selects the cartographic data and loads the
attribute data by asking the user to point to the right file.  Finally,
minutes later, the product builds a gorgeous map.  If you've been waiting for
mapping technology to become easier to use, your time has come!  And the
guarantee is real.  If you can't produce a useful map from EasyStreet within
30 minutes, you can return the product for a refund.  Now that's a guarantee
we like.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $495

DEVELOPER:  OverPlay Data Co.

PHONE:  800-OVERPLAY

FAX:  606-225-9257 EMAIL:  (CompuServe) 70353,1604

Proximity:  Market Mapping for Direct Marketers

Of the three geographic market analysis programs described in this article,
only Proximity is designed with the requirements of direct marketing in mind.
Direct mail is one of the fastest growing promotional technologies of the past
two decades.  It's a highly competitive business with the possibility of an
expensive mailing falling flat because of any one of half a hundred factors.

Proximity provides executive-level geographic (GIS) information that helps
users define direct mail efforts and follow-up tools to test hit rates and
market penetration.  Most important, it's streamlined for speed.  Users can
ask relevant questions without getting snared by the technology or hunting
through directories for files with names like VEGASDT4.MAT.

Designed after three years of research into the needs of direct marketing
analysts, Proximity contains built-in geocoding ability that converts
addresses into points on a map.  A mailing list can be mapped along with
income, population, housing, and business locations at the street, town,
county, or state levels.  Or an area can be scouted by zip code or census
block to determine which areas to go after and which to ignore as
inappropriate.  Five-year projections also are included for a glimpse into the
future.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better

PRICE:  $1,995

DEVELOPER:  Decisionmark Corp.

PHONE:  319-365-5597

FAX:  319-365-5694

EMAIL:  dmark@inav.net

Problem Solving and Creative Thinking Tools

While it's true that computers can't really think, even after 40 years of
research into artificial intelligence, they can help you think.  Working with
a computer-based strategist can make it easier for you to work through the
issues in a structured and logical manner.  Your silicon partner may even
remind you of issues you forgot or considered irrelevant to the current
strategic question.  Of course, if you find the session running off the edge
of the map, you can always start over or toss the session into Window's new
recycling bin or the Mac's trash can-something you can't do as easily with
human managers, management, and board members.

4Thought:  A Unique Business Analysis Package

4Thought is one of a new generation of business analysis, modeling, and
forecasting programs.  It works with your input to help you make decisions
concerning everything from product pricing to studying the seasonal impact of
product and service commitments.  Yes, it's hard to describe such a
multi-legged beast in a couple of paragraphs.  4Thought users sit down for a
thoughtful session on a rainy afternoon and build a model of their business
using spreadsheet input.  4Thought's tools are then used to better understand
their business operation and assemble "what-if" queries for the future.

Once the underlying model is complete, barring major strategic revamps of the
company or its product line, queries can be thrown at 4Thought as needed, and
answers divined from the program's analytical capabilities.  Unlike earlier
generations of such software, 4Thought has no problem with building small
models based on limited data.  Data can be imported from Excel, Lotus 1-2-3,
most databases, and SPSS.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $9,500

DEVELOPER:  Right Information Systems, Inc.

PHONE:  800-803-0933

FAX:  508-462-9198

EMAIL:  yeames@coastal.com

Product TechKnowledgy:  Strategic Planning And Portfolio Management

Product TechKnowledgy from NorthPoint is a self-assessment module/model
designed for senior managers for evaluation, planning, and quantity in-house
expertise.  It also is used to predict the critical delivery process timetable
for product delivery.  Using it, managers can build scenarios and subsequent
reports that validate the steps and time estimations for design to delivery
product cycles.  The company also offers a series of risk management programs
in their RiskTech series.  Five products evaluate everything from corporate
stability and prospects to studying tactical business relationships to
understand if a strategic (or deeper) alignment makes business sense.  This is
very unusual and unique software that has been used by everyone from Adobe
Systems to Lotus.

PLATFORM:

PRICE:  $60,000

DEVELOPER:  NorthPoint Software and Services

PHONE:  508-370-4212

FAX:  508-370-4216

EMAIL:  npss@northpoint.com

CRUSH:  Real-Time Market Segmentation and Analysis

From the HOT group (Hands-On Technology) comes "CRUSH-an interactive
multimedia tool that helps sales and marketing management and analysts develop
marketing strategies and action plans for crushing their competition."  (Uh,
no, we didn't write that line.  It came from their press release.)  What we
have here is a database-based tool capable of building competitive "tables"
that allow users to position themselves against the competition.  It even can
be used for the difficult task of comparing one division against another in
order to build the correct separation between them.  The product is based on
the methodology of public relations guru Regis McKenna and contains A/V clips
of his advice.  CRUSH can be customized to fit the profile requirements of
each user.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better, and Macintosh OS 7.1 or better

PRICE:  $499

DEVELOPER:  Hands-On Technology (HOT)

PHONE:  800-772-2580

FAX:  415-579-7739

EMAIL:  info@HOT.sf.ca.us http://www.HOT.sf.ca.us

Intell.Xx:  Real-Time Summarizer and Trend Analyzer

If you've ever been hobbled by your electronic news source providing a
dizzying 200 messages cached from news groups and other sources, Intell.Xx has
a product that can thin the daily deluge dramatically.  Described as
"summarizer technology," this remarkable tool can be employed to reduce the
daily volume of email and electronically distributed news reports by reducing
the text into an outline format of key points, names, and bullets.

Clicking on an article or email message icon opens it in a
reduced-to-essentials view with the elimination of words and sentences to
reveal the important content.  A long-winded email message that might take 5
minutes to read could then be scanned for the highlights in 10 or 20 seconds.
If you're bombarded with email messages each week, think of the time the
Intell.Xx could save you.

PLATFORM:  UNIX

PRICE:  Call for quote

DEVELOPER:  IntellXx

PHONE:  800-718-7180

FAX:  703-524-7401

EMAIL:  None

The Marketing Planning System:  Build Your Own Strategic Plan

The Marketing Planning System includes a self-study program that combines a
five-part notebook, application checks, and actual company case studies.  It's
a computer-based application designed to help users wend their way through the
complex process of building a credible strategic marketing plan, be it for
their own company, a division within a larger organization, or as part of a
plan to be pitched to investors or the venture capital crowd.  This system
produces reports that can be shared with everyone from the investment
community to line management.  To put this unique environment to work, users
follow the software's instructions to assemble the requisite components.  The
software assumes that updating will be the normal path of plan evolution and
is structured to build updates and changes into the patchwork that makes a
quality planning document.

PLATFORM:  Windows

PRICE:  $179.95

DEVELOPER:  Strategic Management Group, Inc.  PHONE:  215-387-4000

FAX:  215-387-3653

EMAIL:  http:/www.smginc.com

IntelAssist:  Transforming A PC-Based Server Into a Virtual Crystal Ball

Looking into the future is something simultaneously attractive and repellent.
While you could make a mint in the stock market or on the red and the black,
not everything in the future is comforting.  And, prescient knowledge would
make life dull.  Before going shopping, you would know what was for Sunday
dinner and if (and when) the Mets will win the pennant.

For business, fore-knowledge is everything.  What new products will be
appropriate for the year 2000?  Will a strategy succeed, barely creep along,
or completely bomb?  In which direction should the corporate helmsman steer
the organization?  What governmental regulatory changes will pop up in
response to social agendas, evolving customs, and an aging population?

The Futures Group, founded in 1971, now offers IntelAssist.  An add-on product
for Lotus Notes, IntelAssist takes users step by step through the process of
looking into the future from a strategic point of view.  Users provide
background information which IntelAssist then frames into "KITs"-key
intelligence topics.  Working with the product, KITs are refined and then
become the basis for building guesstimates of the future.  This process
reduces the questions to those central to the business activities under
consideration.  IntelAssist can also internalize external materials such as
exit polls.  The product's integration with Notes allows you to use it to
query material from colleagues, and all participants in an analysis are kept
up to date on activities and results.  Finally, conclusions are built based on
the data recorded and filtered through this corporate-intelligence product.
Printed reports then form the basis of larger strategic documents for
distribution to members of the team and senior management.

PLATFORM:  Lotus Notes (Windows 3.1 or better).

PRICE:  $25,000 per server (unlimited number of users)

DEVELOPER:  The Futures Group

PHONE:  203-633-3501

FAX:  203-657-9701

EMAIL:  FUTURES@TFG.COM


Productivity Increasing Tools and Environments

The toughest agenda in business is correctly structuring the working
environment to maximize intellectual and physical throughput while containing
time sinks of all kinds.  Here are a couple of products that build
productivity without turning you into palpable material for a Sunday comics
Dilbert episode.

PeopleSoft:  Enterprise-Wide Client/Server Software

There's no shortage of enterprise-wide "solutions" that connect users to
corporate databases and handle everything from order placement to asset
management, but what has been missing was a product accessible to
non-technical users.  While PeopleSoft requires skilled engineers to program
applications for each corporate user, the unique toolbox included with the
product builds elegant applications that come down to fill-in-the-blank
routines that won't intimidate people who can hunt and peck their way through
an entry screen.  Add-on modules include manufacturing administration
packages, product distribution control systems, financial superintendence, and
a massive database management and reporting facility.

Companies that haven't invested in Oracle or other related client/server
products should take the time to check out PeopleSoft.

PLATFORM:  Enterprise-wide

PRICE:  $100,000+

DEVELOPER:  PeopleSoft, Inc.

PHONE:  800-947-7753

FAX:  510-946-9400

EMAIL:  http://www.peoplesoft.com

KEYview:  See the Internets In a New Light!

Who hasn't downloaded that hot file from the Internet that's a must-have for a
market opportunity, the grist for the mill of an important strategic plan, or
simply important background information, only to be unable to open the file?
While both Windows and the Macintosh system software include simple
applications for translating or opening foreign files, these prove either
incompatible or choke on the size of large files.

Now there's KEYview, a Windows-based platform for open, view, convert, and
print more than 24 popular text and graphics format files.  Once open, using
the built-in conversion routines, the file can be saved in a format supported
by the user's computer and application software.  For more convenience,
KEYview has hooks into popular Internet access and email tools including
Netscape, Mosiac, and this company's EXPLORE.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better

PRICE:  $49

DEVELOPER:  FTP Software

PHONE:  800-863-4548

FAX:  508-659-6297

EMAIL:  info@ftp.com

http://www.ftp.com


NamePro:  Is Your PC A Name Dropper?

One of the most thankless corporate tasks is naming a new product, service, or
subsidiary.  Scene One:  You short-list a bunch of name ideas, and in a
meeting run them by stone-faced colleagues, who remains silent while they
weigh their responses.  Scene Two:  You employ several consulting companies to
find a name for you at $100 per hour.  They come up with ideas you already
scratched off when devising your short list.  Scene Three:  You spend a few
hours with NamePro and build a series of names that fit the company's agenda
in just an afternoon.  If the committee gives a thumbs down to your short
list, you head back to your cubicle and, in two hours, produce yet another
list, or 10 lists, or 100 lists!

That's what NamePro can do for you.  Setting up the eclectic search parameters
produces a list of names that, with some yea-and-nay sorting, quickly builds a
credible list of ideas.  Best of all, NamePro is almost a joy to work with in
comparison to hours spent over a yellow legal pad scratching out ideas and
pondering options while wiping sweat from the brow.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $495

DEVELOPER:  The Namestormers

PHONE:  214-350-6214

FAX:  214-350-7617

EMAIL:

70401.2710@compuserve.com

Location Quest:  Setting Sight On the Right Site

Site location is one of the hardest problems for strategic managers concerned
with complex issues such as trade area, local demographics, natural and
artificial physical barriers and access, and surrounding locations of arch
competitors already in place.  GIS software has become the weapon of choice
for choosing sites, but most GIS packages require the addition of multiple
sets of expensive data, and there's a learning curve associated with each.  In
fact, it's entirely possible that an undertrained strategist might make the
wrong decision using an out-of-the-box mapping product because of choosing the
wrong data or simply inept operation.  Since most GIS packages are "general
purpose" in nature, users must be very familiar with the dozens of available
functions, options, and controls.  And, a poorly constructed market map is
just as convincing as one assembled correctly.  Mapping technology is only as
good as the weakest link.

Now there's Location Quest from PHH Fantus Consulting.  It's not a mapping
package, but a product specifically designed for site location, and it comes
with a robust set of data for just this purpose.  Most important, site
selection can be set up quickly, even given the numerous variables the product
explores.  And, unlike GIS software, Location Quest poses questions that help
users build the site analysis without first spending hours setting up a
general-purpose mapping program for a site location session.  The process
produces comparison tables of labor costs, cost per square foot, and more-all
of the vital information that makes one site more attractive than another.

Once the "Q&A" session is complete, the product provides a snapshot of
potential locations with an analysis of each.  The search then can be further
refined to narrow the list of possibilities.  A separate module helps analyze
complex project requirements, such as time to completion, and one that
provides community profiles.  It's an amazing product.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $6,000

DEVELOPER:  PHH Fantus

Consulting

PHONE:  800-345-8155

FAX:  206-886-0917

EMAIL:  (none)

Data Visualization:  San Diego Computer Center (and other sites)

Not really a product (yet) is full power, computer-based, territorial data
visualization.  Used recently to persuade wanted war criminal Radovan Karadzic
that the boundaries of the new Bosnian state were drawn to reflect geological
and not political features, these computer-generated landscapes allow users to
virtually "fly" over the countryside.  Data for such a flight is collected
from many sources and then converted into a virtual landscape that can be
explored from the air or "walked" to study the finer points of the geo-image
if data with the appropriate level of detail was collected.  Amazing.

PLATFORM:  Advanced visual workstations (e.g., SGI, Cray).

PRICE:  N/A

DEVELOPER:  San Diego Supercomputer Center

PHONE:  619-534-5000

EMAIL:  redelfs@sdsc.edu

[Note:  As important as this center would seem to be to America's
technological prowess and competitive edge, the San Diego Union-Tribune
reports congressional budget cuts may shut SDSC permanently.]

VIASOFT:  Reengineering The Turn of the Century

COBOL-just the word bring shivers to legions of systems analysts and those
responsible for modernizing mainframe computer software built in the 1960s and
1970s.  COBOL was conceived as a "temporary" programming language for the
military back in the late 1950s, but somehow has survived into the 1990s.  At
this writing, there's ever reason to believe it will be with us until the next
millennium.

As the heart of many of today's airline reservation systems, banking
environments, and more uses than we can chronicle here, COBOL is here to stay.
At least for a while.  VIASOFT (their caps, not ours) builds software that
allows software engineers to study the coding monoliths and repair and update
them.  Everything from abends (bugs) to "dead code" can be found and
eliminated with VIASOFT's intelligent "re-engineering" products.

But now the company has a new product to fix something you see reported at
least once a year in the Sunday paper-major computer systems that can't handle
the awkward transition to the millennia they were built for five or six years'
use back in 1965.  Well, VIASOFT offers a product that can be used to bring
these dinosaurs into the next century without tears.  Impact 2000 is a "phased
approach consisting of specialized consulting services and technology to
handle the century turnover problem."

Good.  Otherwise most mainframe system will revert at the turnover point to
the year 1900.  This worries credit card companies that bill for purchases
because buyers could dispute a VCR purchased, according to the system, 50
years before the invention of video technology.  Or imagine your discount
long-distance service charging you for a call made in 1905!

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $40,000-$200,000 (includes vendor technical support)

DEVELOPER:  VIASOFT

PHONE:  800-525-7775

FAX:  602-840-4068

EMAIL:  http://www.viasoft.com

NewsNet:  The Strategist's Buzz Source

No it's not new, but it is updated daily, and a new interface makes it much
easier to use than ever before.  Based on 800 business news sources, NewsNet
is the first place to turn when doing a keyword search on markets,
competitors, ownership, "reorgs," and just about anything else imaginable.
Unlike the massive DIALOG and NEXIS databases, NewsNet focuses almost entirely
on business, and its interface isn't as difficult or intimating as are the
interfaces of other two.  (At no charge, we once did a text DIALOG search for
a book.  The on-line time amounted to a multi-hundred dollar bill as the
search was badly constructed.)  NewsNet works more like CompuServe with a
window of easy-to-use options through a Windows interface called Baton.  You
can also set up the service through NewsFlash to automatically garner articles
on a selected topic as soon as they appear on the wire.  Other options include
the availability of on-line reports and access to American Business
Information, Inc.'s data on 10 million companies and corporations within the
United States.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $15 per month plus 25 cents per minute of connect time, $1.50 a minute
for downloads.  Other miscellaneous charges may apply, but the service
apprises users of most charges beforehand.

DEVELOPER:  NewsNet, Inc.

PHONE:  610-527-8030

FAX:  610-527-0338

EMAIL:  none (Yes, it's hard to believe that an on-line service lacks an email
address, but that's what they told us in two calls to their headquarters.)

CD-ROMs in Print:  A CD-ROM Guide to CD-ROMs

CD-ROMs in Print is a complete guide to all the discs that fit.  Formerly a
MecklerMedia product, it's now in the hands of the Gale Research people.
Currently you can purchase Gale's new print version for $130, and the
CD-ROM-based version is being extensively revised and will become available
sometime this year.  (The Meckler version is still available from Gale, but
it's significantly out of date according to a Gale spokesperson.)

Containing about 12,000 titles made by approximately 4,000 companies, this is
equivalent to a Books in Print for CD-ROM users.  The disc includes a separate
keyword search engine for DOS and Windows.  Because both the book and the disc
contain listings for all kinds of discs (everything from games to CD-I
offerings), probably 80% of the listings won't be of interest to business
users, but the disc contains a reasonably comprehensive listing of business
CD-ROMs and demographic data discs.  Reviews from the now-defunct CD-ROM World
magazine are also included but only on select discs profiled in the magazine
before its untimely demise in 1994.

PLATFORM:  MS-DOS, Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $129.95 (print).  Pricing not set on the revised disc at this time.

PUBLISHER:  Gale Research, Inc.

PHONE:  313-961-2242

FAX:  313-961-6348

EMAIL:  mcdonald@gale.com

What Lies in the Future?

We could have used IntelAssist or 4Thought for this very brief conclusion, but
guesstimating is more fun.  The big growth in strategic software will be in
the area of information management-what to do with the reams of paper the
supposed paperless office produces-and in even better business forecasting
engines.  But next year, don't remind us of what we predicted in this year's
column.


Kim Baker and Sunny Baker are principals in Baker & Baker, a high-technology
marketing and consulting firm based in San Diego and authors of Market Mapping
and 15 other computer, cooking, lifestyle, and business books.  Sunny Baker
also is director of information technologies at the University of California
at San Diego.

Atlas Select:  Market Analysis Software For Senior Strategists

GIS software has been around since the late 1970s, but only within the past
few years has it become reasonably easy to use.  Strategic Mapping is a
long-time player in the GIS market.  Atlas Select is an extension of their
flagship, Atlas GIS.  Equipped with the kind of data sales and marketing
strategists require for in-depth analysis, this comprehensive package
overcomes one of the persistent objections to GIS technology in business:  the
need to buy data separately.

Not only do you get this excellent mapping engine, but a large quantity of
data ships with the product and is included with the purchase price.  This
includes everything from Arbitron Areas of Dominant Influence (ADO) to a
robust set of Census data.  Optional data required for in-depth analysis of
the United States is also pressed onto the same disc that includes the
product.  This includes almost any kind of information required for a
strategic analysis of markets, market share, and five-year projections of
growth.  You simply choose the datasets you desire and then purchase
"MarketData Units" from Strategic Mapping to unlock the information.  This
allows users instant access to the data they require without the wait for a
third-party data provider to deliver.  And without having to geocode or
convert incompatible data files.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better PHONE:  408-970-9600

PRICE:  $1,295 FAX:  408-970-9999

DEVELOPER:  Strategic Mapping EMAIL:  http://www.stratmap.com

Prophetpoint:  The "Pointman" For Strategic Planners

Equifax purchased National Decision Systems (NDS) several years ago.  Instead
of using consumer and business credit records, all NDS data is either
carefully researched by this division or purchased from top data suppliers
across the nation.  Now Equifax/NDS offers this unique
product-ProphetPoint-which allows users to quickly quantify
business-to-business markets by number of employees, income, location,
customers, and much more.  All data can also be researched by SIC code and
size.  In fact, according to Equifax, the database contains more than 300
billion variables.

No, it's not inexpensive, but it's an awesome product for senior sales and
marketing managers in Fortune 500 companies.  It's a variation on GIS
technology in which, with a single query or two, simple answers can be
obtained from even complex data.  Although it looks much like a GIS product as
it builds maps, it is unique.  Unlike generic mapping environments,
ProphetPoint produces definitive answers to tough marketing questions within
seconds.  Need to know instantly how many matchbook manufacturers there are in
Michigan?  Then this is the product for you and your company.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better PHONE:  800-699-8990

PRICE:  $110,000 FAX:  619-550-5800

DEVELOPER:  Equifax Business EMAIL:http://www.cts.com/~ends/ Geo-Metrics

Quick Insight:  Petest Your Product Strategy

Strategic planning Q & A?  Yes, Quick Insight is a useful tool for debugging
(or debunking) any kind of product-related strategic planning document.  Using
it, the Edsel would have never appeared in automobile showrooms, Sony would
have signed onto VHS early, and Newt Gingrich would have announced that he
wasn't running for President months before he did.

This software is an unusual addition to the strategic planner's weapons chest.
Its methodology helps not only experienced planners, but also those new to the
game.  Quick Insight's raison d'etre is to help users determine the strategic
justification for introducing a new product or service.  As everybody knows,
these introductions are enormously expensive in terms of both cash and
corporate resources.  A product that bombs in the marketplace not only
"outplaces" many of those unfortunate enough to have championed its
introduction, but leaves companies with egg on their faces as the press howls
about money wasted and corporate incompetence.

Quick Insight depends on the user to feed it information and then returns a
"vote" of sorts on the product or service's prospects in the marketplace.
Just the process of answering the 60 or so questions the software poses can
help strategists sold on an idea come to grips with a frank appraisal of the
product's success or failure potential.  Quick Insight looks at competitive
advantages, regulatory environment, competition, risks and benefits, the sales
channel, pricing, and promotional strategies before arriving at its "vote."

Once the questions are answered, Quick Insight produces a "score" determining
a go/no-go/needs work scenario.  According to the company, the process takes
about two hours.  (It took us about 90 minutes to study a fictional outbound
telemarketing pizza business in which the company calls people and asks if
they would like to purchase a delivered pizza for dinner.  Quick Insight
produced a resounding and completely appropriate NO to the concept!)
Completing the process produces a printed evaluation that can be used as the
underpinning of a merits (or lack thereof) of a new concept.

It's too bad that Gavilan Computer, the inventor of the first battery-based
portable personal computer, that spent $32 million in venture capital before
going bankrupt, didn't have Quick Insight at its disposal.  You do remember
Gavilan Computer, don't you?

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.  PHONE:  512-251-7541

PRICE:  $129.95 FAX:  512-251-4401

DEVELOPER:  Business Resource EMAIL:  72203.2004@compuserve.com Software, Inc.


This Year's Software Models:  Updated For Strategists

Compiled by Sunny Baker and Kim Baker

There is an abundance of companies offering software appropriate for improving
business analysis and increasing productivity.  Obviously, we cannot list all
the products here, but present instead a rich sampling to let you know what's
out there.


ANALYTICAL COMPUTER SOFTWARE

A family of packages for marketing, survey research, political polling, sales
analysis.

Platform:  Windows, DOS

Research Connections

434 Sandford Avenue

Westfield, NJ 07090

(908) 232-2723



ANALYST WORK STATION

Analyst Work Station and other MSA products provide analysis tools for market
researchers, analysts, and planners.

Platform:  Macintosh, Windows

Management Science Associates, Inc.

6565 Penn Avenue at Fifth

Pittsburgh, PA 15026

(412) 362-2000



ARC/INFO

A sophisticated geographic information system (GIS) with special-purpose
extensions for use by environmental researchers, government agencies, business
planners.

Platform:  Windows and others

Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc.

380 New York Street

Redlands, CA 92373

(714) 793-2853

(714) 793-5953 (fax)



ARTEMIS PRESTIGE

Sophisticated project management software to facilitate decision making
through critical path planning, resource management, costs, and more.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh

Lucas Management Systems

12701 Fair Lakes Circle, Suite 350

Fairfax, VA 22033-4914

(610) 770-1464



ATLAS GIS

Atlas GIS is a full-featured mapping program with a diverse range of data
products, both proprietary and from general government and commercial sources.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Strategic Mapping, Inc.

4030 Moorpark Avenue, Suite 250

San Jose, CA 95117

(408) 985-7400

(408) 985-0859 (fax)



AUTOMATED CUSTOM RESEARCH SYSTEM

A complete, integrated research package designed by real researchers for
sophisticated analyses.

Platform:  Windows and others.

ACRS Division

M/A/R/C Inc.  P.O.  Box 650083

Dallas, TX 75265

(214) 506-3400



BEST PROFILER

A profiling application that can import many different data formats for
various segmentation and forecasting applications.

Platform:  Windows

Quantum Consulting

2030 Addison Street

Berkeley, CA 94709

(510) 540-7200



BUSINESSINSIGHT AND PLANWRITE

More powerful business analysis and planning software from the makers of Quick
Insight.

Platform:  Windows

Business Resource Software, Inc.

2013 Wells Branch Parkway, Suite #305

Austin, TX 78728

(800) 423-1228

(512) 251-4401 (fax)

72203.2004@compuserve.com



CHAID SEGMENTATION SYSTEM

Performs various market research functions for cross-industry use.

Platform:  Windows

Statistical Innovations, Inc.

375 Concord Avenue

Belmont, MA 02178

(617) 489-4492



CHECKMATE

Strategic planning software with customized industry applications.

Platform:  Windows, DOS

Strategic Planning Systems, Inc.

P.O.  Box 13065

Florence, SC 92504

(803) 669-6960

(803) 673-9460 (fax)



COMMANDER PRISM

Multidimensional spreadsheet forecasting program that uses English-language
formulas.

Platform:  Windows, DOS

Comshare, Inc.

Wolverine Tower, 3001 So.  State St.

Ann Arbor, MI 48108

(800) 922-7979

(313) 994-4800

(313) 994-7148 (fax)


CONJOINT DESIGNER AND RELATED PRODUCTS

Conjoint Designer develops designs for use in full-profile (concept-testing)
conjoint analysis studies for product development and pricing, which is
applicable to virtually all industries.

Platform:  Windows

Bretton-Clark

North Tower, 14th Floor

89 Headquarters Plaza

Morristown, NY 07960

(201) 993-3135

(201) 993-1757 (fax)



CONQUEST

A desktop marketing information system that provides visual display of a vast
array of databases.

Platform:  Windows

Strategic Mapping

70 Seaview Avenue

P.O.  Box 10250

Stamford, CT 06904

(800) 866-2255



DATAMAX

Completes exploratory data analysis with 3-D graphical user's interface for
market research, product comparison, and business and financial analysis.

Platform:  Windows

Echo Solutions

1010 North State Street

Orem, UT 84057

(801) 226-7800

(801) 226-6533 (fax)



DPL

A decision analysis application with easy-to-use graphics display options.

Platform:  Windows

DPL Sales Department

Applied Decision Analysis, Inc.

2710 San Hill Road

Menlo Park, CA 94025

(415) 926-9251

(415) 854-6233 fax

dpldep@adainc.com



FORECAST PRO

Forecast Pro allows analysts to forecast hundreds of items quickly and easily
for cross-industry use.

Platform:  Windows

Business Forecast Systems

68 Leonard Street

Belmont, MA 02178

(617) 484-5050



GAIN

Enables researchers to do customer and market trade area analyses using their
proprietary customer data, competitor information, and publicly available
information including demographics, census figures, and zip codes.

Platform:  Windows

Urban Science Applications, Inc.

200 Renaissance Center, 12th Floor

Detroit, MI 48243

(313) 259-6933

(313) 259-1362 (fax)



GOALWARE

Organizes and breaks down goals into elements needed to achieve them.

Platform:  Windows

Positive Change Unlimited

186 Beacon Street

Boston, MA 02116

(617) 247-0276



GEOQUERY

Mac-based analysis-level mapping program that is affordable and full-featured.

Platform:  Macintosh

GeoQuery Corp.

475 Alexis R.  Shuman Boulevard,

Suite 385E

Naperville, IL 60563-8453

(708) 357-0535

(708) 717-4254 (fax)


ITHINK

Maps out business and organizational processes for strategic and tactical
planning.

Platform:  DOS, Windows, Macintosh

High Performance Systems, Inc.

45 Lyme Road., Suite 300

Hanover, NH 03755

(603) 643-9636

(603) 643-9502 (fax)



MAPINFO

A leading mapping product that runs on a number of platforms.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh, others

MapInfo Corp.

200 Broadway

Troy, NY 12180

(800) FAST-MAP

(518) 274-8673 (in New York)

(518) 274-0510 (fax)



MARKET MASTER

A sales contact management software package that tracks contacts and leads;
can monitor a sales program's success.

Platform:  Windows

Breakthrough Productions

210 Park Avenue

Nevada City, CA 95959

(916) 265-0911

(916) 265-8036 (fax)



METHODOLOGIST'S TOOL-CHEST & RELATED PRODUCTS

Programs designed for corporate research and strategic analysis.

Platform:  Windows

The Idea Works, Inc.

100 West Briarwood

Columbia, MO 65203

(800) 537-4866

(314) 445-4554



NEGOTIATOR PRO

Provides electronic performance support for sales, account management,
purchasing, labor management, and negotiation systems.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh

Negotiator Pro Co.

35 Gardner Road

Brookline, MA 01246

(617) 738-9300

(617) 734-3308



OPTION FINDER

This software promotes participation in idea generation and evaluation of
critical options to produce insight and alignment.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Option Technologies, Inc.

1275 Knollwood Lane Mendota Heights, MN 55118

(612) 450-1700

(612) 450-9413



PRIZM SEGMENTATION SOFTWARE

Software for customer/prospect profiling, targeted direct mail, new product
development, media planning, and site planning.

Platform:  Windows

Claritas, Inc.

53 Brown Road

Ithaca, NY 14850

(800) 876-6732



PROBE PC AND FORESTAT

Time series, advanced time series, and forecasting applications that also
provide a direct link to public databases such as Citibase and IPSHARP.

Platform:  Windows

Concurrent Technologies

One World Trade Center, Suite 7967

New York, NY 10048

(800) 345-3895

(212) 524-7760



P-STAT

Includes several software programs for data analysis and economic research.

Platform:  Windows

P-Stat, Inc.

230 Lambertville-Hopewell Road

Hopewell, NJ 08525

(609) 466-9200

(609) 466-1688 (fax)



QUALITYTEAM

A change management system that allows users to monitor the progress of a
project or product change process.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh

Scopus Technology, Inc.

1900 Powell Street

Emeryville, CA 94608

(510) 428-0500

(510) 428-1027 (fax)



QUESTMAP

Maps questions, ideas, and information for group decisions.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Corporate Memory Systems

11824 Jollyville Road

Austin, TX 78759

(512) 918-8000



QUIK-POLL

Creates surveys with up to 99 questions and tabulates up to 2,000 replies for
cross-industry use.

Platform:  DOS

Touch Base Computing

106 Woodcrest Drive

Rome, GA 30161

(706) 234-4260



RESEARCH MACHINE

Performs a variety of research functions for planning and survey research.

Platform:  Windows, UNIX, and others

Pulse Train Technology Ltd.

6232 North Pulaski Road

Chicago, IL 60646

(407) 842-4000



SAS SYSTEM

A family of information delivery products for analyzing and presenting data
integrated with an applications development environment for large end-user
organizations.

Platform:  Mainframes; Windows version

SAS Institute, Inc.

SAS Campus Drive

Cary, NC 27513

(919) 677-8000



SAWTOOTH SOFTWARE

A family of products for computer interviewing and market research.

Platform:  Windows

Sawtooth Software, Inc.

1007 Church Street, Suite 302

Evanston, IL 60201

(708) 866-0870



SCAN/US

An affordable, data-rich mapping product that combines decision support,
database management, and geographic information functions.

Platform:  Windows

Scan/US

2040 Armacost Avenue

Los Angeles, CA 90025

(800) 633-9568

(213) 820-8931

(213) 826-0933 (fax)



SICBASE AND POSTSEARCH

Software that enables you to look up SIC codes with ease and clean up your
database searches.

Platform:  Windows

Pastel Programming Co.

HC56, Box 6038

Sidney, MT 59270

(406) 482-4180



SMARTFORECASTS

A time-series forecasting program that doesn't require previous experience in
statistics.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Smart Software, Inc.

4 Hill Road

Belmont, MA 02178

(800) SMART-99

(617) 489-2743

(617) 489-2748 (fax)



SPSS

Leading statistical analysis program and add-on modules for cross-industry
research, general data analysis, and statistical trend analyses.

Platform:  Windows, Mainframes

SPSS, Inc.

444 North Michigan Avenue

Chicago, IL 60611

(800) 543-9262

(312) 329-3500

(312) 329-3668 (fax)



STATGRAPHICS

A statistical analysis package with more than 50 types of graphs.

Platform:  Windows

Statistical Graphics Corp.

2115 East Jefferson Street

Rockville, MD 20852

(800) 592-0050 ext.  425

(301) 984-5123 (Maryland)



STATPAC GOLD

Program designed for survey and questionnaire analysis.

Platform:  Windows

Statpac, Inc.

3814 Lyndale Avenue South

Minneapolis, MN 55409

(612) 822-8252

(612) 822-1708 (fax)



SUPERTREE

A professional decision tree analysis package for marketing planning,
research, and corporate strategy.

Platform:  Windows

Decision Education Center

2440 Sand Hill Road

Menlo Park, CA 94025

(415) 854-9000



THE SURVEY

The Survey aids in setting up questionnaires or other research tools for
marketing and opinion research, human resources analysis, marketing
management, and cross-industry analysis.

Platform:  Windows

Cybernetic Solutions Co.

3479 West 7480 South

Salt Lake City, UT 84084

(800) 359-3386

(801) 568-1190



SURVEY PRO

Conducts surveys with professional results for market research, customer
satisfaction measurement, and training needs.

Platform:  Windows

Apian Software

P.O.  Box 1224

Menlo Park, CA 94026

(800) 237-4565 ext.  249

(415) 694-2900

(415) 694-2904 (fax)



SYNCHRONY

An information integration tool that facilitates information collection,
synthesis, and sharing throughout an organization.

Platform:  Windows

Sybase Software, Inc.

100 Fifth Avenue

Waltham, MA 02154

(617) 564 6100



SYSTAT

A capable, affordable powerhouse for performing a variety of statistical
analyses.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh, DOS

Systat, Inc.

1800 Sherman Avenue

Evanston, IL 60201

(708) 864-5670

(708) 492-3567 (fax)



TABULYZER

Automates marketing research and analysis and social and political surveys.

Platform:  Windows

Business Research & Surveys

50 Greenwood Avenue

West Orange, NJ 07052

(201) 731-7800



TACTICIAN

A sophisticated mapping product with GIS-level features that integrates
database management, mainframe data access, decision support functions, and
more.

Platform:  Windows and Macintosh

Tactician Corp.

16 Havervill Street

P.O.  Box 4016 BV

Andover, MA 01810

(800) WAR-ROOM

(508) 475-4475

(508) 475-2136 (fax)



TELEFORM

Software that can send a customer an order form via fax, interpret the data on
the fax, and add it directly to a database.

Platform:  Windows

Cardiff Software, Inc.

531 Stevens Avenue, Building B

Solana Beach, CA 92075

(619) 259-6430

(619) 259-6450 (fax)



TELEMAGIC

A complete telemarketing call and client management package.

Platform:  Windows

Remote Control International

5928 Pascal Court

Carlsbad, CA 92008

(619) 431-4000

(619) 431-4006 (fax)



UPTRENDS

A contact management package that tracks, contacts, schedules projects, and
reports on program success.

Platform:  Windows

Uptrends

10555 Old Placerville Road

Sacramento, CA 95827

(916) 368-4484

(916) 368-4490





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Special Focus:  Taking Technology In Hand


ON THE FIRST OF THE MONTH, LIKE CLOCKWORK, MIRIAM Wigdor arrives in the
kitchen of a Taco Bell outlet in Chicago.  She's on a mission-and it's not
stuffing hot peppers into burritos.  Instead, she pulls out an Apple Newton,
her small personal digital assistant computer, and sniffs around the
facilities.  A health inspector, her job is to spot sanitary hazards.  Aha!
Wigdor sights a potential problem and enters her observations into the
booksize, wireless Newton unit.  Next, she pulls from her carrying case a
small, compatible printer and, presto!  creates a report for the outlet
manager.  While this is taking place, her notes transfer automatically into a
file in a centralized system, enabling the company to monitor the situation in
real time.

One year ago, Taco Bell integrated personal digital assistant technology into
the food safety audit system in place at its 4,500 U.S.  outlets, says Joaquin
Palaez, senior vice president of technology and quality at the Irvine,
Calif.-based chain, a unit of PepsiCo.  The inspections are performed by an
outside firm, Audits International of Highland Park, Ill.  Previously, the
approximately 120 inspectors took notes by hand, then recopied them into the
main computer system.  Dozens of extra workers were required to transcribe the
records; up to a week passed before report copies reached outlet managers.

"We needed a system that would let managers make immediate changes," Palaez
says.  "We considered a PC-based system, but thought it would cost too much.
So we came up with the less expensive Newtons."

Personal digital assistant technology has been on the market just two years.
Yet already these portable, battery-powered computers-capable of converting
notes written by hand on their small screens into lettered text-have helped
speed up and streamline operations at a number of companies.

The technology has undergone several lifetimes of change.  The Apple Newton,
the industry leader, will enter its third generation this month when the
latest model, the 2.0, arrives in stores.  The newest Newton is three inches
by six inches, weighs one pound, and costs $699.  Apple executives say it
contains significant technical improvements over earlier versions-which some
users blasted for poor handwriting character recognition capability and
constant battery recharges.  The company says the latest model also boasts
stronger links to local and wide area phone networks for faxing and other
types of data transmission.

Next summer, Apple will launch yet another Newton-friendly innovation that
will unleash even more user functions.  A new variety of Internet Protocol
connective "stack" technology will grant Newton users access to the World Wide
Web.  Currently, Internet browsers are bound to their personal computers.  But
once the new equipment is available, Newton users will be able to enter the
Web from just about anywhere in the world where phone lines exist.

During the whirlwind development period of the last 24 months, several Newton
competitors have emerged, including the Zaurus from Sharp and Sony's Magic
Link.  "The Sharp and Sony products are not wireless, so they are not
high-powered enough for industrial operations," Robert Maire, a Morgan Stanley
technology analyst, says.  "But they can be used indoors as personal
organizers.  At this point, only the Newton is strong enough for outdoor
work."

A sub-industry of Newton-compatible products also has evolved.  The Marco and
the Envoy, both from Motorola, are hardware add-ons that enable the Newton to
take advantage of radio wave technology for wireless transmissions of data.
And new applications, designed expressly for the Newton, expand its
functionality.  Magic Cap software by General Magic in Sunnyvale, Calif., was
designed to help executives organize themselves.  AllPen Software in Los
Gatos, Calif., has written custom programs for more than 60 field users.

After a number of false starts, Apple finally seems to have positioned the
Newton shrewdly in the market.  At its 1994 debut, the diminutive computer was
pitched chiefly as a high-tech personal organizer-suitable for storing
Rolodex, scheduling, and memo information-for use by executives and
salespeople in their offices and on the road.  While the device has found some
acceptance among executives-including Walt Disney Co.  CEO Michael Eisner-many
potential users did not want to put up with the early models' poor character
recognition capability.

In fact, the early Newton's handwriting conversion problems became a running
joke on the Saturday Night Live comedy show and in the Doonesbury comic strip.
At the same time, the computer press took frequent pot shots at the memory
leaks, brief battery life, and poor desktop links that plagued the first
versions.

Gene Talsky, a technology consultant in Bedford, N.H., says the mini-computer
probably never was suited to the daily needs of most executives.  "I'm not
sure how well the product works out for a lot of the initial target audience,"
Talsky says.  "Many executives already carry a laptop when they travel and
also have a PC on their desk at work.  They don't need a personal digital
assistant, too."

After the Newton's positioning as an executive implement got a lukewarm
response from many quarters, Apple marketers began pitching it as a field
tool.

Talsky says that this set of applications appears promising:  "The devices
have a lot of interesting operational uses of interest to corporate
strategists."

Planting Cyber-Seeds

A Newton-based precision farming experiment at Monsanto Corp.  has
far-reaching possibilities.  The St.  Louis agricultural conglomerate
commissioned special mapping software from AllPen and currently is refining
the trial program at its U.S.  test farms.

"The key to precision farming is being able to make site-specific
observations," Marc Vanacht, who heads strategic planning for Monsanto's
Infield Division, explains.  "There was a time when farmers would just do
blanket spraying over vast land areas.  But fields are not homogeneous.  One
area could have a problem with infestation, while another might have
exceptional yields."

"Under the new program, we send our scouts into the fields, and they enter
observations about different land conditions into their Newtons.  Then we use
the mapping software, in conjunction with the military's global positioning
satellite program, to figure out exactly where a given area is on the map.
This allows us to make site-specific observations about where spraying is
needed."

Without the technology, the scouts would have to return from the fields,
compile their data, and key them into a computer before the company's
agronomists would be able to make a spraying recommendation.  Using the
Newton, the scouts can dispatch the data over phone lines directly to the
agricultural decision makers as the data are collected.

"The new system can produce savings of a half-day or more," Vanacht says.
"Often that's enough to save a vineyard or cotton field."

Monsanto has big plans for its new creation, beyond the agricultural
applications.  Vanacht says the company will market its hand-held mapping
technology to transportation logistics, construction, insurance, and law
enforcement organizations.  He thinks it could be sold to just about any other
type of company with a need to pinpoint the locations of delivery stations,
building sites, accident areas, and crime scenes.  If the mapping products
sell well, Monsanto probably will form a new division to develop and market
them, he says.

Making a Power Statement

For the past year, Janis Wheeler, a substation inspector at Idaho Power and
Light Co.  in Boise, Idaho, has experimented with a Newton.  She uses the
computer to make notes about the condition of the utility's equipment while
she moves around the 56 substations she oversees within a 100-mile area.

"After making inspections, I bring my Newton back to the office and hook it up
to a Macintosh," she explains.  "My notes are fed into a database and sent to
a server in our downtown office.  This allows anyone in the company to view
it.  Then they can make work orders or track the history of a piece of
equipment.  Work orders are generated automatically for pieces of equipment
that I have noted have problems."

Wheeler estimates that the technology enables her to do in three weeks the
same amount of work she used to perform in a month.  Before working with the
Newton, she brought her written notes back from the field.  Then, either she
or another worker would enter all her observations manually into the Macintosh
system.  After the data entry, the information would be analyzed, and,
finally, work orders would be issued.  These long waits were dangerous in
situations involving equipment on the verge of collapse.

Later this year, Idaho Power and Light will give Newtons to six other
substation inspectors.  The utility's management is pleased that the
technology reduces its labor requirements.  Wheeler says that since she no
longer needs to perform data-entry functions when she returns to her office,
she has been assigned additional duties.  Based on Wheeler's experience the
company expects to give new responsibilities to the other substation
inspectors after they receive their Newtons.

I Hear America Monitoring

The U.S.  federally sponsored Voice of America last year began using Newtons
to link its network of more than 150 contract workers in 47 nations who
monitor the sound quality of its educational radio programs about American
culture.  The freelancers are stationed in such far-flung places as Armenia,
Nigeria, and Myanmar.  The agency tracks broadcast caliber because it uses
short-wave radio technology, which has significant tonal variations from day
to day and place to place.

Bill Whitaker, director of monitoring resources, says the Voice of America has
devised a one-to-five scale numerical code, with five representing the highest
level of sound quality.  The monitors punch the digitized sound rankings into
their computers.  Then the numerical data is sent by telephone lines into
computers at the agency's Washington office.  Whitaker says all reports are
received within five days of broadcast.

Before adopting the new system, the Voice of America relied on the diplomatic
pouches at local U.S.  embassies-an antiquated and time-consuming method-to
convey handwritten reports back to Washington.  "It could take weeks, or even
months, to get all the reports back," Whitaker recalls.  "And then we had to
enter them in our system.  Now we have information about all our broadcasts
around the world at the end of each week."

Whitaker adds that the new digitized system also allowed the government to
further its downsizing goals by eliminating three data-entry positions.

Newton, the Next Generation

Many telephone companies use surprisingly low-tech methods to give their crews
the locations of equipment problems, assigning clerical workers to keep logs
of work orders.  Workers in repair units are forced to call in each hour or so
to receive updated job lists.

The Dracon Division of Harris Corp., a technology manufacturer in Melbourne,
Fla., is seeking to change all that with a new PDA-type device called the
Craft Digital Assistant, which would allow outdoor employees to receive
information about jobs from their computers.  These workers also could update
equipment files as they complete each task.  Printer capability would allow
them to create copies of bills and other documents on the spot to give to
customers.

The Dracon unit, based in Camarillo, Calif., received licensing rights from
Apple to create the Craft Digital Assistant, which in essence is a
water-proof, "ruggedized" version of the Newton.  The device can be dropped 10
feet without damage.

The technology is in trial stages.  Ken Selig, director of the division, says
Dracon is conducting extensive trial tests for Pacific Telephone Co., the
largest telecommunications lines provider in California.  He notes that
virtually all the other regional Bells, as well as GTE Corp.  of Stamford,
Conn., are experimenting with the Craft product.

The telephone companies are eager for this technology because it can boost
productivity while reducing labor.  In addition, the device's efficiencies
would allow these companies to reduce cycle times on many repair jobs.

In the Chips

One of the most intriguing things about PDA technology is that its ability to
gather information in real time allows companies and entrepreneurs to create
businesses that were not viable when data collection techniques were slower.
Last year Vicky Bradum, a Las Vegas entrepreneur, used Motorola's Envoy to
build a unique service for local hotels called CasinoLine.

Bradum dispatched employees to each of the town's largest casinos to keep
track of the constant changes in jackpot dollar totals.  The changes were
transmitted to Las Vegas' tourist hotels, which posted large signs advising
tourists of the locations of the biggest jackpots.  Although the operation was
discontinued this year, it remains a good example of the types of innovative
applications made possible by these devices.

The Future Is Wow

It is highly unlikely the PDA will challenge personal computers in the
business world.  But the units are carving out a healthy market share, Vadim
Zlotnikov, a technology analyst with Sanford C.  Bernstein & Co., says.  He
estimates approximately 500,000 personal digital assistants were sold in 1995,
making for a $300 million-a-year industry.  Of the 500,000 units, some 300,000
were earmarked for field operations; the remaining 200,000 were used as
personal organizers.

In Zlotnikov's view, the development of PDAs as a corporate operations tool
takes place in three stages.  The first is exemplified by the field uses being
employed by Taco Bell and Monsanto.

"The second stage will be when there is widespread use of cellular
communications to access the Internet or corporate local networks with Newtons
and similar devices," he says.  "Some of this technology is already in place.
But it has not become widely available yet.  I believe it will do so in 1996
and 1997.  It's a question of people becoming comfortable with this
technology.  When they do, we'll see many people use the Internet and company
networks routinely for their email.  People also will become just as
comfortable viewing the Internet from a PDA as from a personal computer."

The third stage will come when the use of high-band radio wave connective
technology, like Motorola's Envoy and Marco, becomes common.

"People know about these devices, but not that many companies have committed
to using them," Zlotnikov observes.  "This technology will allow massive data
transfers between PDAs and office computers.  When it becomes widespread, the
walls between being in the office and on the road will really break down.  It
will no longer matter much where one is located."

A few forward-looking companies already are in the second stage he describes.
When Apple releases its "stack" connector to the Internet this summer, a whole
new universe of business applications will open.  In creating Web sites, many
companies will want to appeal to mobile PDA-linked Net browsers-along with
users who log in from offices and homes.

With PDA and other small computer users in mind, American Airlines last year
began designing a Web site suited to miniature screens.  "You can't use as
much lettering when you have less display space," Joseph Crawley, Web Master
for American Airlines, explains.  "The idea is:  'more thought and less
text.'"

Currently, the American Airlines Web site runs 450 pages.  Among other
benefits, browsers may tap into the airline's massive SABRE computerized
reservation system to purchase tickets and access seating arrangements, or
they may learn if a certain flight is on time or has been delayed.  "This is
the type of up-to-date information that would interest Newton users, who are,
say, riding around in a car," Crawley points out.

A demonstration of the American Airlines' Web site was performed on a Newton
at the Comdex trade show in Las Vegas last November.  "I don't know if it was
the advertising of the future," recalls one attendee.  "But, that tiny site
definitely was the biggest 'wow' of the show."


THE NEWTON 2.0 AT A GLANCE

PRICE:  $699

WEIGHT:  One pound

MEMORY CAPACITY:  2 MB

BATTERY LIFE:  20 hours with rechargable batteries; 50 hours with alkaline
batteries

PERSONAL COMPUTER COMPATIBILITY:  Can be integrated into Windows and MAC
systems

SOFTWARE:  More than 50 programs available from indepdendent developers,
including AllPen, American Airlines, Dayna, Intuit, ON Technology, Socket
Communications

CONNECTIVITY:  Two-way wireless messaging capability allows users to send and
receive email, transmit graphic images to fax machines, get pages, and access
stock quotes and news.

NUMBER OF WORDS IN INTERNAL DICTIONARY:  90,000, up from 10,000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Special Focus:  A Tale Of Three Web Sites


Exponential figures are touted routinely for the growth in the number of
users, the number of information providers, the number of Web sites, and the
amount of money to be made on the Web.  Some of the numbers are realistic,
some are greatly exaggerated; yet, with almost 14 million unique Universal
Resource Locators (URLs)-more commonly known as home pages-currently
available, anyone can find virtually any kind of information on the Web, from
the ridiculous to the sublime.

So, is the proliferation of home pages merely a trend signal of slaves to
cyber-fashion?  Hardly.  Cottage industries have sprouted from less.  All
signs show that business is booming on the Web, across traditional and
nontraditional sectors.  Measuring success, well, that will vary from a
Fortune 100 company to an independent marketer of quality cigars.  It all
boils down to style and substance.  What is the strategy for designing,
developing, building, and operating a Web site?  Before you brush off the Web
as an electronic variation of the hula hoop, take a look at what three
different organizations-Chevron Corp.; Virtual Vineyards; and Amnesty
International-have accomplished on the Web, each with its own purpose and
individual strategy for achieving its goal.

These three Web sites stand out as examples of what can be done
on-line-marketing and selling a product; creating an image; and generating
awareness-through careful strategic planning and implementation.

CHEVRON:  Defining Corporate Image

Not everything about doing business on the Web is linked strategically to
product, sales, promotion, or marketing.  Sometimes, the information takes a
broader, corporate perspective, as Chevron Corp.  has done on its Web site
(http://www.chevron.com).  While a lot of companies developed Web sites just
for the sake of doing it, Chevron has adopted an overall corporate
communications strategy for its site.

"A lot of it has to do with positioning," Mike Libbey, Chevron's team leader
for media relations, explains.  By having a Web site, Chevron is positioned as
a leading-edge company technologically.  And by doing it well, Chevron is
positioned as a company that knows what it is doing.

"This image rubs off on people who may want to buy our products," Libbey says.
"While we're not selling fuel on our Web site, we are positioning ourselves as
experts in the area of fuel, and the Web site itself is positioning Chevron as
a company aware of the latest technology.  It provides an image of Chevron in
the minds of people that we think benefits our reputation, and, by extension,
our business."

Chevron's Web site came into being in November 1994, when Libbey started
defining content and how to propose the concept to management.  As his
exploration into the World Wide Web began, he discovered his idea was not
entirely new at Chevron.

"What we discovered was that Chevron already had an external Web site set up
for demonstration purposes developed by our information technology
subsidiary," Libbey recalls.  "They had had a conference on the Web and its
uses a few months earlier, and had set up the demonstration site with a
different URL.  But, nevertheless, it was available externally.  This actually
turned out to be a big help, since the hardware, software, URL address, and
the networking already were taken care of by our technical people.  All we
really had to do was to work with them to provide the professional content."

Libbey's department provides corporate communications services for print,
radio, and television journalists, so it was only natural for his department
also to provide the Web site content and product development.  Chevron's
information technology department provided the hardware, software, and
networking.

Chevron's Web site is developed on a Unix-based, Sun server, using Netscape
Communications software.

Internal and External Strategies

Chevron followed both an internal and external strategy in its Web site
development.  "Our internal strategy was to establish the corporate
communications department as having the responsibility and oversight for the
content," Libbey notes.  "In examining other early corporate Web sites, it was
apparent that a particular business unit within a corporation had the first
idea to put up a site, and that site reflected the business unit's views
without reflecting the overall corporation's views.  It looked like whomever
had the idea first established what they thought the site should be."

From Libbey's corporate viewpoint, these sites didn't project a wide-ranging
and complete corporate image for a broad audience.  "So our internal strategy
was from the perspective of getting our corporate flag out there, if you will,
because we are corporate professional comunicators, as opposed to marketers or
some other sector of our business."

The external strategy, according to Libbey, was to position Chevron in a
number of ways, each represented by one of the four original areas on its Web
site:  financials, operations, news and views, and what Chevron's Web site
calls the exploration zone.

Chevron's financials "page" provides comprehensive financial information for
investors, potential investors, analysts, shareholders, and anyone else who is
interested in the company's financial performance.  The operations "page"
provides information about Chevron's nearly two dozen operating companies in
the United States and overseas, in every aspect of the petroleum industry.  It
also focuses on the "human equation" behind the statistics, profiling the
people at Chevron and their work.  The news and views "page" offers current
information about Chevron, from press releases to speeches by top executives.

Chevron's fourth original "page," the exploration zone, is aimed at the wide
range of educational audiences looking for information about business,
particularly the oil industry.  The exploration zone contains articles on the
history of the oil industry, and explains the workings of various sectors of
the business, including refining and marketing.

"All of the stories in the exploration zone were already available in print
form," Libbey notes.  "We simply took articles, including art work, from our
stockholder magazine which had many interesting articles on the company, and
repackaged it for the Web.  This allows this information to have a much longer
life."

Libbey already is looking to future refinements in Chevron's Web site.  "My
regular job is manager of media relations," he notes, "so I want to provide as
much information as possible for the media.  What I would like to do in the
future, if I ever get the time, is to enhance our regular press release
material, available on PR Newswire, with additional information, such as maps,
charts, graphics, and background information that can't be put on the wire.
And when multimedia technology becomes more readily available, adding sound or
even video.  In that way, not only could you have a press release where we're
quoting our chairman's words, but you could also download the chairman's words
and watch him speaking them."

Chevron's recent addition of a products and services "page"-which provides
information on Chevron credit cards, its Techron fuel additive, and fuels
manufactured by Chevron-is another area Libbey targets for expansion.

"When you look at the credit card area, all they're doing now is explaining
the different types of credit cards Chevron offers and providing an 800 number
for people to call.  But we're looking ahead at the possibility of on-line
transactions-taking applications on-line, or even billing inquiries on-line.
We have something like 8 million Chevron credit card holders, of which 2
million to 3 million are active users.  Even a small percentage of those
coming on-line would represent thousands of people.  It's going to take a
while, but we're definitely looking at it."

Going On-Line Or Not

Chevron appears to have successfully avoided the pitfall of many Web
sites-sacrificing content for graphics.  "We evaluated several outside Web
page designers, who agreed with us that people don't want to sit there for
long downloads," Libbey recalls.  "We limited our graphics to cut download
time, and yet be attractive and informative at the same time, and our Netscape
software also provides us with much quicker downloads.  Our outside designer
also has a very good relationship with Netscape, for whom he also does work,
which keeps us extremely well informed on the leading-edge technology which we
are pursuing for our site."

Libbey's enthusiasm for the Web is laced with common-sense advice.

"If anyone else wants to develop a Web site, I would say, do it, but think
about who your audience is, what you want to say to your audience, and what
you hope to accomplish.  For example, on our products and services 'page,'
there are several things about our Techron fuel additive and answers to
questions about octane and reformulated gasoline.  These are very carefully
thought-out answers, and I think people who will read them will recognize we
have an expertise in this area, and that our fuel and other products reflect
our expertise."

VIRTUAL VINEYARDS:  A Megabyte, A Jug of Wine, And Thou

One of the earliest developers and practitioners of interactive marketing is a
small company based in Los Altos, Calif., called Virtual Vineyards
(http://www.virtualvin.com).  But don't look for any wine-tasting parties or
tours of its rustic wineries.  In fact, the only way to sample its vintages is
through the World Wide Web.

"Virtual Vineyards is strictly a Web-based company," Robert Olson, president
and co-founder, says.  "When we get the odd telephone or fax order, we put it
into the system by having a clerk use a Web browser, exactly as if the user
had put it in himself.  Older businesses translate Web-based orders into their
existing telephone or paper-based systems; we go the opposite way."

The company is an electronic direct marketing channel for more than 50
wineries and food producers.  Virtual Vineyards doesn't just create Web pages.
"We select the foods and wines, stock them in our warehouse, promote the
products, process orders, and manage fulfillment logistics," Olson explains.

Wine On-Line

Olson didn't start out in wine making or marketing.  In his case, the
technical skills came first, the marketing concept second, and the product
last.

"I got interested in the power of personalized, interactive marketing while
working on an Interactive Television project," he says.  "In many ways, the
Internet is a better vehicle for what we are doing than is Interactive TV,
since it is a more open architecture platform.  I decided that the time had
come for me to do something on my own."

In early 1994, Olson started talking to various retailers about investing in
interactive marketing and interactive stores, but he didn't make much
progress.  "They all just kind of looked at me and said, 'I've got about
$5,000 left in my advertising budget, what can you do with that?' and I said
'Frankly, not much.'"

It was during a conversation with his brother-in-law, Peter Granoff, about the
trials and tribulations of launching a venture that Olson decided he needed to
build a demonstration store "for people to be able to figure out what I was
talking about."

"What I was looking for was something that had three characteristics," he
recalls.  "First, it had to be an information-oriented product, something
where information at the point of sale had a major influence in the purchasing
decision.  I included wine in that category, even though at that time I didn't
know it was wine that would ultimately become our product line.  The second
thing is, it needed to be a product with a distribution problem-a specialty
oriented product as opposed to a commodity-because I didn't particularly want
to be in competition with Safeway, or WalMart, or any other large chain."

The third necessity was having a content expert.

"What I was talking about was in effect a distribution business, which can
live or die based upon both producer and consumer relationships," Olson notes.
"So I needed someone who understood those relationships, to give us a better
chance.  That pretty much described the wine business, and that's about the
way it worked.  Peter was ready for a change, I needed somebody who understood
the product, wine is certainly something that has a lot of appeal to a lot of
people, and thereby hangs the tale."

Granoff, a Master Sommelier, certainly had the background to be content
expert.  Granoff is only the thirteenth American admitted to the British Court
of Master Sommeliers and currently serves as an Examiner and Board of
Directors member for the Court's American Chapter.  In 1991, he received the
James Beard Foundation Sommelier of the Year Award.  Granoff serves as
consulting sommelier and wine director for San Francisco's Square One
restaurant and as visiting lecturer for The Sterling Vineyards School of
Service and Hospitality.

Coming from a computer background at Silicon Graphics, Olson had a pretty good
idea of most of the technical issues involved in setting up a Web site.  "So
Peter knows the products, knows the suppliers, and has a handle on why
customers buy what they do," Olson says.  "I know the computers and the Net."

The initial site was built on an Intel platform manufactured by Micron, using
a Unix operating system.  Virtual Vineyards utilizes the Netsite Commerce
Server from Netscape Communications, a Sybase database, and an ordering
software package called Open Orders from Custom Software.

Marketing The Marketing

"When we first started out, it wasn't too difficult to develop an interest in
our product," Olson notes.  "People were intrigued with what we were doing."

Virtual Vineyards was one of the first Internet-based marketers, and
consequently, the venture received a tremendous amount of publicity as
interest in the Internet and the World Wide Web was growing.

"We have discovered, in general, press coverage works better than
advertising," Olson observes.  "I don't know why that it is, but I think it
may be due to the current crop of users on the Internet.  They may, in fact,
be less susceptible to advertising than your average human being, but all that
may change."

Has Olson been able to turn the publicity into a successful operation?
Virtual Vineyards is privately held-investors include Applied Technology
Partners, Lexington, Mass.; Alpine Technology Ventures, Cupertino, Calif; and
four private individuals, including Olson-and Olson is reluctant to give out
financial data.  He says the company "has been meeting the expectations of its
backers, which is a very important objective."  Published reports have noted
that Virtual Vineyards processes orders for tens of thousands of dollars worth
of wine every month on the Web, with expectations for monthly sales to exceed
$100,000 for December.

It doesn't appear to be too difficult to generate awareness of the Web site.
Virtual Vineyards gets its message out through three different avenues.  The
company buys ads on other on-line service providers, such as America Online
and Prodigy, but Olson says this route "is only marginally effective."

The second avenue is through the traditional channels of the press and various
on-line conferences.  "We've been interviewed on CNN and National Public
Radio, and have had articles about us in USA Today and the New York Times, for
example.  And every time a story comes out, we see a pretty good hit in
on-line traffic, which convinces us it works."

The third way is via word-of-mouth.  "We currently are running a discount gift
promotion to stimulate additional holiday sales," Olson notes at the close of
1995, "because gifts get two people instead of one."

Keeping an Eye on Business

Virtual Vineyards' parent company, Net Contents, Inc., provides computer and
Internet services.  It also consults in the design and implementation of
electronic stores for other companies, including a number of wineries.  Olson
likens the process to working with an architect in the design of a new
building:  The first questions revolve around priorities.

"If you measure success in sales through the channel, you make one set of
choices about content, navigation, maintenance, back office support, and so
forth.  If your goal is to get lots of visitors and cultivate a 'cool' company
image, you make other choices.  Once you know how you are going to measure
your success, it becomes much easier to build a successful site," he observes.

"We specialize in transaction-oriented sites, building everything around
delivering products to customers.  'Cool' in our context means customer
service and value added.  I attribute our success to staying focused on this
business objective.  There is nothing wrong with the many other models on the
Net.  But success on the Web comes from knowing why you are doing the project,
and staying true to your vision."

AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL:  Freedom Through Information

It's often said that one person can't make a difference in this world.  Well,
one person can, if that person is hooked into the Internet, and, more
specifically, into Amnesty International's numerous international, national,
and local Web sites.  ("Official" Web site:
http://www.io.org/amnesty/overview.html; U.S.  sites
include:http://www.traveller.com/~hrweb/ai/ai.html and
http://www.gatech.edu/amnesty/international.html).

Amnesty International's mandate-to free all prisoners of conscience detained
for the nonviolent expression of their beliefs, fair and prompt trials for
political prisoners, and an end to torture and executions-is well suited to
the worldwide communications and information gathering and processing
capabilities of the Internet.  Since it first went on-line a little more than
a year ago, the World Wide Web has allowed more than 1.1 million Amnesty
International members, subscribers, and donors in more than 150 countries and
territories, and more than 8,000 Amnesty International volunteer groups in
more than 70 countries, to report on, monitor, and take action against human
rights violations worldwide almost instantaneously.

"The Internet has enabled us to mobilize our members and others around the
world, " Robin Bernard, director of information technology, says.  "It also
has allowed us to become aware of potential and actual human rights violations
that would not have gotten out otherwise, or would have taken a long time to
get out."

Human Rights Awareness

When Amnesty International first started looking at the Web as an information
and communications tool, the group saw a number of reasons.  "First, we
realized it would be an invaluable human rights tool, by providing human
rights information and education to a wide audience," Bernard says.  "We
wanted to enable people to get involved in saving lives and preventing human
rights abuses immediately with the click of a button.  It also provides us a
means to communicate and collaborate with our volunteers, staff, and members
across the Net in a cost-effective and timely manner."

Amnesty International also uses the Net to promote membership in the
organization, and distributes its publications through its Web sites, as well
as income-generating merchandise such as tee shirts and calendars.  Generating
income is an important strategy for Amnesty International.

"Our system now is set up through volunteers, and various organizations and
universities have given us computer space and time with which to operate on
the Net," Bernard explains.  "We would like to set up our Web site in-house,
to help us be even more effective, if the funding were available."

The Internet and the World Wide Web are especially well suited to non-profit
organizations like Amnesty International, given the lack of communications
networks and options, and government control over communications, in many of
the countries Amnesty International monitors for human rights violations.

"The Internet is virtually the only way to communicate globally in a number of
countries," Bernard says.  During the coup against then Pres-ident Gorbachev
in Russia, for example, most lines of communications in Russia, particularly
in and around Moscow, were cut off.  Initial reports and early confirmation of
the attempted coup were first learned worldwide through individuals and
organizations communicating through the Internet, Bernard notes.

Amnesty International programs such as the Regional Action Network and the
Urgent Action Network are greatly enhanced by use of the Internet.  The 21
Regional Action Networks concentrate their activities on any one of five
regions of the world to assist people subjected to any of the human rights
abuses that Amnesty International opposes in almost all of the world's
countries.

Human Rights Action

Amnesty International's Urgent Action Network consists of a streamlined
procedure for finding and responding to urgent information about threatened
individuals and quickly getting it to a pool of concerned people who agree to
be "on call" to send immediate letters, faxes, telegrams, and aerograms to
government authorities regarding torture, capital punishment, ill-treatment,
extrajudicial execution, disappearance, untreated health problems, death
threats, denial of legal counsel, unacknowledged detention, and forced
repatriation.

An Urgent Action includes specific details about the prisoner as well as
background information regarding relevant patterns of human rights violations
in the country, recommended actions, addresses of responsible governmental
authorities, and general guidelines to use when composing appeals.  Amnesty
International issues several Urgent Actions daily and delivers each one to a
portion of the Urgent Action Network.

Since the largest portion of the Urgent Action Network is made up of
individual letter-writers, the Web is an efficient, cost-effective way to
reach thousands of people simultaneously, Bernard acknowledges.  "The Web
gives us the opportunity to let people know what Amnesty International is,
what we do, and how to get involved," she says.

And like its organizational, educational, and commercial counterparts on the
Web, Amnesty International is carefully watching technological advances and
planning its future Web strategy accordingly.

Technology Assists Strategy

A longer term strategy can be difficult to pinpoint when dealing with the
World Wide Web.

"The way in which the Web is expanding and technology is advancing, we'll
probably be doing things on the Web and using it in ways we can't even imagine
today," Bernard believes.  Amnesty International already uses photographs
extensively on the Web and plans to increase its graphics use.  "It means much
more, and has a greater impact, if you can show the faces along with the
facts," Bernard says.

"And as the technology becomes more available, multimedia capabilities,
including not only words and pictures, but sound, film, and video, will also
become part of our Web strategy," Bernard observes.  "We hope that it will
help our members and other interested persons by giving them information, and
answers to their questions more quickly, and provide the kinds of services to
help us achieve our mandate.  In the commercial world, I guess you would call
that customer service.  In our area, I guess it would be service to humanity."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Special Focus:  Cyber-Strategy


A FEW MONTHS AGO, ALCOA ANNOUNCED THE LARGEST information technology project
in its history, an overhaul of its basic computer infrastructure.  The $150
million effort will span 26 countries and take several years to complete, and
is considered so strategic that Paul O'Neill, Alcoa's chairman, cites his
"personal involvement and commitment to the project."

The effort is ambitious and complicated, but the goal is elegantly simple and
clear:  Let employees around the globe communicate quickly and easily.  When
the new systems are in place, Keith Turnbull, Alcoa's executive vice president
of strategic analysis/planning and information, says, "The person who has an
opportunity and wants to share it can, and the person who has a problem can
find help."

Alcoa's initiative reflects a basic fact of life in the use of strategic
information technology (IT).  Today, IT is focused increasingly on creating
connections-between employees, across functions, with customers, and between
data and decision makers.

To forge those links, companies have rushed with great fanfare and urgency
into client-server technologies, global networking projects, and extensive
reengineering programs.  Many have succeeded and found competitive advantage
in their technology.  But many others haven't.  "When I talk to CEOs and
senior managers, they tell me information technology is much more important
today than it used to be," Larry DeJarnett, vice president of A.T.  Kearney in
Chicago, says.  "But it still takes too long and costs too much, and when it's
done it too often doesn't deliver what they thought they were going to get."

For example, client-server and distributed systems-in which some or all of the
computing load is moved off the mainframe and onto smaller computers-now are
central to most IT strategies.  But some 75% of client-server projects fail,
according to Cambridge Market Intelligence in England.

At times, those failures can reach epic proportions, Bill Carico, president of
the ACTS consulting firm based in Marble Falls, Texas, says.  He cites
published reports of National Westminster Bank's troubled $300 million branch
system that will take several years longer than expected to get up to speed; a
U.S.  Army National Guard system created for thousands of users that sometimes
takes two days to handle an email message; and an extensive EuropCar system
that turned out to be so complicated it "collapsed under its own weight" on
its first day in operation.

Faced with such sobering examples, many executives are approaching strategic
IT projects with a renewed sense of caution and realism, "moving from where
the rubber meets the sky to where the rubber meets the road," Carico says.

At the heart of this trend is a basic tenet:  The effective, strategic use of
information systems relies less on the latest and greatest technology, and
more on how the technology is managed.  And so companies are spending more
time up front, at higher levels in the organization, thinking about how
systems should be evaluated, deployed, maintained, and targeted to specific
business opportunities and problems.

What Kind of Systems?

Increasingly, such thinking revolves around the customer, and progressive
corporate IT departments are investing in technologies that aim to improve
product quality and variety, hone marketing efforts, and enhance customer
service.

These technologies include networks that give frontline employees the product
information they need to help customers on the spot; point-of-sale systems
that let retailers gather data on purchasing patterns and shorten checkout
lines; voice systems that let banks offer phone-based services; and
sophisticated databases that let companies develop detailed profiles of
customers' tastes.

In an age where virtually every company touts its love of the customer, that
hardly seems like leading-edge thinking.  But in fact, IT traditionally has
focused on administrative, backroom operations.  DeJarnett says executives
often are surprised at just how inwardly attuned their systems are.  For
example, when a Fortune 500 manufacturer he advises recently examined its IT
usage, it found only about 30% of its IT resources were oriented toward
external customers and 70% were focused on internal customers.  "That company,
and others I've talked to since, think it's important to shift that balance
pretty dramatically," DeJarnett says.

When companies do make that shift, they often find that some of the internal
systems they've been operating are unnecessary, according to DeJarnett.  When
considering a new system, he advises:  "Put yourself in the customer's chair
and see if you care.  That will tell you a whole lot about many control
systems and financial systems.  Customers could care less what kind of
internal exercises you go through.  They just want the product or service on
time at the right price."

There seems to be a clear payoff from using IT to reach customers.  Erik
Brynjolfsson, associate professor of management at MIT's Sloan School,
recently compared the performance of companies with customer-oriented IT
strategies and those that had more traditional cost-reduction strategies.  "We
found that the customer-oriented ones had substantially higher productivity
and profitability," he says.  "The information technology enables them to have
a richer level of information flow between the company and the customers, and
to give their line employees the information they need to make decisions.  The
companies that used the technology in that way showed a benefit beyond just
saving dollars."

Taking Control

While deploying those frontline systems, companies are developing strategies
to re-establish some degree of central control over them.  As companies moved
from mainframes to distributed systems, buying power shifted from central
information systems (IS) organizations to business units.  According to the
Gartner Group, Stamford, Conn., consultants, 60% to 70% of IT spending now is
done outside of the IS organization.

Too often, Kearney's DeJarnett says, "that creates a version of anarchy, with
everybody doing their own thing."  Departmental systems, bought with no
overall plan in place, often can't work with other departmental systems.
What's more, the variety of systems makes it difficult for technical experts
from centralized IS departments to provide maintenance and assistance, meaning
such tasks fall to "underground support" groups, nontechnical employees end up
spending a lot of time fixing and fine-tuning their computers, rather than
doing their jobs.

Dispersed control over PCs also makes it difficult to target and control
spending at a strategic level.  Gartner Group surveys show that companies
typically spend 5.8% of their total revenues on IT.  Of that, 2% is
centralized IS spending; 2.3% is done by business units, and 1.5% is
unaccounted for.  By 1999, companies indicate their IT spending will reach
8.9% of revenues; 1.6% will be controlled centrally, 5.6% decentrally, and
1.6% will be "lost in the sauce," William Kirwin, a vice president in
Gartner's management of information technology group, says.

Not surprisingly, many executives are rethinking their decentralized buying
strategies.  But that does not mean turning back the clock to return total
power to the technicians.  "IS departments are looking for ways to influence
purchases made by the business units," Kirwin says.  "It's not so much a
question of centralization versus decentralization as it is realizing that
there is going to be a hybrid split of responsibility."

In some companies, that influence is taking the form of standards that
business units must comply with in making purchases.  Typically, the IT
department will dictate what sort of underlying technologies to buy, such as
operating systems and network software.  As a result, maintenance is simpler,
and systems across the company can work together.  For their part, the
business units are then free to use a variety of application software, the
programs they really use to run their business.

Such standards provide an effective balance between central control and
decentralized flexibility and save money along the way.  "Companies that have
gone through these rigorous standardization programs report that their total
cost of PC ownership has gone down by 20% to 30%, which may translate to a
couple of thousand dollars per user per year," Kirwin says.

Handing It Off

At some organizations, the debate over who manages what part of the IT
function is taken to another level.

"We're seeing an increasing willingness on the part of executives to consider
outsourcing," Allie Young, a senior industry analyst at Dataquest in
Westborough, Mass., observes.  Her firm estimates that outsourcing, a $67
billion business worldwide in 1994, will grow to $141 billion by 1999, not
including various types of IT consulting.

More important than the dollar amounts, however, is the changing nature of
outsourcing, she says.  Traditionally, outsourcing has been a cost-cutting
tool; companies would turn their systems over to a vendor so they could get
assets off their books and downsize their staffs.  But a growing trend, Young
says, is to tie outsourcing to larger, longer-term initiatives and to look at
vendors as strategic partners.

The key:  selective outsourcing.  As its name implies, selective outsourcing
lets companies pick and choose what to outsource, rather than just handing
over the total management of systems to a vendor.  So a company might elect to
break off mundane, day-to-day data-center operations to allow its IS staff to
focus on new strategic technologies, and management to focus on core
competencies.  Or, conversely, it might bring a vendor in to help with a
specific transition to a new technology.  "There's whole host of new options,"
Young says.  "It's not a situation where you're in a contract and you're in it
for life.  Vendors are approaching customers with much more of a blank sheet
of paper."

All this flexibility makes it easier to use outsourcing as a strategic tool.
By partnering with a vendor, a firm no longer has to keep pace with rapidly
changing technology on its own-an increasingly difficult task, even for a
large corporation with a bright and able IT staff.

"Those people just don't have access to the same kinds of resources as does a
company that is 100% focused on information technology," according to Tim
Bourgeois, a research analyst at International Data Corp.  in Framingham,
Mass.  "They don't have the research and development, and they don't have the
access to the emerging tools and products that change every 18 months."

Outsourcing can be used to shorten the time to market for a critical new
system by giving a corporation a quick infusion of expertise.  "A company may
be looking at the strategic advantage they can gain by implementing a global
client-server customer-service solution, or perhaps a retailer wants to put in
a new system that links its retail operations with its distributors," Young
says of outsourcing.  "It gives you access to experts that have done this
before and know how to roll it out."

Young points out that several vendors are starting to extend their services
into areas beyond the IS department.  "We're seeing an emerging concept called
business process management, which is going to be real important going
forward," Young says.  In this approach, traditional vendors such as Andersen
Consulting or EDS take on and re-engineer an entire IT-intensive business
process, such as accounting, human resources, or customer service.  "These
areas are usually not core competencies for a company," she notes.  "But they
are important, and there is value in making sure they don't become stagnant."

Measuring Up

Without a doubt, the most fundamental question in strategic IT is whether it's
worth it.  And the evidence suggests that on a macro level, at least, the
answer is yes.  In a recent study, MIT's Brynjolfsson looked at overall
productivity and IT expenditures at several hundred major corporations.  "We
found that IT investment was very significantly correlated with large
increases in productivity," he says.  "The estimated return on information
technology investments was on the order of 60%, which was a lot higher than a
return on other types of capital investments."

But on a more detailed level, executives have been frustrated in attempts to
measure and justify specific systems.  Many experts believe that traditional
return-on-investment financial calculations are too narrow in scope.  "We're
seeing a reaction to the whole early 1990s school of IS strategy, which tended
to focus on very short-term payback projects- which meant in a lot of
companies that the basic IT infrastructure has gone to hell in a handbasket,"
Brian Jeffrey, managing director of the International Technology Group in
Mountain View, Calif., says.

That short-term view also tends to miss larger trends, Jeffrey notes.  For
example, in 1994 banks invested heavily in putting PCs into branch offices.
But at the same time, emerging alternatives such as phone and on-line
banking-as well as ATMs-were starting to make branches less and less popular.

"In 1994, there were 54,000 bank branches in the country; by the year 2000
there will be less than 20,000," he says.  "So they were focusing on putting a
PC on every desk, and rather missed the point that half the desks are going to
disappear."

The larger problem is that traditional financial methods simply don't measure
what IT does best-support innovation.  "When IT is used effectively, it
doesn't just do more of the same, it does things like improve product variety
and quality and customer service," Brynjolfsson says.  "These are things that
are not easy to measure."

It's clear that research and debate about how to measure IT's value will
continue for some time.  But overall, experts are moving toward a broader view
of what technology contributes to an organization, taking into account such
things as how it affects processes and customers.

John Scholes, president of Regent Associates International, an East Hartland,
Conn., firm that advises companies in the IT industry, believes executives
should not unravel IT from the rest of their businesses.  "What they ought to
be doing is stepping up a level, and asking, 'How do I best organize my
business?' And then ask how IT enables that," he says.

Thornton May, vice president of research and education at Cambridge Technology
Partners in Cambridge, Mass., cites a need for methods that recognize the
value of organizational knowledge and the ability to collaborate to leverage
that knowledge.

"What we are finding is progressive organizations are moving from the 'How
many clerks did I kill today?' view, to more of a bid-and-ask type negotiation
session, where they ask themselves, 'What is this chunk of functionality
worth?'" May says.  "For example, they might ask what it's worth to have email
that takes you point-to-point around the organization.  Then, they ask how
much it costs, and then they start negotiating.  So the new paradigm is
basically a case-by-case negotiation of whether a project makes sense."

Finally, many observers recommend that strategists resist the sense of urgency
that often surrounds new technology, and take time to look before they leap-to
weigh a system's value and test the concept.  And, as ITG's Jeffrey points
out, they should remember:  "None of it is quick, none of it is easy, and none
of it is cheap.  There aren't any simple answers."


Peter Haapaniemi is a freelance business journalist based in the Detroit area.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>