
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B32-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B021-59</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec03.html 205.156.212.5 19970114215450 text/html 30179
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:53:03 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:23 GMT
Content-length: 29992
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>*LATEST NEWS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>ALPHA REVENUE PACES SOLID SECOND QUARTER FINANCIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(896 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DIGITAL UNLEASHES HARDWARE BARRAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1478 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ENHANCED INTERNET ALPHASERVER SOFTWARE KIT UNVEILED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>"SUPER SPIDER:" DIGITAL'S INTERNET SEARCH TOOL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(784 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>PRICING FOR PENTIUM 150 MHZ, 166MHZ COMMERCIAL DESKTOP SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(439 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>PRICING FOR PENTIUM 150 MHZ, 166MHZ COMMERCIAL DESKTOP SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(437 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALPHA REVENUE PACES SOLID SECOND QUARTER FINANCIALS

CASH PICTURE UNCHANGED:  DIGITAL ON JAN. 23 REPORTED NET INCOME OF
$148.8 million, or $0.91 per common share, for the second quarter,
which ended December 30, 1995, compared with net income of $18.9
million, or $0.07 per common share, for the same period last year.
But cash remained the same as in the first quarter, and grew less
than $400 million since last year.

Digital cited the strong performance of its 64-bit Alpha-based
computer lines as one of the key reasons for healthy sales.  Sales
in these lines grew by 50 percent over the prior year, with
strongest demand shown for AlphaServer systems.  Strong sales
growth was reported also in the Alpha workstation products,
especially those shipping with Windows NT.

Total operating revenue for the quarter was $3.95 billion, up 14
percent from the $3.47 billion for the comparable quarter a year
ago.

Gross margin for the quarter was 32.6 percent, compared with 33.1
percent for the comparable period in the prior year and 32.2
percent in the first quarter of the current fiscal year.

Total operating expenses for the quarter were $1.11 billion,
essentially unchanged from the same period last year, on higher
revenue.  Current period operating expenses reflected previously
announced demand generation initiatives, including variable sales
and distribution costs associated with increased volumes.

The increase in product sales over last year is a healthy sign
that Digital's profit is not just coming from belt-tightening.

The company ended the quarter with approximately 61,100 employees,
down 4,500 from a year ago and 400 from the first quarter of the
current fiscal year.

"Digital is solidly into a strategic growth phase, as demonstrated
by our highest quarterly revenue ever," said Digital Chairman
Robert B. Palmer.  "We enjoyed significant revenue growth in all
of our product businesses and in our new service offerings.  We
also recorded good revenue growth in all geographies.  I am
optimistic we will experience continued growth as we move into the
second half of our fiscal year."

"I am pleased that our efforts have produced five consecutive
quarters of improving profits, on a year-over-year basis," said
CFO Vincent J. Mullarkey.  "We clearly achieved accelerated
revenue and profit growth during the quarter.  We are experiencing
strong demand across the company for all of our new product and
service offerings.

"Over the course of the next two years, Digital will continue to
concentrate on improving operations to bring profit levels in line
with the computer industry's leading financial performers,"
Mullarkey said.

Product revenues were up 26 percent in the quarter to $2.35
billion from $1.87 billion in the second quarter of last year, and
the seventh consecutive quarter of year-over-year product revenue
growth.

ALPHA RESULTS

The company's 64-bit Alpha systems sales grew by 50 percent over
the prior year, driven by strong demand for AlphaServer systems.
Digital's total Alpha-generated revenue since introduction three
years ago, now exceeds $7 billion.

The company reported revenue growth and increasing demand in its
AlphaStation line, with particularly strong growth in workstations
shipping with Windows NT.  Workstation products range from
Intel-based personal workstations to the industry-leading 64-bit
AlphaStation 600.

Digital also unveiled an advanced software translation and
emulation technology that enables high-performance x86
compatibility on Alpha systems.  The FX!32 software provides Alpha
users the same suite of Microsoft Windows applications that run on
x86 systems.

PERSONAL COMPUTERS

Digital recorded strong revenue growth in its personal computer
business.

"Two quarters ago we redirected the course of our PC business to
balance growth and financial performance," Palmer said.  "This
strategy is working.  We continue to capture additional market
share, with more than 40 percent revenue growth in the second
quarter, as demand for our full range of Intel-based personal
computer products accelerates."

Revenue from the company's components product businesses,
including storage subsystems and network products, grew more than
30 percent over last year.  The Storage Business Unit, a supplier
of platform-neutral storage solutions, saw strong revenue growth
in its StorageWorks products.  The Network Products Business Unit
also experienced revenue growth in its switching and hub products.

The company's service revenues were $1.604 billion, essentially
unchanged from the same period last year.  While VAX maintenance
revenues were down slightly, the decline was offset by the
significant growth in the company's new multivendor services,
network integration services and Alpha systems maintenance and
support.

The company continues to make progress in improving overall gross
margin trends, Mullarkey said.

Product gross margin was 32.5 percent, compared with 30.5 percent
in the second quarter of a year ago.  Service gross margin was
32.7 percent compared with 36.1 percent in the comparable period
last year, reflecting the expected shift in mix towards new high
growth, but somewhat lower margin multivendor service and support
offerings.

Digital ended the quarter with approximately $1.5 billion in cash,
essentially unchanged from the first quarter and an increase of
$362 million compared with last year.

"I am pleased with many aspects of our asset management
performance, with solid improvements in asset turns for both
inventory and property, plant and equipment," Mullarkey said.  He
said Digital needed to improve the effectiveness of managing
accounts receivable, which stood at about $3.5 billion.  He also
said he was confident the company had enough cash now and in the
future to finance operations.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DIGITAL UNLEASHES HARDWARE BARRAGE

January, especially the last few days thereof, proved a busy time
for Digital in the hardware area.

In a span of only a few days the Maynard, Mass.-based computer
maker introduced upgraded 64-bit RISC-based AlphaServer models, a
new 133 MHz Pentium-based enterprise PC server with symmetric
multiprocessing, and a new workstation with a 64-bit 333 MHz Alpha
microprocessor.

Following is an overview and summary of the new machines:

ALPHASERVERS

Digital announced significant enhancements to the AlphaServer
family of 64-bit RISC systems on Jan. 30.  The company upgraded
the server line with added processor power, increased throughput,
new server management software, as well as lower costs.

* The AlphaServer 8400 enterprise server will now be available
with up to 12 350 MHz Alpha 21164 processors.  (The six-CPU
AlphaServer 8200 system will also be available with the more
powerful chip.)  The four-CPU AlphaServer 2100 and two-CPU
AlphaServer 2000 systems are now faster as well, upgraded with the
300 MHz Alpha 21164 microprocessors.

Users can upgrade to the 5/350 system with a simple CPU and clock
module upgrade.  Existing memory, I/O, base operating system
licenses and layered product software options continue to be
supported on the 5/350 system offerings.

The new AlphaServer 8400 5/350 provides audited database
performance of 11,456 transactions per minute (tpmC) at $286/tpmC
using the 64-bit Oracle7 Unix database.  The systems support the
OpenVMS 64-bit software environment.

AlphaServer 8400 5/350 systems will be available in March, priced
from $319,000 with two CPUs, 512MB of memory, and 2GB disk.

* A new version of the AlphaServer 2100, the 2100A, has eight PCI
and three EISA slots for higher bandwidth and faster access to
larger databases and high-speed real-time data access devices.
Earlier versions had only three PCI slots.  Similarly, the new
single-processor AlphaServer 1000A system has seven PCI slots and
two EISA slots.

Digital believes the 2100A 5/300 system is the world's fastest and
most cost-effective Windows NT platform, providing 3194.4 tpmC at
$196/tpmC running Microsoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database
management system.  The 2100A is targeted at customers with large
disk farms, multiple network segments, and heavy I/O applications.
Available now, the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 system is priced from
$52,430 with one CPU, 128MB of memory, and 2GB disk.

*  The single processor AlphaServer 1000 4/266 workgroup/network
system holds the world record for single-processor performance and
price/performance on any operating system or database -- 1153.7
tpmC at $229/tpmC running Microsoft SQL Server V6.5.  By tripling
the number of available PCI slots, network throughput is
increased, enhancing customers' use of multiple disk controllers
and multiple network controllers/segments.  The 1000A system is
targeted at Internet platforms for electronic commerce,
information distribution, and collaboration.  The system is
available with Internet and World Wide Web server software.  The
AlphaServer 1000A 4/233 systems are available in March and priced
from $13,680 with 32MB of memory, and 1.05GB disk.  The system is
offered with a range of CPU performance -- 233 or 266 MHz -- each
in a deskside pedestal, rackmount, or cabinet configuration.

* The systems have free ServerWORKS software for easier management
of SNMP-based distributed network environments.

All AlphaServer systems now include ServerWORKS Manager software
free of charge.  ServerWORKS is launched from within the
MANAGEWORKS Workgroup Administrator.  MANAGEWORKS, also included
in the package, enables system administrators to monitor and
manage multiple network operating systems and SNMP-compliant
devices on a common LAN.  The package provides users a server
management and distributed network management package for
Digital's AlphaServer and Intel based Prioris systems and other
network devices.

* Prices were cut on current AlphaServer 2100, 2000, and 400
models.  For example, prices are reduced on the popular
AlphaServer 2100 5/250 system from $43,390 to $38,430, or 11
percent.

PRIORIS ZX 5133MP PC SERVER

The Prioris ZX 5133MP superserver, announced Jan. 30, is the lead
product in Digital's a new line of Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP)
enterprise PC servers carrying the "ZX" designation.  Based on the
133 MHz Pentium chip, the Prioris ZX 5133MP is targeted at
enterprise-class applications.  The company also announced the
immediate availability of new Pentium processor models of the
Prioris LX, Prioris XL Server and Prioris HX PC servers.

The ZX 5133MP is a scalable superserver for resource-intensive
applications such as database transaction processing, decision
support, groupware, internet access, and general file and print or
e-mail services for large LANs.  It is optimized as a
line-of-business application server suitable for large branch
offices and remote sites in a variety of industries including
financial services, retail, manufacturing, transportation,
communications and government, and for organizations migrating to
a client/server environment using Windows NT or Unix.

The server incorporates Intel's industry-standard Multi-processing
Specification (MPS 1.1 or 1.4) and supports SMP scalability from
one to four 133 MHz Pentium processors.  Each CPU is equipped with
up to one MB of dedicated secondary level, two-way write-back
cache for maximum performance in database-intensive applications.
Extending Digital's leadership position in PCI technology, the new
system features a dual peer PCI bus and integrated dual Fast/Wide
SCSI controllers to provide maximum throughput for heavy file
sharing and database-intensive tasks.

The machine comes with ECC memory and a maximum memory capacity of
768MB.  The system also has nine total bus-master I/O slots (five
PCI for maximum performance, four EISA for legacy card
compatibility); up to 28GB internal storage capacity with external
support for up to one terabyte; 11 total drive bays including
seven hot-swappable bays; optional redundant power supply,
standard redundant cooling and a rackmount-ready chassis.

It will also include, free, the ServerWORKS Manager software.

The Prioris ZX 5133MP family will be available on February 12,
1996.  A Prioris ZX 5133MP/1 RAID system equipped with a single
Pentium 133 MHz processor, 512KB of synchronous secondary two-way
write-back cache, a dual-channel PCI RAID controller, 32MB of
memory with two-way interleaving, integrated dual Fast/Wide SCSI-2
controllers, a quad-speed CD-ROM drive, and three 2.1GB SCSI hard
disk drives carries a suggested list price of $17,119.

A Prioris ZX 5133MP/2 RAID system equipped with dual symmetric
multiprocessing Pentium 133 MHz processors, 1MB of synchronous
secondary two-way write-back cache per processor, a dual-channel
PCI RAID controller, 64MB of memory with two-way interleaving,
integrated dual Fast/Wide SCSI-2 controllers, a quad-speed CD-ROM
drive, and three 2.1GB SCSI hard disk drives carries a suggested
list price of $24,369.

HIGH-END ALPHASTATION

The AlphaStation 600 5/333 workstation has the newest 64-bit Alpha
microprocessor, the 333 MHz 21164 Alpha chip, and can run the most
popular technical software applications, including offerings from
Parametric Technology, EDS/Unigraphics, Mentor Graphics, Synopsys,
Softimage, ESRI, and others.

AlphaStations are chip and board upgradeable, so technical end
users can upgrade to the AlphaStation 600 5/333 fairly easily.

Digital says the AlphaStation 600 5/333 is the fastest workstation
on the market with record-breaking SPECint95 performance of 9.19
and SPECfp95 performance of 13.2.  It is also the world's first
workstation to break the 400 SPECint92 barrier with 412.4
SPECint92 and to offer a price/performance ratio of
$84.9/SPECint92.  For floating point, it delivers performance of
545.2 SPECfp92.  Integer and floating point capabilities make the
new workstation a suitable platform for complex compute- and
graphics-intensive design applications.

For customers who want to run graphics applications under the
Windows NT operating system, Digital has two midrange 3D graphics
accelerators -- the ZLXp-L1 and ZLXp-L2 boards, announced several
months ago.  With the same graphics performance found in Unix
environments, the L1 and L2 are suitable for mechanical
computer-aided design (MCAD) applications such as Parametric
Technology's PRO/Engineer; 3D animation software such as
Microsoft's Softimage; and others.


Available immediately, the AlphaStation 600 5/333 workstation is
$28,885 for a Windows NT-based version that includes a 17-inch
color monitor, a 1 Gbyte disk, 4 MBytes fast cache, 32 MBytes of
memory, a ZLXp-E1 graphics adapter, floppy, CD-ROM, audio, mouse,
keyboard, and a an industry leading three-year warranty.
AlphaStation workstations also run the Digital Unix and OpenVMS
operating systems.

Digital also said it has cut the price of the AlphaStation 600
5/266 workstation.  A Windows NT-based version is $23,885 for a
package that includes a 17-inch color monitor, a 1 Gbyte disk, 2
MBytes fast cache, 32 MBytes of memory, a ZLXp-E1 graphics
adapter, floppy, CD- ROM, audio, mouse, keyboard, and a three-year
warranty.

NEW 150 MHZ, 166 MHZ PENTIUM CHIPS TO BE USED

Digital early in January announced plans to incorporate the new
150 MHz and 166 MHz Intel Pentium processors across its desktop,
retail and server PC families.  Digital is including the new
processors in several models within its Celebris XL, Celebris GL
and Venturis commercial desktop families and is introducing two
new powerful home computers in its Starion retail line.  The
company also announced that it will offer 166 MHz Pentium-powered
models of its Prioris server line in single- and dual-processor
configurations.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ENHANCED INTERNET ALPHASERVER SOFTWARE KIT UNVEILED

Digital announced the Internet AlphaServer Software Kit for
Digital Unix V.2 this month at Internet World.

Enhancements include graphical Internet AlphaServer administration
software scripts for quick installation and a graphical interface
for setup and management of Internet news groups.  The AlphaServer
system can handle thousands of Internet newsgroups on one server.
The kit also includes tcpwrapper, an enhanced Internet security
application that allows users to turn off certain programs that
expose systems to unsecured Internet traffic, as well as a test to
verify changes.  The enhanced Software Kit can now run in
Digital's DECsafe Available Server Environment (ASE), allowing
users access to their web site even if a failure occurs.

"The Net is today's hot spot for doing business.  No company can
afford to ignore the business implications of representation on
the Internet.  It's the global vehicle for expanding users
markets, taking offerings worldwide and laying a strong foundation
for future commerce," said Rose Ann Giordano, vice president of
Digital's Internet Business Group.

The 64-bit Digital UNIX architecture can support 1,000
simultaneous domain names, enabling Internet Service Providers to
host multiple customer sites on one server.  The Internet
AlphaServer Software Kit runs in all models of Digital's
AlphaServer family.  The kit is also prepackaged on two new
AlphaServer systems including the 1000/266 and 400/233.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

"SUPER SPIDER:" DIGITAL'S INTERNET SEARCH TOOL

Within weeks of its introduction, Digital says, its advanced
"super spider" technology has become the fastest-growing
information search and indexing capability on the Internet's World
Wide Web.

The technology's super spider and super indexer employ
next-generation software and advanced networking, powered by
Digital's AlphaServer 8400 system.  The scalable hardware has
quadrupled its original capacity -- from two to eight processors,
and double the memory -- to keep pace with demand.

The super spider technology conducts comprehensive searches of the
entire Web faster than spiders used in conventional information
search services.  It creates and dispatches a "brood of spiders"
that crawls the entire Web.  Second-generation scalable software
simultaneously locates and indexes text as it finds Web pages.  A
search engine enables Web users to conduct precise searches for
specific information by looking for phrases, specifying key words,
using case-sensitive matches, and restricting searches to titles
or other parts of a document.

The super spider has searched up to 2.5 million pages per day,
finding and indexing information.  It is enroute to finding every
page and indexing every word of text on the Web, Digital said.


@STANDFRAME = Digital News Briefs

* Digital and INNOSOFT INTERNATIONAL INC. ANNOUNCED A WORLDWIDE
agreement under which Digital will resell PMDF e-Mail Interconnect
software products.  PMDF products from Innosoft have historically
provided SMTP (Simple Mail Transport Protocol) support for
Digital's VMS Mail and Message Router environments including
ALL-IN-1.

* Digital will include key components of the PATROL application
management product suite from BMC SOFTWARE, INC. WITH EVERY
AlphaServer system running the Windows NT, Digital Unix, and
OpenVMS operating systems.  BMC will provide the PATROL agent and
PATROLVIEW, which is now integrated with Digital's ManageWorks
Workgroup Administrator software.

BMC Software supports all of the AlphaServer platforms with its
application management suite of tools and integrates seamlessly
with POLYCENTER NetView and ManageWorks Workgroup Administrator
through PATROLVIEW, BMC Software's product that allows the
management and monitoring capabilities of PATROL to be viewed
natively within an existing third party framework.

PATROL supports database and application platforms, including
Oracle, Sybase, Informix, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle Financials
and Lotus Notes.  Additional management support for leading
software packages, middleware, application development tools and
databases is expected.

* NORTHROP GRUMMAN CORPORATION'S B-2 DIVISION, HEADQUARTERED IN
Pico Rivera, California, signed an agreement with Digital valued
at $4.7 million.  The contract includes AlphaStation 200 4/266 and
AlphaStation 250 4/266 workstations; AlphaServer 8400, AlphaServer
8200, and AlphaServer 2100 systems; Multia desktop systems;
Digital's StorageWorks products; a GIGAswitch for ATM networking;
and on-site Digital system integration services.

Northrop Grumman will use the new equipment and services to
upgrade its B-2 Stealth Bomber Software Laboratory for flight
mission simulations, avionics integration, and real-time test and
integration of flight control equipment.

* Digital and Intel have invested in a SYSTEMSOFT CORP. EFFORT TO
develop technologies that will automatically identify and resolve
the most common problems faced by personal computer users.
SystemSoft's goals are two-fold: to significantly improve the
end-user experience by utilizing the power of the PC to solve
system-level problems, and to dramatically reduce calls and
subsequent costs to manufacturers' technical support lines.

Under the agreement, Intel and Digital Equipment Corp.  will
provide SystemSoft with up to several million dollars in funding,
intellectual property and development assistance to accelerate
development of this new category of PC software to be known as
"Call Avoidance" products.  SystemSoft will market and license
products resulting from this alliance.  It is estimated that
products resulting from this development effort could reduce the
number of calls received by PC manufacturers' technical support
organizations by 30 percent, representing a potential annual
industry-wide cost savings of more than $1 billion.

The first products are scheduled to ship to system manufacturers
in the second quarter of 1996.

* MAINSOFT CORPORATION, PROVIDER OF CROSS-PLATFORM DEVELOPMENT
tools with true Windows API (application programming interface)
compliance, has announced an agreement with Digital to port the
next version of MainWin Studio (including XDE, Test and
SourceSafe) to the OpenVMS operating system.  The agreement will
make the Windows API (including Microsoft Foundation Class library
version 4.0 and OLE 2.0), Microsoft Test and Microsoft Visual
SourceSafe available to developers writing applications for Alpha
and VAX systems running OpenVMS, and enable them to offer their
OpenVMS end-users the familiar Microsoft Windows `look and feel.'

* Digital announced the highest-ever benchmark results for SAP'S
R/3 application suite.  The benchmark achieved throughput of
210,384 SAP transactions per hour with an average dialog response
time of 1.64 sec.  A total of 1,700 SD benchmark users was
measured, performing 525,960 dialog steps per hour, running on
Digital's AlphaServer 8400 5/300 system with the Oracle7 database.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PRICING FOR PENTIUM 150 MHZ, 166MHZ COMMERCIAL DESKTOP SYSTEMS

As we went to press, Digital announced pricing and availability
for its new 150 MHz and 166 MHz Pentium processor-based commercial
desktop systems (see page 4).

The new Intel processors are available in several models within
Digital's Celebris XL, Celebris GL and Venturis commercial desktop
families.

At the same time, the company announced price reductions of up to
16 percent on selected commercial desktop models.  The new models,
as well as the price reductions, are effective immediately in the
U.S.

Following is a summary of the new models:

* Celebris XL 5150 and Celebris XL 5166 models and a
dual-processor Celebris XL 5166 model, all workstation class
machines.  Feature Windows NT, 16MB RAM, 256/512K cache, 1GB SCSI
hard drive, Matrox Millennium graphics card (or an AccelGraphics
AG300, depending on configuration), 4X CD-ROM, and Digital
ClientWORKS network and asset management software.  The 5150 is
$4,329; the 5166 is $4,579; and the dual-processor 5166 is $5,929
U.S.

* Celebris GL PCs (short tower configurations).  Feature
integrated, best-of-breed componentry, including 16MB EDO memory,
256 pipeline burst cache, Intel Triton FX chipset, PCI bus master
Enhanced-IDE, Matrox Millennium graphics card, 4X CD-ROM, and
Digital's ClientWORKS.  The 5150 is $3,819; the 5166 is $4,169.

* Venturis 5150 and Venturis 5166 (slimline and full-profile
models).  Feature 8MB RAM, 256 secondary cache, 630MB, 845MB or
1.2GB IDE hard disk drives (depending on configuration), and
Digital's ClientWORKS.  The 5150 is $2,429; the 5166 is $2,829.

PRICE REDUCTIONS

Digital's price reductions affect its entire commercial desktop
line.  The cuts range up to 16 percent and are applicable on
selected models in the Digital Celebris XL, Celebris GL and
Venturis product families.

Price cuts taken in the Celebris XL line range from the Celebris
XL 5100, which now lists for $3,529 U.S., a reduction of $210; to
the Celebris XL 5133, which now lists for $3,879 U.S., a drop of
$550.  The Celebris XL 6150 Pentium Pro processor-based system is
priced at $5,449 U.S., a $100 price drop.  Digital's PowerGrade
upgrade options also have been reduced by $100 - $250 U.S.,
depending on the upgrade. Reductions in the slimline and short
tower models of the Celebris GL line range from the Celebris GL
5100, which now lists for $3,019 U.S., a drop of $230; to the
Celebris GL 5133ST, now listed at $3,619 U.S., a reduction of
$430.

The slimline and full-profile price cuts in the Venturis line
range from the Venturis 575, which now lists for $1,479 U.S., a
reduction of $120; to the Venturis 5133FP, now listed at $2,479
U.S., a price cut of $370.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DATATRENDS REPORT ON DEC via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PRICING FOR PENTIUM 150 MHZ, 166MHZ COMMERCIAL DESKTOP SYSTEMS

As we went to press, Digital announced pricing and availability
for its new 150 MHz and 166 MHz Pentium processor-based commercial
desktop systems (see page 4).

The new Intel processors are available in several models within
Digital's Celebris XL, Celebris GL and Venturis commercial desktop
families.

At the same time, the company announced price reductions of up to
16 percent on selected commercial desktop models.  The new models,
as well as the price reductions, are effective immediately in the
U.S.

Following is a summary of the new models:

* Celebris XL 5150 and Celebris XL 5166 models and a
dual-processor Celebris XL 5166 model, all workstation class
machines.  Feature Windows NT, 16MB RAM, 256/512K cache, 1GB SCSI
hard drive, Matrox Millennium graphics card (or an AccelGraphics
AG300, depending on configuration), 4X CD-ROM, and Digital
ClientWORKS network and asset management software.  The 5150 is
$4,329; the 5166 is $4,579; and the dual-processor 5166 is $5,929
U.S.

* Celebris GL PCs (short tower configurations).  Feature
integrated, best-of-breed componentry, including 16MB EDO memory,
256 pipeline burst cache, Intel Triton FX chipset, PCI bus master
Enhanced-IDE, Matrox Millennium graphics card, 4X CD-ROM, and
Digital's ClientWORKS.  The 5150 is $3,819; the 5166 is $4,169.

* Venturis 5150 and Venturis 5166 (slimline and full-profile
models).  Feature 8MB RAM, 256 secondary cache, 630MB, 845MB or
1.2GB IDE hard disk drives (depending on configuration), and
Digital's ClientWORKS.  The 5150 is $2,429; the 5166 is $2,829.

PRICE REDUCTIONS

Digital's price reductions affect its entire commercial desktop
line.  The cuts range up to 16 percent and are applicable on
selected models in the Digital Celebris XL, Celebris GL and
Venturis product families.

Price cuts taken in the Celebris XL line range from the Celebris
XL 5100, which now lists for $3,529 U.S., a reduction of $210; to
the Celebris XL 5133, which now lists for $3,879 U.S., a drop of
$550.  The Celebris XL 6150 Pentium Pro processor-based system is
priced at $5,449 U.S., a $100 price drop.  Digital's PowerGrade
upgrade options also have been reduced by $100 - $250 U.S.,
depending on the upgrade. Reductions in the slimline and short
tower models of the Celebris GL line range from the Celebris GL
5100, which now lists for $3,019 U.S., a drop of $230; to the
Celebris GL 5133ST, now listed at $3,619 U.S., a reduction of
$430.

The slimline and full-profile price cuts in the Venturis line
range from the Venturis 575, which now lists for $1,479 U.S., a
reduction of $120; to the Venturis 5133FP, now listed at $2,479
U.S., a price cut of $370.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>