
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B32-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B023-268</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec61.html 205.156.212.5 19970114221100 text/html 44472
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:08:57 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:59 GMT
Content-length: 44285
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec61.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>1995 - OH, WHAT A YEAR IT WAS!  THE INDUSTRY WAS ON A SHAKEDOWN RUN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1673 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CORPORATE COMMUNICATION GETS BOOST FROM 'INTRANETS'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1104 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>QMS EXPANDS FROM PRINTERS TO DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(246 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Imaging Products Review</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(918 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Imaging Supplier News</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1693 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>KODAK GRANTED 772 PATENTS IN 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Will 1996 Turn Out to be the YEAR OF THE GHOST SITE?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(428 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

1995 - OH, WHAT A YEAR IT WAS!  THE INDUSTRY WAS ON A SHAKEDOWN RUN

By Mitchell M. Badler, Contributing Editor

     For all those in the imaging/workflow market who have been
predicting the big shakeout in the industry, 1995 was the year in
which they finally looked like prophets.  Acquisitions,
consolidations and alliances were the order of the day,
particularly since the big Association for Information and Image
Management (AIIM) Show last April in San Francisco.  More than two
dozen significant acquisitions, mergers or alliances were announced
and/or consummated in the last nine months of the year, and those
on what looked like an accelerating schedule.

     Wang's imaging and workflow agreement with Microsoft Corp. was
the biggest event of the year.  By putting its image viewer and
image controls into Microsoft's Windows 95, Wang pulled off a coup
that eventually can make imaging a "commodity" product.  The
arrangement provides significant marketing advantages for Wang as
its imaging products will be linked with Microsoft's operating
systems.

     The following were some (but not all) of the other major
developments of 1995 that will have effects on both vendors and
users into 1996 and beyond.

The Merger/Acquisition Dance

     *    Wang Laboratories Inc.'s acquisition of Sigma Imaging
Systems.  This was another big plus for Wang, transferring the
successful Unisys/Sigma alliance to Wang and giving it access to
Sigma's solid installed base.  It gave Wang's enterprise imaging
strategy a big boost, at a relatively low cost.  At year-end, Wang
announced a planned acquisition of Avail Systems to add
hierarchical storage management software capability.

     *    FileNet's acquisition of Watermark Software Inc.  The
latter retains its name and operates as a wholly owned subsidiary,
but the deal is beneficial to both companies.  In 1996 Watermark
clients will have access to FileNet IMS repositories and FileNet
clients will be able to migrate documents to the Watermark server. 
Not far down the line, the two companies will offer users access to
repositories on both servers.

     *    IBM Corp.'s acquisition of Lotus Development Corp.  This
was IBM's response to the Wang/Microsoft alliance.  IBM plans to
leverage Lotus Notes with its own workflow and imaging strategy. 
It should strengthen IBM's position in enterprise imaging and
workflow.

     *    Caere Corp.'s acquisitions, first of Calera Recognition
Systems Inc. and then of ViewStar Corp.  The former consolidated
two of the industry's leading optical character recognition (OCR)
vendors and put Caere on the road to dominating the market, with
hoped-for revenues of $100 million in the near future.  The latter
acquisition helps Caere extend beyond the desktop market.  ViewStar
continues under its own name, but by late 1996 look for Caere
offerings to be more fully integrated into ViewStar products. 
Caere also bought 20 percent of ZyLab, a leader in full-text
retrieval and indexing.  Combining full-text retrieval with OCR
allows expanding Caere to provide a more complete solution.

     *    Kofax Image Products' announced acquisition of LaserData. 
This expands Kofax's offerings by adding storage management
components to complement its Ascent line of image capture and
viewing software.

     *    BancTec's acquisition of Recognition International.  It
was driven by several factors:  a need for consolidation in the
item-remittance processing field where BancTec's competitors are
giants such as AT&T Global Information Systems, IBM Corp. and
Unisys Corp., and a concomitant need to broaden its product line
and to expand its markets, domestically and internationally.

     *    TMS Inc.'s acquisition of Sequoia Data Corp.  This deal,
announced in October, will create a product and services provider
with more than $5 million in revenue as well as a record of
profitable growth.

     *    The merger of Excalibur Technologies Corp. and ConQuest
Software, with Excalibur as the survivor.  The product lines of the
text retrieval and document management companies were retained but
sales resources were pooled in some markets.

     *    Cornerstone Imaging's acquisition of Pegasus Disk
Technologies.  Buying the producer of file and volume management
software for CD-ROM, CD-R, WORM (write once, read many) and
rewritable optical disk drives and jukeboxes advanced Cornerstone's
goal of dominating imaging's peripheral technology markets.

     *    The merger of ImageFast Software Systems and Compusearch
Software into a new entity, Compusearch Software Systems, typified
some of the mergers of smaller software firms.

Alliances as Well as Acquisitions

     1995 also was a big year for alliances.  Instead of joining at
the hip, many organizations wanted to keep their own identities and
strategies but knew they needed assistance either to grow or to
survive.  As already noted, the big development of the year was
Wang/Microsoft.  Other significant alliances entered into during
1995 were:

     *    The Eastman Kodak Co., Wang Laboratories Inc. and Imagery
distribution and development agreement.  This enabled Kodak to
re-enter the market by reselling Wang's image, workflow and
computer output to laser disk (COLD) products.  At the same time,
Wang  agreed to integrate Kodak's peripherals.  This strengthened
everyone's distribution position.

     *    FileNet and Novell Inc.'s distribution/development
agreement that will result in three workflow products.  Visual
Workflo for NetWare, a shared database product that ties into
FileNet's workflow software, will be distributed later this year. 
Also to be available this year are Ensemble Discovery Edition, an
electronic mail-based document workflow, and Ensemble, an
e-mail-based graphical workflow product.

     *    Unisys' strategic partnership with Wang.  This gives each
added distribution channels and plugs holes in existing product and
systems lineups.  Both companies come closer to each being a
single-source provider for its existing customers.  Unisys also
entered into a Master Sales Agreement with IdentiTech Inc. that
will help broaden its marketing base.

     *    AT&T Global Information Systems' partnership with Fiserv
for AT&T/GIS to market the software products offered by Fiserv's
Image Integration Business Unit.  This is part of AT&T/GIS' push to
become a one-stop provider of imaging services.

     *    Alpharel Inc.'s agreement with Control Data Systems Inc.
for the latter to integrate Alpharel's line of document imaging
into solutions for Control Data customers worldwide.

     *    Keyfile's alliance with Microsoft.  This will provide
seamless integration of Keyfile's workflow technology into the
Microsoft Exchange Server.  That opens up markets for Keyfile it
might not have reached otherwise.

     *    Action Technologies' agreements with PC DOCS, Saros and
Novell Soft-Solutions to offer Action Workflow DocRoute.  This
provides customers of all four firms with advanced client/server
workflow functionality by combining Action's client/server workflow
capabilities with complementary document managing offerings from
the other vendors.

     *    The integration of Informative Graphics' Myriad document
viewing software with Documentum's Enterprise client/server
Document Management System (EDMS) typified product integration
actions taken by some of the independent software providers. 
Typical of market-expanding alliances was one entered into by
Rimage with MultiMedia Masters & Machinery (4M) of Switzerland. 
Under that agreement, Rimage will market 4M's CD-ROM production
systems in North and South America while 4M continues to market on
its own in Europe and Asia.

What's Behind the Urge to Merge?

     A major cause of the shakeout in the industry was the
existence of too many companies for the size of the imaging
business, which still has not achieved the soaring altitudes
forecast for many years.  Not enough of the competitors were making
money.

     Thus, in some instances the acquisitions resulted from the
financial weaknesses of the players.  Despite having excellent
products, they needed deep pockets to be able to grow and/or stay
in business.  This was the case with ViewStar, which needed
financing.  In some allied situations it was because founders or
backers of pioneering firms apparently decided it was time to
"harvest" the fruits of their efforts.  That appeared to hold true
with Calera.  Before its acquisition by Caere, industry rumors had
Calera's venture capital backers impatiently waiting for a big
return.

     Then there were situations in which cost savings were a major
consideration.  The BancTec/Recognition International deal is
expected to result in cost savings of $25 million to $30 million. 
It also gave acquirer BancTec expanded international coverage.

     Sometimes a merger occurred because a deal was too good to
turn down.  FileNet's acquisition of Watermark sounded like one. 
The latter retained its identity and still got more than $60
million.  And, of course, IBM's $3.3 billion offer for Lotus was
the best example of a sweet deal.

     But there also were other factors pushing consolidations. 
These included a drive for market share, sometimes in one segmented
market, sometimes across the board;  rapid migration of older
systems to new platforms; the geometric acceleration of technology
typified by groupware's impact on workflow and its effects on
individual vendors; the glut of providers in some areas,
particularly software.  Finally, a number of the consolidations
late in the year probably were reactions to the Wang/Microsoft and
IBM/Lotus actions.

The Meaning for Users

     The various consolidations and alliances signal the rapid
maturing of the imaging/workflow marketplace.  For users, the
effect is positive.  Inevitably the multiplicity of vendors creates
confusion and caution.  The user sometimes wonders - with good
reason - how long a vendor will be around.  That raises questions
of technical follow-up and product obsolescence without an upward
migration path.  Vendor viability and reliability is becoming more
and more critical.  The emergence of powerful industry leaders -
fewer but still strong - is reassuring to users looking at future
purchases and hoping to protect current and past investments.

     Whether the urge to merge will result in decreased competition
(because of fewer players) or increased competition (from stronger
survivors) is yet to be answered.  How that turns out will affect
the questions of pricing and user cost.  But stronger players
should provide the base for faster development of improved
products.  The trick may be giving the user market time to absorb
and digest these continually upgraded products and systems while
earning a reasonable pay-back on investments in imaging/workflow
solutions.

     Mitchell M. Badler is president of Microfilm Publishing Inc.
and founding editor of  Imaging Technology Report.  He is a fellow
of the Association for Information and Image Management and the
International Information Management Congress.  He has been
involved in and an observer of the imaging scene for more than two
decades.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CORPORATE COMMUNICATION GETS BOOST FROM 'INTRANETS'

By Robert D. Lamb, Associate Editor

     There was a time when most corporations didn't have elaborate
private telephone systems installed in their office buildings - but
they did have access to the public telephone system.  Those
employees with permission to use the company phone could call
clients, call home, call anyone outside the office building who had
a telephone.  But to contact someone inside the building required
a somewhat less technological means of communication.

     But necessity - or convenience (it amounts to the same) - is
the mother of invention, so it was inevitable that sooner or later
someone somewhere would come up with the brilliant idea to build a
miniature Ma Bell in the cloak room and connect it to a bunch of
telephones throughout the building.  Voila!  A private telephone
network was born!

     Something similar is happening to the Internet today.

     Corporations that have had access to the public computer
network have been using it to access and distribute public
documents and other information for several years now.  During the
past year and a half, however, Internet access has become an
essential part of the corporate infrastructure, due largely to the
exploding popularity of the World Wide Web, whose easy-to-use,
graphical interface has thrust the art of information distribution
into the mass culture spotlight.  Everyone - from Eastman Kodak Co.
(http://www.kodak.com) and ITR's publisher, BRP Publications Inc.
(http://brp.com), all the way down to Uncle Bob
(http://gagme.wwa.com/~boba/kidslinks.html) and the Geek of the
Week (http://csl04.cs.tamu. edu/ITR/geek.readme) - seems to have a
home page on the Web, and the sites are becoming increasingly
sophisticated while remaining shamelessly simple to use.

     But even more exciting:  The software used to view documents
over the Web is dirt cheap, and it doesn't matter what computer
platform you're using.

     Sooner or later, it was inevitable that someone, somewhere
would realize that a document coded with hypertext markup language
(HTML) can be viewed with any Web browser regardless of its
location - whether it was stored on a publicly accessible Web
server in Taiwan, on the hard drive in a desktop computer, or on
any computer connected to a company's private local area network
(LAN).  Why not, it eventually was asked, use this great new
technology to improve internal corporate communication?  Voila!  An
"Intranet" was born!

Granddaddy of Web Embraces Intranet Concept

     Netscape Communications Corp., the company that makes the
granddaddy of all Web browsers, the Netscape Navigator, also
provides server software, application development tools, security
software and management systems for Internet documents, Web sites
and other such applications.  Despite the fact that all of its
products are designed for use on or with the (very public)
Internet, the company itself for years has been using them in a
private setting for internal communications.

     But it wasn't until last spring that Netscape realized there
might be a market for such uses of its products and actually began
marketing its Internet products as Intranet products - software and
systems that can be used on any transmission control
protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP) network for private
applications - and by then, many of its customers already had set
up their own Web servers and deployed their own Intranets.  Today,
more than 60 Fortune 100 companies are using Netscape products for
Intranet applications, according to a company spokeswoman, and
Netscape expects at least half of its sales to come from the
"behind-the-firewall" Intranet sector in the near future, she said.

     Last month, in fact, Netscape agreed to license its browser,
Netscape Commerce Server, and its Netscape Communications Server to
Open Text Corp. of Waterloo, Ontario, for use in the latter's new
Latitude Intranet System product suite.  Like its Internet sibling,
Latitude enables users to build, maintain and access electronic
documents and information using Internet technology (ITR, Oct. 9,
p. 7).

     "Intranets are the fastest-growing segment of the World Wide
Web," said Open Text President Tom Jenkins when the agreement with
Netscape was announced, "because they provide a convenient,
low-cost, high-impact communications channel."  A Forrester
Research analyst, John Robb, added that Forrester's Computing
Strategy Service expects Intranets "to become a substantial market
because they allow decentralized access to distributed,
business-critical information."

Re-Marketing Internet Products

     As corporations increasingly are discovering this, software
and hardware developers are falling all over themselves trying to
re-market their Internet products as Intranet "solutions."  In one
of the more dramatic examples of this, Attachmate Corp. - which has
dubbed itself "The Intranet Company" - a week ago announced that it
has completed its acquisition of The Wollongong Group Inc. 
Wollongong, whose name has been synonymous with TCP/IP
internetworking technology for more than 15 years, now operates as
an Attachmate subsidiary - but is known as the Intranet Products
Group.

     Attachmate's new "Intranet Products Group" plans to release
three Windows-based products during the first calendar quarter of
this year:  Emissary Workgroup, "for complete Internet/Intranet Web
conferencing, browsing, publishing, searching, tracking and
document management," according to the company's announcement;
Emissary Host Publishing System; and Emissary Intranet/Internet
Services, which will provide support and consulting services to
companies building an Intranet or developing an Internet site.

     Other companies, such as Quarterdeck Corp. and Cuadra
Associates, also recently have released Web software - oddly,
Quarterdeck's product is called "WebSTAR" and Cuadra's is called
"STAR/Web."  Neither of these products is being touted primarily as
an Internet product:  Both clearly are targeted to the Intranet
sector.

     Quarterdeck's WebSTAR for Windows 95/NT, formerly known as
WebServer 32, is a turnkey, scalable Intranet server that is "also
powerful enough" to run a public Web site, said Emerick Woods, vice
president and general manager of Quarterdeck's Internet
Applications unit.  Cuadra's STAR/Web is a common gateway interface
(CGI) program that connects the Cuadra STAR information management
software to standard commercial Web servers to enable employees to
retrieve information from large corporate databases.  Much of the
press release announcing STAR/Web reads like an essay on how
Internet technology is being used "for strictly private use on ...
internal [corporate] networks for in-house communications and
information storage and retrieval."

     As 1995 was the year the Internet exploded onto the public
scene, 1996 is likely to be the year that all the technology
developed for the Internet will be repurposed and quietly make its
way into the private scene.

     Cuadra is based in Los Angeles and can be contacted at (708)
291-8420, ext. 261.  Quarterdeck (http://www.quarterdeck.com),
headquartered in Marina Del Rey, Calif., is at (310) 309-4261. 
Bellevue, Wash.-based Attachmate (http://www.attachmate.com) is at
(206) 649-6551.  Netscape Communications can be reached at (415)
528-6711. Open Text is at (519) 888-7111.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

QMS EXPANDS FROM PRINTERS TO DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT

     QMS Inc., a producer of network printers, has formed a new
business unit that will focus on image and document management
solutions.  The company's Image Management Solutions (IMS) unit
will design, develop and market QMS' line of digital imaging
systems.

     The IMS unit, the creation of which is part of QMS' strategy
to expand its market focus, plans to target primarily the custom
publishing, digital library, digital printer/copier, on-demand
publishing and online information repository markets.

CrownImage is Flagship 'Solution'

     "Our goal is to address emerging customer needs in the digital
imaging area and provide them powerful and affordable open
systems-based solutions," said Perry Hockaday, IMS' director.  The
unit's flagship "solution" is QMS CrownImage, a new version of
which was announced last week.  The product enables users to
manage, distribute and access digital documents, and features
printing, image/document capture, display, recognition, custom
publishing, storage and retrieval capabilities.  The new version
also provides an expanded set of document customization and quality
improvement tools, support for additional scanners, and a new
integrated intelligent character recognition (ICR) library.

     "The need for both vertical market custom publishing and
enterprisewide document imaging systems is exploding as
organizations continue to transition from paper-based archives to
digitally stored information," said Don Parket, the company's chief
technical officer.  "QMS' CrownImage line of products extends QMS'
traditional print services to provide complete document management
and utilization facilities."

     QMS (http://www.qms.com) is based in Mobile, Ala., and can be
reached at (334) 633-4300.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Imaging Products Review

     Reverse:STORAGE SUBSYSTEMS/MEDIA

     *    MicroNet Technology (714-453-6100, fax 714-453-6101,
http://www.micronet.com) announced shipment of the Array2000J
removable media storage solution for Macintosh platforms.  The
Array2000J combines two Iomega Jaz drives, which accept 1 gigabyte
(Gb) or 540 megabyte Jaz cartridges, for up to 2 Gb of storage in
a single enclosure.  The Array2000J can be configured to mirror or
duplicate the data for instant archival backup, and the drives also
can be configured as single drives, for extra convenience in moving
data between drives.  Price:  $1,275.

DOCUMENT IMAGING/MANAGEMENT

     *    Caere Corp. (100 Cooper Court, Los Gatos, CA 95030,
408-395-7000, fax 408-354-2743, http://www.patrick@caere.com)
announced an OfficeMax retail products version upgrade of its
OmniPage Pro 6.0 optical character recognition (OCR) software for
Windows.  The OfficeMax upgrade version is available to owners of
any Caere OCR product and in more than 450 OfficeMax locations at
a price of $129.

     *    Cheyenne Software Inc. (3 Expressway Plaza, Roslyn
Heights, NY 11577, 516-484-5110, fax 516-484-3446) announced
shipment of ARCserve version 6.0 for NetWare, a storage management
solution; ARCserve has received full Novell certification for
NetWare 3.1x and 4.1 environments.  Software features and options
include full NDS integration, RAID-5 fault tolerance, file
interleaving, push agents, intelligent online backup of cc:Mail
databases, mainframe connectivity, Windows 95 look and feel,
Wizard, tutorial cue cards, and support for Windows NT, Unix, OS/2
and Macintosh platforms.  Price:  ARCserve 6.0 for NetWare for 25
users or fewer, $795; ARCserve for NetWare/Enterprise Edition for
more than 25 users, $1,895.

     *    Cimage Enterprise Systems Ltd. (Centennial Court,
Easthampstead Road, Bracknell, Berkshire, UK, RG12 1JZ,
01344-860055, Fax +44 01344-861471) introduced Document Manager API
(DMAPI) version 1.0 component for its Document Manager for Windows. 
The new component is a library of application programming
interfaces (APIs) callable from a variety of Windows programming
and integration environments.  The APIs enable integration of
Cimage document management functionality into the pull-down menu
structure of Windows-based applications, such as AutoCAD and Word. 
DMAPI includes comprehensive online help facilities and programming
examples in C, C++ and Basic, and supports MS Visual C++ 3.0 and
higher, Visual Basic 3.0 and higher, and MS Word basic 6.0 and
higher.

     Cimage also announced Universal View, a new document viewer
component to its ImageMaster document viewing tool.  Universal View
provides an easy user interface for viewing and printing more than
150 file formats for word processing, database, spreadsheet,
computer-aided design (CAD) and graphics applications.  The new
component permits users to view and edit virtually any information
existing in the enterprise.  Price:  complete ImageMaster, $595;
Universal View component only, $75.

     *    DST Systems Inc. (816-435-8600) announced that future
releases of its Automated Work Distributor, including AWD version
2.3 to be released in March, will fully support the ImageAccel 2
controller from Cornerstone Imaging Inc.  AWD is an intelligent
work management system that transforms paper, voice, text and
graphics into digital objects electronically routed to workstations
based on workflow, priority levels and processor experience levels.

     *    Duplex Products Inc. (815-895-5400) launched NaviGator,
a scalable workflow automation engine for electronic forms
organization and catalog management.  NaviGator, based on Delrina's
FormFlow program, provides support for all levels of automation
from simple on-demand to complex database mail-enabled workflow.

     *    Excalibur Technologies Corp. (9255 Town Center Drive, San
Diego, CA 92121, 619-625-7900, fax 619-625-7901, http://www.
xrs.com) rolled out EFS WebFile, a World Wide Web-enabled version
of its established EFS Document Image Management System.  EFS
WebFile integrates searching capabilities with advanced Web server
technology and permits any Web browser platform to access EFS
filerooms across the Internet.  EFS will be available in April for
Unix, VMS and Windows/NT platforms.  Price:  $4,950.

     *    HyperDesk Corp. (800-832-6975, fax 508-898-3841,
http://www.hyperdesk.com) introduced its GroupWorks 2.0 workgroup
solution for small and large teams.  New features include support
for Windows 95 and Windows NT, Web page linkage to group projects,
improved electronic mail integration, including VIM and
MAPI-compliant address recognition, improved remote access support,
enhanced document management capabilities and project servers. 
Other new features are sticky notes, contact improvements, search
filters, import/export and color-coded outlines.  GroupWorks runs
on NetWare, transmission control protocols/Internet protocols
(TCP/IP) and Windows for Workgroups, Windows 95, LANtastic and
other NetBIOS networks.  Price:  $199.

     *    MultiStream Systems Corp. (612-926-3522, fax
512-926-3243) added HYPERtape Service Node, a platform-independent,
automated data backup for Windows 95, to its desktop client
interfaces.  The new service node includes a search function that
enables users to find and restore a specific file.  Price: $99 to
$199, depending on volume.

     *    Optical Technology Group Inc. (1 Democracy Plaza, 6701
Democracy Blvd., Bethesda, MD 20817, 301-897-1415, fax
301-564-3786) unveiled JukeMeister, an entry-level storage
management solution for CD-ROM or erasable optical jukebox
subsystems.  JukeMeister provides capabilities for cataloging,
mounting and sharing compact disks or erasable media, and runs on
Windows NT server platforms versions 3.51 or higher.  The software
can be accessed from clients running Windows 95, Windows for
Workgroups and Windows NT.  Users can connect to the server, view
the jukebox, mount the drive and read the desired files on CD-ROM
or erasable media.  JukeMeister, which supports more than 100
jukeboxes, can be linked to a single workstation or connected to a
network.  Price:  $259 and up.

     *    Philips Laser Magnetic Storage (LMS) (4425 ArrowsWest
Drive, Colorado Springs, CO 80907, 719-593-7900, fax 719-599-8713)
introduced its ISO-certified EMASS'AMASS software to expand its
12-inch optical connectivity for the LMS Infinity 6000 12-inch
optical subsystems.  Platforms supported by EMASS'AMASS storage
management software include HD-UX, IBM-AIX, SCI-IRIX, SunOS/Sun
Solaris2.x, AusoexOS, NFS and Unix.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Imaging Supplier News


     CORPORATE NEWS/PERSONNEL CHANGES

     *    The Association for Information and Image Management
International (AIIM) announced that Bentley Systems has joined as
a corporate member to play an active role in AIIM's standards
development efforts.  Bentley's membership and follow-on work will
enhance the interoperability of its new MicroStation TeamMate with
other engineering and enterprise document management systems.

     *    Caere Corp. announced that the registration statement for
its merger with ViewStar Corp., which was filed with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC), became effective Dec. 19.  A joint
proxy statement and prospectus describing in detail the terms of
the merger and other matters has been mailed to stockholders of
both com-panies.  A stockholder meeting is scheduled for Jan. 23,
and the merger is expected to close shortly thereafter.

     *    Eastman Kodak Corp. confirmed plans to transfer the
Edicon Systems Division, renamed Identification and Securities
Solutions Group, into its core organization.  Under the new name,
the group will operate within Kodak's Digital & Applied Imaging
division and will market its imaging-related products under the new
Kodak Digital Science trademark.  Edicon has been a supplier of
securities management systems that produce identification
credentials since 1985.

     *    FileNet Corp. announced that its ValueNet Partner program
sales have exceeded internal forecasts and now account for more
than 25 percent of North American product revenues.  The firm also
announced a strong ramp-up of its FileNet:WorkGroup packaged
workflow and document imaging application aimed at reseller
channels.  The package is now available in a new starter
configuration for five users priced at $34,000 for server and
client licenses.  The ValueNet Partner program targets companies
exper-ienced in application software development, business process
re-engineering and client/server technology.

     FileNet also announced that Fred H. Selby has been promoted to
the position of vice president of sales for North America.  He
replaces Larry Jordan, who has left FileNet to become chief
operating officer of another software firm.  Selby, who has held
sales positions at Prime Computer and at Honeywell, and most
recently was an eastern regional sales manager for FileNet, is an
engineering graduate of Lehigh University.

     *    Scan-Optics Inc. announced that James C. Mavel has been
appointed to the position of president and chief operating officer. 
Formerly vice president and general manager at Unisys Imaging
Systems Division, Mavel now will report to Dr. Richard I. Tanaka,
chairman and chief executive officer of Scan-Optics, which provides
products and systems for character recognition, image processing
and display, data capture and multibusiness computers.

     *    Kofax Image Products announced the opening of a new
office in London to coordinate sales activities in selected
European regions.  Kofax will maintain its Brussels office while
the London-based operation will focus on the United Kingdom, Italy,
Scandinavia and Eastern Europe.  Technical support for these
regions will remain with the Brussels site.

     *    Mitek Systems announced that Paul J. Jester has joined
the firm as vice president of sales and marketing.  In making the
appointment, President John F. Kessler said, "Our transformation to
an imaging software and document imaging processing solutions
provider requires the focus of a seasoned professional to
capitalize on our technological leadership."  Jester most recently
was vice president of sales and marketing at Vortex.  He holds a
B.S. degree in engineering from Brown University and an MBA degree
from Harvard University.

AGREEMENTS/STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

     *    Electronics For Imaging (EFI) and Canon Inc. have signed
a multiyear original equipment manufacturer (OEM) agreement
granting Canon worldwide sales rights for EFI's Fiery XJ color
servers, which drive Canon's color laser copiers.  Canon has been
selling Fiery XJ color servers since March 1995 under the terms of
a letter of intent.

     *    Howtek Inc. reached an agreement authorizing Pitman Co.
to sell the complete Howtek Scanmaster line of drum and flatbed
color scanners in the North American graphic arts and newspaper
markets.  The agreement calls for all 17 Pitman offices to market
the Scanmaster 7500, 4500 and 2500 scanners.  Pitman also will be
responsible for unit installation and training of its customers.

     *    Optical Technology Group Inc. (OTG) announced a worldwide
distribution agreement with Diamond Head Software Inc.  Under the
terms of the strategic partnership, Diamond Head will integrate
OTG's mass storage management software solutions, DiskExtender and
CDExtender, into its ImageBASIC component-based developer tools.

     *    Pixel Translations Inc., a division of Cornerstone
Imaging Inc., announced the following four new strategic partners
to its cadre of 100 vendors integrating Pixel display, scan or
print functionality into their applications:  Imagery Software
Inc., Imagination Software Inc., Lanier Worldwide Inc. and Nestor
Inc.

     *    Scangraphics Inc. signed a two-year marketing agreement
with Western Tele-Communications Inc. (WTCI) whereby WTCI will
distribute Scangraphics' software products to U.S. government
contractors and others, under WTCI's contract with National
Technical Information Services.  The agreement calls for WTCI to
sell more than $450,000 in Scangraphics software and maintenance
services during the first year of the two-year agreement.

APPLICATIONS/AWARDS AND CONTRACTS

     *    Cambric Graphics Inc. announced a C$14.3 million contract
award from Bell Canada to assist in the implementation of an
AM/FM/GIS (automated mapping/facilities management/geographic
information systems) digital mapping system.  During the 15-month
project, Cambric will convert approximately 180,000 outside-plant
records from hand-lettered linen and mylar originals to an
intelligent database format in IMAP, Bell Canada's Integrated
Mapping System.  Cambric also will develop approximately 24,000 new
files based on the original drawings.  The project will begin with
conversion of 2,500 main distributing frame diagrams, which detail
termination of outside plant cable pairs at Bell's switching
centers.  Cambric will use this data for conversion of the cable
records grouped into switching centers within Ontario.

     *    Trimco Enterprises Ltd. announced the installation of a
Target document imaging system to image-enable invoice management,
accounting and records systems at Granada and London Weekend
Television in the United Kingdom.  The Target system connects the
two main sites in Manchester and London, permitting the 60 users to
access 250,000 images placed annually on the system.  During the
first phase of the application, purchase ledger invoices were
scanned and imaged.  The second phase will involve electronic
authorization of the invoices via a workflow solution.  The Granada
TV system runs on a Unix mainframe using a Windows terminal
emulation package, JSB Multiview running on a Sun server with an HP
optical subsystem.  SQLink, Scand and Iserver are installed on the
server with client/server software installed under SQLink on the
personal computer (PC) scan stations.  The Target solution consists
of Target/SQL and TIE-DDE.

     *    Wang announced installation of an OPEN/image document
image management solution at the Australian Royal Commission on the
New South Wales Police Service to create a paperless "courtroom of
the future" featuring all documents and photographs available as
images online.  The Royal Commission investigators, judges, legal
team and media use OPEN/image to locate and access documents and
evidence that have been scanned and bar-coded into the host system. 
To date, 1.5 million pages of legal documents have been bar-coded. 
Using OPEN/image, all scanned documents can be retrieved
immediately on computer monitors, taking less than 1 second per
page.  During witness examinations, related documents are featured
on screen, and once a document is tendered as evidence, it appears
automatically on each monitor, eliminating the need for hand
distribution.  The Royal Commission system runs on a Novell network
star configuration.  Laptops are used to display real-time
transcripts, which are simultaneously translated from electronic
shorthand.

Reverse:FINANCIAL NEWS

     *    Alpharel has completed the acquisition of all of the
stock of Trimco Group PLC, a United Kingdom supplier of enterprise
document management systems.  Total consideration for the Trimco
stock is approximately $14.65 million, composed of $550,000 in
cash, a convertible note for $1 million and 1,614,189 shares of
Alpharel common stock.  The convertible note is payable Sept. 27,
1996, with interest at the rate of 7 percent per annum.  In
connection with the acquisition, Alpharel announced that it has
issued 172,500 shares of a newly created Series B convertible
preferred stock for $3,450,000 in a private offering exempt from
registration under Regulation S of the Securities and Exchange
Commission.

     *    Data Translation Inc. announced record financial results
for the fiscal quarter ended Nov. 30, 1995.  Total net sales of
$21,166,000 were 46 percent higher than the same period in 1994;
quarterly net income was up substantially to $1.6 million from the
previous year's quarterly income of $380,000.  For fiscal year
1995, ended Nov. 30, total net sales were up 44 percent to
$72,452,000 from fiscal year 1994 sales, and fiscal year 1995 net
income was $4,771,000, up more than 1,000 percent from fiscal year
1994 income of $320,000.  These positive results are due to "the
success of our digital media product, Media 100, which has led the
way in a new generation of authoring video programs," said Fred
Molinari, president and chief executive officer.

     *    TMS Inc. and Sequoia Computer Corp. announced the signing
of a merger agreement whereby TMS will acquire Sequoia in a stock
swap transaction in the form of a pooling of interests.  TMS will
issue 5.3 million shares of stock to Sequoia shareholders.  The
acquisition will combine TMS' document imaging and CD-ROM retrieval
software and related services with Sequoia's image enhancement and
forms processing software for document imaging and optical
character recognition.  The acquisition is expected to be completed
in the first calendar quarter of this year.  The merged company
will be named "TMSSequoia."  For the first quarter of fiscal 1996,
ended Nov. 30, 1995, TMS reported revenues of $1.3 million, with a
net income of $153,0000.  For the same period, Sequoia reported
revenues of $303,000, with a net income of $22,367.

     *    The Widecom Group Inc., a wide-format document management
systems vendor, closed as of Dec. 21, 1995, its initial public
offering (IPO) of 1,650,000 common shares and redeemable warrants
to purchase 1,897,500 common shares purchasable only on the basis
of one common share and one warrant at $5 per share and 10 cents
per warrant for a total of $8,439,750.  The proceeds from the
offering will be used to expand manufacturing, increase marketing
and sales activities, and repay debt.  Whale Securities Co. LP
served as underwriter of the offering.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

KODAK GRANTED 772 PATENTS IN 1995

     Eastman Kodak Co. was ranked ninth among the top 10 companies
in the world in terms of the number of patents awarded in 1995. 
According to an annual listing published by IFI/Plenum Data Co.,
Kodak received a total of 772 patents last year, down from 890 in
1994, when the imaging company was ranked No. 8; the decline is
attributable to Kodak's divestitures in 1994.

     Dr. James W. Meyer, Kodak's chief technical officer, said the
ranking is "a tribute to the company's scientific and technical
staff and a measure of the company's commitment to innovation and
product leadership."  Kodak conducts its research and development
activities in Australia, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom
and the United States.

     Of the three U.S. companies listed in IFI's top 10, two--Kodak
and IBM Corp.--were companies involved in the imaging/document
management industries.  The third was Motorola Corp.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
IMAGING TECHNOLOGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Will 1996 Turn Out to be the YEAR OF THE GHOST SITE?

     Microsoft Corp. Chairman Bill Gates has been known to be right
on the money, and in his latest book, "The Road Ahead," his analogy
that compares the Internet and multimedia feeding frenzy to the
American gold rush may be a harbinger of things to come.

     Unfortunately, as a new study by International Data Corp.
(IDC) notes, after the gold ran dry in the 1800s, ghost towns were
left behind.  The research and consulting firm predicts that 1996
will be a "year of disappointment" for investors and corporations
in the online marketplace, reflecting sluggish development of a
significant consumer base.  In addition, 20 percent of the Fortune
500 companies that have commercial Web sites will close or stop
maintaining them, resulting in "ghost sites."

     IDC also said the leading online information service providers
such as CompuServe Inc., America Online Inc., Prodigy Services Co.
and the Microsoft Network will realize more than 50 percent of
their revenues from offering access to the World Wide Web by the
middle of 1997, and that two of the four services will struggle for
survival.

     "Though we predict the overall growth in online subscribers
will continue to be very strong, we expect 1996 will show a high
turnover rate as users underwhelmed by the content on the Web
cancel their subscriptions and turn on their TVs," said Frank Gens,
senior vice president of research at IDC.  "Still, 1996 will be a
strategic investment year for businesses that expect to compete in
the growing electronic marketplace, because during the next five
years, the number of wired (i.e., online) users will rise to more
than 200 million, and by 2010, it will exceed 1 billion."

     Financial services companies, retailers and publishers will
bail out in the initial "hangover" period, Gens said, leaving the
door wide open for new leadership and the downfall of current
giants.  However, IDC predicts Microsoft will have a great 1996,
and its revenue will not be affected by potentially weaker holds on
the industry it may have with technology such as object linking and
embedding (OLE) and Visual Basic.

     Gens also forecasts that manufacturers of Internet appliances,
which allow users to access online information, will slash prices
in half by the end of 1996.  "The game console crowd is already
slicing away at the pricing for simple Web surfing devices," he
said.  "Within two years, Internet appliances will emerge as
giveaways - [from] less than $100 to free - by businesses that want
customers to access their online services."

     IDC is at (508) 935-4282 or http://www.idcresearch.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>