
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B06-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B041-153</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it109.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030650 text/html 67617
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:04:47 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:48 GMT
Content-length: 67430
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it109.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet <BR>
July 18, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI> CHILE: CHILE'S DEAL WITH THE MERCOSUR: BOLIVIA TO FOLLOW?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(828 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI> REGION: HELMS BURTON: PREPARING FOR RETALIATION: TO TRY AND HEAD OFF THE US</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1778 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI> REGION: AROUND THE BLOCS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(988 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI> MEXICO: WHY ZEDILLO MUST PROSECUTE RAUL SALINAS TO BOLSTER LAW AND ORDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI> MEXICO: GUERRERO: ANOTHER REVOLT?: OR AGENTES PROVACATEURS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1041 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI> MEXICO: OAXACA: MORE GUERRILLAS?: PRD CLAIMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(477 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI> MEXICO: CHIAPAS: MASSACRE: IN NORTH OF STATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(369 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI> MEXICO: POLITICAL REFORM: PRD PROTESTS OVER TABASCO: AND WITHDRAWS FROM &nbsp;political reform talks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1436 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI> MEXICO: THE PRD ELECTION: THREE CANDIDATES: 1.4M VOTERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(529 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI> MEXICO: THE DROUGHT: MAIZE IMPORTS TO DOUBLE TO 7M T IN 1996: STRUCTURAL &nbsp;adjustment in agriculture</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1150 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI> MEXICO: GAS: PRIVATE PIPELINES: 10 NETWORKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI> MEXICO: THE UNIONS: TEACHERS' DEMO ENDS IN VIOLENCE: MEXICO CITY POLICE &nbsp;chief sacked</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(600 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI> MEXICO: FOCUS ON THE SALINAS BROTHERS: THE PRESSURE MOUNTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(596 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 CHILE: CHILE'S DEAL WITH THE MERCOSUR: BOLIVIA TO FOLLOW?

 Chile finally signed an agreement on commercial association with the 
Mercosur on 25 June. The deal, which effectively makes Chile an associate 
member of the trading bloc, will come into force on 1 October. This deal, 
and the somewhat fudged framework agreement with Bolivia, were driven 
forward by Argentina, which held the rotating six month presidency of the 
Mercosur until the end of June. The presidency for the next term is held by 
Brazil, which is keen on making similar agreements with Colombia and 
Venezuela.

 The Mercosur's agreement with Chile will not make the country a full member 
of the Mercosur and will mean that any future agreements between the 
Mercosur and other countries will have to be agreed by the Mercosur and also 
by Chile (the so-called four plus one formula). The Argentine foreign 
minister, Guido Di Tella, admitted that Chile's position could be seen as an 
intermediate step: he said that the Mercosur would like Chile to have an 
even closer relationship and did not rule out this possibility. The big 
sticking point here though is external tariffs: Chile has a fixed 11% tariff 
while the Mercosur's tariffs range in bands from zero to 20%. 

 The agreement between the Mercosur and Chile runs to 58 articles and 27 
chapters which deal with topics such as commercial and customs arrangements, 
fiscal policy, capital movement and integration of infrastructure. The two 
sides also agreed on a dispute settlement procedure based on a panel of 
experts. Under the terms of the agreement roughly 80% of the trade between 
the Mercosur and Chile will face immediate tariff reductions of 40% and more 
than 90% of the value of the products traded between Chile and the Mercosur 
will be free of tariffs in eight years' time.

 Some products (mostly agricultural, but also carparts) have been excluded 
from the arrangement. In Chile's case these products are meat, edible oil 
and sugar. Chilean production of these products will be protected by tariffs 
for 15 years.  Chile's wheat tariffs will only start to come down after 
eight years, provided that 90% of the rest of the trade between the Mercosur 
and Chile is free of any tariff, as is envisaged. The Chilean wheat market 
will be open to its Mercosur partners from 2014.  

 Sticking points. One of the thorniest issues that had to be resolved before 
the agreement was signed was over rules of origin. The Mercosur's rule is 
that 60% of a product has to be manufactured in the Mercosur area to be 
considered local and therefore eligible to be bought and sold free of 
tariffs in the Mercosur. Chile broadly agreed with this but wanted 
exceptions made for some bottled foods, clothes and printed and computer 
goods coming from Chile.

 Argentina made a concession on textiles and shoes, agreeing that Chilean 
products could enter its market on the same terms as other Chilean products. 

 The two sides have also fudged the issue of whether in future agreements 
the concessions offered to a third country should automatically be offered 
to the other parties to this agreement. The two sides agreed to set up a 
committee to study this. 

 One big attraction of the deal with Chile from the Mercosur's point of view 
is Chilean agreement for the use of its ports to ship Mercosur products to 
the booming markets of East Asia. 

 Bolivia. Di Tella said that the Mercosur and Bolivia had agreed on 
mechanisms covering 80% of the trade between the Mercosur and Bolivia. They 
failed, however, to sort out a deal for the other products. Bolivia wanted 
an asymmetrical deal under which the Mercosur would open its market to 50% 
of Bolivia's exports but Bolivia would only open up to 25% of the Mercosur's 
exports. Bolivia also wanted a special deal on local content: 40% instead of 
the Mercosur's 60%.

 The two sides have now come to an agreement: signing a framework document 
at the end of June that commits them to negotiating a free trade deal within 
90 days. This deal is supposed to come into force on 1 January 1997. 

 According to Alejandro Mayoral, the Argentine foreign trade minister, what 
the Mercosur has done with Chile is sign a framework agreement that will 
allow each Mercosur country to then sort out bilaterally its tariff 
arrangements with Bolivia. This, he pointed out, was very different from 
what had been arranged with Chile, and the framework agreement with Bolivia 
was more likely to be a model for future Mercosur trade agreements with 
Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru and Ecuador, Mayoral said. 

 He argued that this was an extension of the old Aladi (Asociacion 
Latinoamericana de Integracion) system, which grades each country according 
to its economic development and uses this as a basis for fixing trade 
preferences. This means that each country in the Mercosur could have 
different trade arrangements with a third country with tariffs ranging from 
12% to 41%. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 REGION: HELMS BURTON: PREPARING FOR RETALIATION: TO TRY AND HEAD OFF THE US

 So far the US has only been criticised for approving the Helms-Burton law 
which seeks to penalise non-US companies which do business or invest in 
Cuba. The law was even discussed at the recent G7 summit in France: the 
other industrialised countries made it clear to the US that they disagreed 
with the law but agreed to wait a bit longer before they launched a 
concerted protest at an international body such as the World Trade 
Organisation.

 What everybody is waiting for is 15 July. By then President Bill Clinton 
has to decide whether to allow the sanctions envisaged by the Helms-Burton 
Act to be imposed. If he does so, he is likely to trigger a welter of 
reprisals from two of the US's most important trade partners, Canada and 
Mexico.

 The penalties envisaged by the Helms-Burton law (or to give it its proper 
title, The Cuban Liberation and Democratic Solidarity Act) are due to come 
into force from 1 August. Last month the US published details of how it 
would apply these provisions of the Act (the so-called Title III) and a list 
of which companies would be subject to them.

 Blacklist. In accordance with the law, the US warned three companies that 
they were falling foul of the Helms-Burton Act by using assets which were 
claimed by their original US owners. The three companies are Sherritt 
International, a nickel mining company which uses nickel deposits and 
equipment claimed by Freeport MacMoRan; Domos from Mexico and Stet from 
Italy, both of which are developing Cuba's telephone system with assets 
claimed by the US company AT&T. Though these companies have 45 days to 
withdraw from Cuba or face the penalties, they have all said that they will 
not withdraw from Cuba.

 On the other hand Cementos Mexicanos, the world's third largest cement 
company, has bowed to US pressure and told Washington that it will withdraw 
from Cuba. Cemex had already suspended its activities in there as a 
precautionary measure. 

 Around 340 Mexican companies, all with business and investments in Cuba, 
could be affected by the Helms-Burton Act. 

 So far, Mexico has taken a more conciliatory attitude to the Act than 
Canada. Mexico seems determined to go through all the Nafta hoops before it 
starts to take reprisals. Canada, on the other hand, has already prepared 
its retaliatory legislation. It is only using the Nafta mechanisms as a 
back-up. 

 Nafta hoops. Mexico has asked for a meeting of the Free Trade Commission, 
which is composed of the three countries' trade ministers, to discuss the 
issue raised by the Helms-Burton Act. Mexico intends to argue that the 
Helms-Burton Act violates Nafta. Herminio Blanco, the secretario de Comercio 
y Fomento Industrial (Secofi), called for the  meeting under Article 2.007 
of Nafta.

 Canada. Blanco's Canadian counterpart, Arthur Eggleton, has also called for 
a trade ministers' meeting but has already drafted retaliatory action. 
Canada had previously held two bilateral meetings with the US on this issue, 
to no avail.

 Eggleton accused the US of taking aim at its foes but shooting its friends. 
He said Canada was the US's closest ally and that if the US has a 
disagreement with Cuba it should not take it out on Canada.

 Canada's government has drawn up legislation which would allow its citizens 
to sue in Canadian courts to recover any losses caused by Helms-Burton and 
to block the enforcement in Canada of judgments handed down under any 
objectionable foreign law, such as  the Helms-Burton Act. 

 The Canadian legislation is in the  form of an amendment to the Foreign 
Extraterritorial Measures Act. The amendment also raises the maximum fine 
under Fema from Can Dollars 10,000 to US Dollars 1m to match the maximum 
imposed by Helms-Burton.

 The government, which has been criticised for proposing the changes as 
amendments to a current act rather than proposing them to parliament, says 
that the counter-measures will be in place by 1 November. This is the first 
date by which companies could be punished by Helms-Burton. 

 Pre-emptive. The Canadian action is specifically designed to stop President 
Bill Clinton authorising implementation of the penalisation clauses of the 
Helms-Burton Act. The President has the right to impose or suspend the 
provisions of the law according to his view of events in Cuba, though the 
first period of authorisation expires in mid-July.

 Concerns. Both Canada and Mexico are worried that their companies and 
nationals could be punished by the US for doing business with Cuba. The most 
controversial provision of the Helms-Burton Act gives US companies the right 
to sue any company in the world for the losses it claims to have suffered 
from the use of its expropriated assets in Cuba.

 Besides this, the US government also has the right to refuse entry to 
executives (and their families) of companies who trade and invest in Cuba. 
Already the children of some senior executives at Mexican companies with 
extensive businesses in Cuba, have been withdrawn from US universities. 

 Mexican companies trade and invest extensively in Cuba. In 1995 the two 
countries exchanged goods and services worth US Dollars 363m, according to 
Secofi. This was nearly twice as much as in 1994. 

 Mexican argument. Herminio Blanco at Secofi argues that the Helms-Burton 
Act clearly infringes both chapter 11 and chapter 16 of Nafta, which 
enshrine the free circulation of investment, trade and businessmen 
throughout the territory of the three Nafta signatories. 

 Schedule. Under the terms of Nafta, a commission has to be convened within 
10 days of one of the members calling for it. (Both Mexico and Canada have 
done so). The Mexicans lodged their application on 18 June, but the 
commission failed to meet by the beginning of July. Nafta rules stipulate 
that as the next stage a complainant can call for a Nafta panel to be set up 
to consider the issues. This panel, which will be composed of experts and 
officials, has five months to reach a decision.

 Reprisals. Although the Mexican government's line appears to be to exhaust 
Nafta procedures before taking unilateral action, some Mexican senators are 
already preparing retaliatory legislation. Rodolfo Becerril Straffon, a 
member of the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional and chairman of 
the senate's trade committee, has tabled a draft bill which would penalise 
companies owned by Cuban-Americans which wanted to do business in Mexico. 
Another suggestion is that companies that withdraw from Cuba because of the 
Helms-Burton law should be fined. 

 Becerril Straffon said that the tricky part of such a bill was to ensure 
that it did not lead to further countermeasures by the US against Mexican 
companies trying to do business in the US. The senate has plenty of time to 
come up with a solution, as it is currently in recess and not due to 
reassemble until September. 

 The senate reckons it is in a strong position. It notes that according to 
Secofi, Mexico's imports from the US increased from US Dollars 41.6bn in 
1994 to US Dollars 46.3bn in 1995. 

 Cuba. The island's government is also working hard on ways of getting 
around Helms-Burton, the Cuban minister of foreign investment, Ibrahim 
Ferradaz said. He refused, however, to go into details about what the 
government would (or could) do. He pointed out that the international 
community had objected in very strong terms to the law and the people most 
penalised by it would be US executives wanting to do business in Cuba.

 The minister was speaking during a trip to Europe last month (June) to 
promote Cuba's new free trade zones. Although no zones have yet been 
created, there is legislation in the works to set them up, probably in 
Mariel, Cienfuegos and the area around the airport at Havana. Ferradaz said 
that the legislation would be designed to attract foreign investors and 
create jobs. 

 Regional objections. Apart from Canada and Mexico, the US's closest allies 
in the region reckon that the US has overstepped the mark. Venezuela's 
foreign minister, Miguel Angel Burelli, said that Helms-Burton broke the 
first principle of international law which was that one country could not 
apply its laws to another. He said that Venezuela would continue to do 
business with Cuba and not stop businessmen from travelling there. 

 Burelli noted that the OAS had also asked its legal committee to comment on 
the scope of the Helms-Burton Act. He said that 32 of the 34 members of the 
OAS had voted for the report on the Act. [Dominica was an absentee, while 
the US voted against].

 Honduras was another country to support the OAS report. The foreign 
minister, Delmer Urbizo Panting, said that there were some elements of 
extraterritoriality about the law which needed clarification. 

 Russia: An official close to the Russian foreign minister, Yuri Primakov, 
said that he doubted that the Helms-Burton Act would affect Russia's 
relations with Cuba. 

 Mexico: Three Mexican daily newspapers, La Jornada, El Financiero and 
Excelsior are now free to circulate in Cuba. Currently Excelsior is sending 
about 50 copies a day to the island. The papers are sold for dollars in 
tourist resorts. Other foreign publications on sale in Cuba include Hola, 
Cambio 16 and El Pais from Spain, Le Monde from France and Corriere della 
Sera from Italy. 

 Spain: The right-wing government of prime minister Jose Maria Aznar is 
taking the most pro-US line. Aznar announced that Spain would stop official 
cooperation with the Cuban government. The projects covered by this 
programme are minuscule (the only one still running is for a bakery) but the 
symbolic effects of the suspension are far more significant. The Cuban 
government is fretting that Spain might end a US Dollars 160m credit line 
which insures Spanish exporters to Cuba. Another vulnerable project is the 
Instituto de Cooperacion Iberoamericana which is providing US Dollars 2m to 
help repair one of Havana's aqueducts. 

 Chile: The Chilean government said that seven Chilean companies could be 
vulnerable to the Helms-Burton Act. The bulk of the companies involved have 
made investments in Cuba's citrus industry, though one has invested in the 
shoe industry and another in the tourism sector. The companies involved are: 
Zapatos Dolphin and in the fruit sector Ingelsco, New World Fruit and Pole. 
The three companies with tourism investments are Latinexim, Santa Ana and 
Inmobiliara Santa Cruz. Altogether Chilean companies have invested about US 
Dollars 60m in Cuba.

 The right in Chile alleges a US Dollars 23m credit line to finance Chilean 
humanitarian exports to Cuba from the Banco del Estado de Chile has been 
used to finance newsprint which is used for propaganda. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 REGION: AROUND THE BLOCS

 Mexico: Mexico's trade is becoming even more dominated by its North 
American partners, the official Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, Geografia 
e Informatica reports. It noted that despite government efforts to diversify 
the country's trade, the US and Canada accounted for 86% of Mexico's exports 
and supplied 78% of its imports. In the comparable period of 1995 the 
figures were 80% for Mexican exports and 70% for Mexican purchases.

 Mexico's free trade deals with other Latin American countries (Bolivia, 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile and Venezuela) are not doing as well. In the 
first quarter of this year only 8% of Mexico's exports went to Latin America 
and only 5% of its imports came from the region. Only Chile, among Mexico's 
regional partners, has seen its exports to Mexico increase between the first 
quarter of 1995 and the first quarter of 1996.

 Overall Mexico's exports in the first quarter were US Dollars 21.9bn and 
its imports were US Dollars 20.3bn. 

 Chile/Mercosur trade: Chile's trade with the Mercosur boomed last year. In 
1995 Chilean exports to the four Mercosur countries were US Dollars 1.77bn. 
This was 157% up on 1994's figure.

 The Mercosur's exports to Chile increased by 154% in 1995 to US Dollars 
2.56bn.

 Chile/Mercosur deal:  President Eduardo Frei has agreed that congress 
should have the right to vote on the trade deal with the Mercosur. 
Previously the government had been unwilling to do this arguing that the 
deal was an extension or modification of existing Aladi arrangements and 
therefore there was no need for congress to become involved. The opposition 
parties had argued that the deal was in fact a treaty and therefore should 
be submitted to congress.

 The foreign minister, Jose Miguel Insulza, said that the President was 
making a goodwill gesture and not setting a precedent.

 EU: The EU's relations with the Mercosur are getting closer. An EU 
commissioner, Miguel Marin, attended the recent Mercosur summit in Argentina 
(at which the deal with Chile was signed) Earlier the EU's (almost 
powerless) parliament agreed a framework trade agreement with the Mercosur. 

 Labour challenge: Three groups from Mexico and the US are protesting over 
alleged labour violations in Mexico. Human Rights Watch/Americas, the 
International Labor Rights Fund and the Mexican Association of Democratic 
lawyers submitted a petition in mid-June to the US National Administration 
Office claiming that the Mexican government has not upheld workers rights 
and in particular has impeded their freedom of association and their legal 
rights of a fair trial and appeal. 

 The case will go a long way to settling whether Nafta can be used to uphold 
Mexican labour rights. The USNAO was set up to respond to violations of the 
North American Agreement on Labour Rights, commonly known as the Nafta side 
agreement on labour.

 In their petition the three groups accuse Mexico's federal conciliation and 
arbitration tribunal of repeatedly violating the labour side agreement in 
its deals with the former union at the fishing ministry.

 According to the petition, the tribunal has prevented members of the 
independent fishing ministry union (the Sindicato Unico de Trabajadores de 
Secretaria de Pesca) from exercising their right of freedom of association 
and to organise a union. This behaviour started in 1995, when the union ws 
replaced by one that was more loyal to the ruling PRI. The tribunal, which 
deals with issues involving public sector employees, used a law that 
prevents government agencies recognising more than one government entity. 
Once the new union was recognised the SUTSP was outlawed. 

 The executive director of Human rights Watch/ Americas, Miguel Vivanco, 
argues that what the tribunal has done falls into a pattern in which the 
laws and structures of pro-government unions in Mexico are used to inhibit 
independent union activity. he said that he hoped Nafta's labour rights' 
side agreement would be strong enough to resolve both the case and the 
fishing ministry's wider problem. 

 The USNAO panel has 60 days to decide whether to take the case. Even if it 
does, it has no powers to force a change or a remedy upon Mexico. The Human 
Rights Watch/America people realise this and say that the true test will be 
how the Mexican government reacts to the findings. 

 The omens are not good. The government failed to act even after the SUTSP 
won some favourable rulings in the Mexican courts.

 On the other hand, the ILO argues that this case is much stronger than 
previous cases dismissed by the USNAO because it focuses on the law than 
restricts the number of unions in federal workplaces. This law is, according 
to Joel Solomon, Human Rights Watch's research director, a clear violation 
of the Nafta side agreement that guarantees that workers can organise unions 
free of government interference. 

 The Mexican counterpart to the USNAO is currently  considering a claim from 
the Mexican telecommunication workers' union which claims that a US company, 
Sprint, closed down a San Francisco office to prevent a unionising effort by 
235 employees. The Mexican NAO has agreed to delay action until the US 
National Labor Relations Board makes its final ruling on the case. 

 Costa Rica-Chile: The two countries have agreed on an investment protection 
deal. The deal will be signed during President Eduardo Frei's visit to Costa 
Rica in July. This has suddenly become important following the purchase of 
the Del Monte fresh fruit company (which has US Dollars 200m worth of 
investments in Costa Rica) by Chilean investors. Chilean companies also have 
important investments in the Costa Rican fertiliser company, Fertica. 

 Mercosur/Textiles: Brazil has agreed not to cut the period for financing 
textile imports from six months to one month. Its Mercosur partners had said 
that this measure would damage their textile exports to Brazil. Brazil has 
also been criticised by Paraguay and Uruguay respectively for blocking 
exports of dairy goods and rice from its two neighbours. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: WHY ZEDILLO MUST PROSECUTE RAUL SALINAS TO BOLSTER LAW AND ORDER

 As we warned last month, President Ernesto Zedillo's run of luck so far 
this year was overdue a reverse. The government has had a bad month: the 
unrest in the south of the country, which we examine in some detail in this 
issue, has been capped by the appearance of the Ejercito Popular 
Revolucionario in Guerrero. Political analysts in Mexico have hinted very 
broadly that the EPR may be a group of agentes provocateurs, set up by the 
authorities to justify a crackdown.

 The yearning for law and order is not confined to the government. Even the 
EPR called for more law and order in its Declaracion de Aguas Blancas: a 
strange demand for a group that is also apparently calling for the overthrow 
of the state.

 Opinion polls in Mexico City show that the rise in crime is the main 
concern. This is why the President's decision to replace Mexico City's 
police chief with a general (who in turn has appointed soldiers to key 
positions) may well be politically astute. 

 Yet establishing the rule of law means, as the ordinary Mexican 
understands, curbing the rule of men. This means that the government has to 
make up its mind about the Salinas brothers. There is growing evidence that 
Raul Salinas de Gortari made money because his brother was President. So far 
the focus of the investigatory efforts, both official and by the media, have 
been on Raul. His brother, and other key people in his entourage, have just 
as many questions to answer. 

 If President Zedillo is serious about reform, unraveling the tangled 
affairs of the Salinas brothers is vital. Raul must be brought to trial. 

 The case will clearly pose a serious problem for the ruling Partido 
Revolucionario Institucional where the Salinas brothers still have large 
numbers of supporters. But Zedillo could turn this to his advantage, using 
the case to separate the party from the government, which is the key 
objective of his political reform programme. 

 Zedillo could also argue that such a dramatic court case, culminating in 
the conviction of Raul, could help the PRI in next year's mid-term 
elections. And the PRI is going to need all the help it can get.

 The economy is still centrifuging: the export companies and the rich are 
doing well but for the domestic economy and the poor life is getting 
tougher. It seems almost inevitable that the US Federal Reserve will start 
to raise short-term US interest rates in the autumn to slow down the US 
economy. Once this happens, Mexican exporters may well start to feel the 
pressure.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: GUERRERO: ANOTHER REVOLT?: OR AGENTES PROVACATEURS

 The government tried to play down the sudden appearance of another 
guerrilla army, the Ejercito Popular Revolucionario, in Guerrero. The 
guerrillas, who appeared to be well-equipped and armed with new guns, made 
their appearance on 28 June at Aguas Blancas, the site of a brutal massacre 
of 17 peasants exactly a year earlier: that massacre and the revelation of 
the ham-fisted attempt by the governor of the state, Ruben Figueroa, to make 
it appear that the peasants were armed, forced his resignation earlier this 
year.

 Upstage. The EPR's sudden appearance upstaged 5,000 other political figures 
who had come to pay homage to the peasants killed in the massacre. Among the 
notables attending the ceremony at Aguas Blancas, was Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, 
the left-wing presidential candidate (and probable victor) in 1988. He was 
clearly surprised by the EPR's appearance and annoyed when they started to 
read a document they called the Declaracion de Aguas Blancas. 

 This declaration appeared to be a justification for the armed struggle. It 
termed the government anti-democratic and committed to protecting the 
interests of foreigners and the business class. The document claimed that, 
against a background of institutionalised violence, the armed struggle was a 
legitimate and necessary means for a people to recover their national 
sovereignty and the rule of law.

 The EPR. The guerrillas themselves numbered about 100, according to those 
at the ceremony. The Secretaria de Gobernacion and the Procuraduria General 
de la Republica were more precise: they said that exactly 38 'armed persons' 
interrupted the ceremony as it was concluding. 

 The guerrillas had their faces hidden with balaclavas and handkerchiefs 
(like the Zapatistas) and were dressed in olive-green military fatigues. 
They were armed with AK-47s, which are known in Mexico as cuernos de chivo 
(goats' horns). 

 The guerrillas laid flowers at the tombs of the massacred peasants before 
reading out their declaration. During the reading of this document, the 
guerrillas claimed that they numbered 500 and were active right across the 
mountains in the south of the state. They said that the organisation had 
arisen after men and women from the oppressed sectors of society had 
realised that they must organise themselves to fight back against their 
exploiters.

 One theme that runs through the declaration is the need for justice. This, 
the EPR reckons, can only be achieved by overthrowing the existing 
government. 

 One significant difference between the EPR and the Zapatistas is that the 
EPR does not make any claims to be speaking for the Indians. The EPR also 
seems to be much more aggressive: it called for the creation of popular 
tribunals to judge enemies of the people. 

 On the evening of 29 June, the EPR (apparently) stopped motorists on the 
highway between Mexico City and Acapulco and gave them copies of the 
Declaracion de Aguas Blancas. This led to a confrontation with the police. 
The guerrillas, according to the police, opened fire on them from a lorry 
which they were using to block the road. Three policemen and one civilian 
were wounded in the exchange of fire before the masked members of the EPR 
escaped. The police say that they found weapons and explosives in the lorry. 

 Government response. Like the PRD, the federal government doubted that the 
EPR was anything more than a publicity stunt. The government said that the 
only subversive groups in the mountains were drug traffickers and criminal 
bands.

 Nevertheless, the federal government sent 3,000 troops and police up into 
the mountains to try and flush out the guerrillas. The government said it 
would ensure that the army took more care than it did in Chiapas, where it 
was used to reclaim territory occupied by the Ejercito Zapatista de la 
Liberacion Nacional in 1994.

 Guerrero, more than Chiapas, has a reputation in Mexico for being the last 
redoubt of guerrilla bands. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the remnants 
of Maoist focos holed up in the mountains. They were only dispersed when 
their ideological leader, professor Lucio Cabanas was killed in December 
1974. Cabanas was the leader of the Partido de los Pobres. 

 Criticism. Unlike the Zapatistas, whose leader subcomandante Marcos 
impressed the middle-classes with his wit and general air of romance, the 
EPR has annoyed the middle classes. One of the most annoyed was Cuauhtemoc 
Cardenas, one of the PRD's most senior figures. The EPR's arrival at the 
tombs of the massacred peasants interrupted his eulogy of them. All of the 
murdered peasants had been PRD members. 

 Cardenas and other senior PRD figures at the ceremony left Aguas Blancas 
almost as soon as the guerrillas appeared. Cardenas then issued a fierce 
statement from Mexico City. He called the EPR's appearance a grotesque 
pantomime. He said that the appearance of the group 'disguised as guerrillas 
would have been unimportant if it was not for the fact that they were 
carrying heavy weapons.' He called the 'guerrillas' both 'irresponsible' and 
'provocative'. He accused them of being under the control of those who had 
ordered the killing of the 17 peasants a year earlier. 

 Other politicians as well as NGOs, the Church and businessmen have said 
that an armed uprising is a dead end and that the EPR risks undoing what the 
Zapatistas have achieved. 

 Gonzalo Ituarte, a priest in San Cristobal de la Casas, said that the EPR 
would definitely have an effect on the peace talks between the government 
and the Zapatistas but it is still too early to speculate on what the effect 
will be. 

 Some analysts have even claimed that the EPR is a group of agentes 
provocateurs, set up by the authorities to link the left-wing Partido de la 
Revolucion Democratica to guerrillas and more importantly, head off the 
investigation into who knew what about the cover-up of the massacre at Aguas 
Blancas.

 This scepticism is shared by locals who say that the army has been 
patrolling the mountains for the past couple of years and found traces of 
guerrillas. In Chiapas, it should be remembered, the army found several 
camps six months before the Zapatistas seized San Cristobal and the other 
towns on 1 January 1994. The army, though, thought that the camps were not 
important. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: OAXACA: MORE GUERRILLAS?: PRD CLAIMS

 Hector Sanchez, a PRD senator and a likely candidate for the governorship 
of the state, claims that Oaxaca, a traditionally polarised state, is also 
on the point of revolt. He claimed that there were guerrillas to the south 
and east of the state and in the northern Indian communities there was a 
feeling that the political system had failed them and they needed to resort 
to arms to make their points.

 Sanchez claimed that the state government, headed by Diodoro Carrasco, was 
to blame for letting the situation get out of hand. He said that the 
Oaxquenos are irritated at what is happening in Chiapas, where Indian issues 
are (now) treated delicately.

 Oaxaca, which was the scene of bitter feuds and fighting in the Revolution, 
is still a very Indian state. According to the 1990 census, 40% of the 
state's 3m inhabitants  either speak an Indian language or are dependents of 
a head of a family who is either bi-lingual or a monoglot speaker of an 
Indian language.

 Government. According to the senator, the state government does not realise 
that the state is a tinderbox. He accused the government of not realising 
that the chorus of complaints were about similar things: political 
assassinations, squabbles over the results of elections, crime, the 
hopelessness of the law enforcement agencies, the use of troops in the state 
and the lack of democratic accountability were all part of the same story. 
The state government prefers to view each case as a product of a unique 
circumstance. 

 Carrasco admitted that there had been and there still were social problems 
in the state and pressure for the fight against poverty to be speeded up but 
he flatly denied that any of the agitators on social questions had links to 
armed groups, with political and ideological objectives. 

 The senator claimed, in Proceso, a news magazine, that the heavy handed use 
of troops to try and prevent the Zapatistas establishing their organisation 
in Oaxaca could trigger an uprising. The army, under the pretext of clamping 
down on drug traffickers, has been moving into Indian villages and 
interrogating Indian leaders. The focus of this activity has been in the 
Sierra Sur where hundreds of police and soldiers have been searching for 
Zapatistas.

 Politics. What is clear is that electoral violence (including 
assassination) is on the increase in the state. According to Proceso, there 
have been at least 11 political assassinations in the past six months. In 
April alone first Feliciano Riano Lopez, the president of the Comisariado de 
Bienes Comunales de San Lucas Atoyaquillo and two of his supporters were 
gunned down by a group, presumably hired by local landowners, and then 
Orlando Guerra Guerra, a leader of the local left-wing opposition was killed 
by Mariano Guerra Lopez, the mayor and a member of the ruling Partido 
Revolucionario Institucional. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: CHIAPAS: MASSACRE: IN NORTH OF STATE

 The outbreak of political violence in the north of the state in June has 
left 26 people dead. In the first half of 1996, clashes between the ruling 
Partido Revolucionario Institucional and the opposition Partido de la 
Revolucion Democratica and the Partido de Trabajo have cost 34 lives.

 According to the opposition parties and human rights organisations, the PRI 
is backed by thugs known as guardias blancas. These groups are financed by 
local landowners and politicians and even federal deputies. 

 The violence may be the start of an attack on civil society, said Samuel 
Ruiz, the bishop of San Cristobal de las Casas. He is also the president of 
the Comision Nacional de Intermediacion, which is trying to mediate between 
the government and the Ejercito Zapatista de Liberacion Nacional.

 The people behind the killings, according to the bishop, are being backed 
by the authorities. He said that in several cases where witnesses were 
prepared to testify the authorities refused to act. he said that the 
killings had been responsible for driving 800 peasants from their homes.

 The bishop pointed out that the authorities, instead of acting, preferred 
to blame priests for fomenting the social unrest in the area and even 
sometimes being involved in murder. He also claimed that the authorities 
were using evangelical Christians to try and weaken the support for the 
Roman Catholic Church in the area of conflict. 

 The big problem in the state, besides the Zapatistas, is land. The peasants 
want to use it for subsistence farming while the landowners prefer ranching. 
According to figures from the state government, 80% of the people in the 
area where the killings are most numerous are illiterate and landless. 

 Zapatistas: The government is due to hold another round of talks with the 
Zapatistas on 8 July. This will follow their Foro Especial Para la Reforma 
del Estado, which was scheduled for the first week of July. As a token of 
good faith, the Zapatistas would like the government to release 17 
Zapatistas held in prison and cancel the arrest warrants for other Zapatista 
leaders. The government negotiators, in the form of the Comision de 
Concordia y Pacificacion, are disposed to agree.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: POLITICAL REFORM: PRD PROTESTS OVER TABASCO: AND WITHDRAWS FROM 
political reform talks

 The left-wing Partido de la Revolucion Democratica has withdrawn from the 
political reform debate that is being held in the national congress. The 
PRD's decision, which is more symbolic than practical, came after President 
Ernesto Zedillo made a visit to Roberto Madrazo, the governor of Tabasco on 
25 June. The PRD saw this visit as a gesture of support for Madrazo.

 The government accused the PRD of trying to use the negotiations over 
political reform as a lever to achieve its own political ends. The PRD is 
well aware that the main opposition party scored a success by refusing to 
take part in the negotiations over political reform until the result of an 
election in Huejotzingo, in the backwoods of Puebla, had been resolved in 
its favour. 

 The PRD has accused Madrazo, and produced supporting evidence, of breaking 
the legal limit on how much could be spent on his (successful) election 
campaign in 1994. According to the PRD, Madrazo spent 128m pesos on his 
campaign: at the then prevailing exchange rate that was US Dollars 43m (or 
more than President Bill Clinton spent on his election campaign in 1992). 
The defeated PRD candidate, Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, said that the 
President's visit to Madrazo was unwise and provocative. Wisely, Lopez 
Obrador chose to spend the day of the President's visit in Monterrey, in 
Nuevo Leon. Lopez Obrador is one of the three candidates to take over from 
Porfirio Munoz Ledo as president of the PRD.

 The PRD has accused Madrazo of taking money from some doubtful sources, as 
well as breaking the law on election spending. In particular, the party has 
accused him of taking US Dollars 4m from Carlos Cabal Peniche, the former 
head of the (now bust) Banco Union-Cremi. Peniche is now on the run, with 
warrants out for his arrest. He has been accused of using his fresh fruit 
business as a front for drug-running.

 Violence. The PRD was also angry at being blamed for the violence that 
accompanied Zedillo's visit. There were riots in the capital Villahermosa 
which left 20 people injured. 

 The riots were at their worst when the President visited the state's 
Procuraduria General de Justicia. The PRD claims that the riots were caused 
by the PRI, which assembled 200 thugs, armed them with machetes and then set 
them loose. The PRD said that the people who caused all the trouble had also 
demonstrated in favour of Roberto Madrazo. The PRD admitted to trying to 
seal off the capital from the rest of the state for the duration of the 
President's visit but claimed that its protest was peaceable. It said that 
the police did nothing to stop its supporters manning the roadblocks from 
being attacked by the Priistas 

 According to the authorities, the PRD's supporters blocked the roads 
leading to Villahermosa and burnt a  bus that was bringing Priistas to a 
rally in the city. The authorities also say that the PRD burnt a lorry as 
well as causing damage to other vehicles. The authorities said that two of 
the PRD's leaders, Julio Cesar Alvarez Santos and Alejandrino Alvarez, were 
leading attacks by PRD supporters on the passengers in the bus. Both men are 
local PRD deputies. The authorities also claimed that another PRD leader, 
the federal deputy, Octavio Romero, was leading another band of Perredistas 
who were blocking the road between Villahermosa and Ciudad del Carmen. 

 The unrest around Villahermosa led to the President cutting short his visit 
and departing from his published schedule. After the President had left, 
somebody threw a petrol bomb at Lopez Obrador's house in Villahermosa. 

 Demand. The PRD has now demanded that the national congress declare Tabasco 
ungovernable and that the current state government should be replaced. What 
the federal PRD deputies are asking is for the national congress to declare 
that the authorities in Tabasco have lost their powers, technically 
desaparicion de poderes. 

 This is a legal term which can only be declared by the federal congress. It 
means that the federal authorities recognise that the state government no 
longer has the legal and political authority to carry out its duties.

 The PRD argues that the state government is no longer in control and that 
the federal authorities must now, as the constitution envisages, step into 
the breach. One PRD leader in the state, Rafael Lopez Cruz, made the barely 
veiled threat that there was a danger of people in Tabasco taking the law 
into their own hands. 

 The PRD pointed out that the day after the President's visit, Priistas had 
stormed the XEVA radio station to broadcast a message of support for 
Madrazo. They added that two days after the President's visit, local Priista 
deputies and officials had attacked Julio Cesar Alvarez Santos, the PRD 
deputy and supposed leader of the demonstrations on the day of the 
President's visit, in the local congress. 

 Federal level. The PRD has also called on the federal Procuraduria General 
to complete its investigation into Madrazo's election expenses. The local 
PRI had tried to claim that the federal authorities had no rights to 
investigate elections in the state, but the supreme court ruled against 
them. The Procuraduria investigation, though, is proceeding slowly.

 The PRD denies that it is playing politics over constitutional reform. The 
head of the party in the lower house, Jesus Ortega, said that the first 
condition for the party's resumption of talks is that the PRI publish its 
final, edited version of its proposals for constitutional reform.

 The second condition was that the main parties should set up a so-called 
mesa de coyuntura which would sort out the politics of introducing the 
reforms. The PRD would be happy for the question of Madrazo's election to be 
settled at the same time. 

 The PRD's third condition for rejoining the discussions is that the 
authorities in Tabasco should abandon their attempt to gaol the Perredistas 
whom they blame for the riots during the President's visit. 

 State of play. The discussions on constitutional reforms are currently 
trying to take on board the proposals made by the Partido Accion Nacional. 
The PAN had withdrawn from the discussions for three months, during which 
the PRI, PRD and the Partido de Trabajo, reached an agreement in April. The 
PAN wanted to get the result of an election in Huejotzingo overturned. 

 After winning its point a month ago, the PAN rejoined the discussions in 
congress. Currently legislators are considering 27 modifications to the 
constitution and a further 80 amendments to other laws. 

 The main change, which is supported by all the parties, is for the 
President and congress to surrender their (dominating) roles in the 
Instituto Federal Electoral. The IFE is in charge of running federal 
elections. The current proposal is that there should be an absolute majority 
of independents on the IFE board and that its president should be chosen by 
at least two thirds of congress. 

 The parties have also agreed that the Tribunal Federal Electoral, which is 
responsible for resolving election disputes, should now be answerable to the 
supreme court rather than the President. 

 A mechanism for the allocation of federal funds for elections was also 
agreed by the two parties: 70% should be awarded according to votes won 
while 30% should be awarded in inverse proportion to votes won. The 
government has also conceded that Mexicans resident abroad should be allowed 
to vote.

 The parties are now trying to find ways of turning these agreements in 
principle into legislation.  

 PAN. After getting its way over Huejotzingo, the PAN is now trying to 
behave in a statesmanlike way. Its president, Felipe Calderon Hinojosa, said 
that the riots in Tabasco did nobody any good.

 The party's secretary general, Juan Antonio Garcia Villa, has accused the 
ruling PRI of deliberately trying to stall the electoral reform programme. 
He accused the PRI of wanting to keep the negotiations deliberately 
ambiguous. The PAN's congressional leader, Ricardo Garcia Cervantes, accused 
the PRI of delaying talks for meetings where no firm proposals were made or 
crazy ideas were floated. 

 Garcia Cervantes pointed out that the politicians were running out of time. 
He said they had to agree on reforms, by the end of this month (July) at the 
very latest. If this did not happen, it was unlikely that the 1997 mid-term 
elections would be held under the new system. 

 The PAN complains that the PRI refuses to distinguish its position from the 
other parties. This, it says, will enable everybody to reach compromises 
that will work. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: THE PRD ELECTION: THREE CANDIDATES: 1.4M VOTERS

 The country's third largest party, the left-wing Partido de la Revolucion 
Democratica is electing its new president on 14 July. The PRD's  1.2m 
members are all entitled to vote in the secret ballot. 

 The three candidates are Heberto Castillo, a veteran senator from Veracruz; 
Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, the PRD leader in Tabasco and Amalia Garcia, a 
member of the party's national committee.

 Our bet is that Lopez Obrador will be elected. He is younger than Castillo 
and better known than Garcia. Castillo is the most interesting: he is 
campaigning on a platform of better organisation for the party and a 
harnessing of support from environmentalists and other activists. 

 The winner will take over from Porfirio Munoz Ledo, one of the senior 
Priistas who left the ruling party in 1987 to support Cuauhtemoc Cardenas in 
his run for the presidency in 1998.

 Mass suffrage. In order to enable most of its members to vote, the party 
expects to set up 6,000 polling booths across the country. Gerardo Unzueta, 
the head of the PRD's election committee and a former member of the Partido 
Comunista,  says that this part of the election alone will cost US Dollars 
400,000. 

 This will be the first time that a political party in Mexico has used a 
method that allows (most) of its members to vote. Previously, parties such 
as the PAN (the clericalist opposition party) held special congresses to 
elect members.

 The PRD claims that this method is the most democratic way to elect a new 
leader. The PRD says that it will even allow members who join at the polling 
station to vote.

 The party expects voting to be heaviest in the capital where it claims to 
have 135,000 members. It also has 48,000 members in Chiapas and 33,000 in 
Jalisco. Other important states are Sonora with 27,000 and Cardenas's home 
state of Michoacan, which has 25,000 perredistas. 

 PAN: Vicente Fox, the governor of Guanajuato and a possible presidential 
candidate in 2000, if the constitution is changed to allow the children of 
foreign nationals to become President, shocked both the PAN and the country 
by saying that Petroleos Mexicanos should be privatised. Fox, who was 
recently on a visit to New York, was quoted as saying that Pemex, a national 
icon, should be sold off. Although Fox has not denied what he was reported 
to have said, he has backed away from repeating it.

 Fox has long had a stormy relationship with some of the more orthodox 
Panistas, such as the former party president Carlos Castillo Peraza. Fox is 
widely thought to be out of sympathy with the current party president (and 
Castillo protege) Felipe Calderon Hinojosa. 

 In a long interview in Proceso, Fox appears to rule out an alliance between 
the PAN and the PRD in either of the next two elections (the mid-term 
congressional elections in 1997 and the presidential elections in 2000). He 
points out that under the current election law, alliances between registered 
parties are specifically outlawed. Indeed the PRD had to become a new party 
in order to fight elections as the party of the united left.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: THE DROUGHT: MAIZE IMPORTS TO DOUBLE TO 7M T IN 1996: STRUCTURAL 
adjustment in agriculture

 The consequences of the drought in northern Mexico are beginning to become 
severe. On 30 May, 400 women and children stopped a train at San Nicolas de 
los Garza, near Monterrey, by putting cement bars across the tracks: they 
then carried away 40 tonnes of food in buckets. On 11 June, 50 youths 
stopped a grain train in the same area and raided it. 

 According to Mexican Commentary, a twice-weekly E-mail publication, an 
official report on the drought in Chihuahua found that 77 indigenous people 
(mostly children and the elderly) had died because of malnutrition and 
associated conditions in the first four months of the year.

 As we have reported regularly this year, the drought has become steadily 
worse. At the end of June, Proceso  published an in-depth report on the 
state of Mexican agriculture. The report was a damning view of recent 
Mexican agricultural policies. 

 Over the past three years Mexico has grown to become the US's fourth 
biggest agricultural market. According to US agricultural exporters, 
Mexico's maize crop (which provides the country's staple food, tortillas) 
averages between 12m and 15m t a year, but demand from human beings alone 
runs to 22m t.

 Proceso claimed that the government would have to spend at least US Dollars 
4bn on grain imports this year. The agriculture minister, Francisco 
Labastida Ochoa, said that the country would have to import between 8m and 
10m t of food. He reckoned that this would cost at least US Dollars 1.9bn.

 Labastida claimed that the country's stocks of food were adequate: he said 
that the Compania Nacional de Subsistencias Populares (Conasupo) had four 
months worth of meat and grains in its stocks. 

 This may be an overestimate: farmers are beginning to demand back crops 
which they have sold to Conasupo: at General Frias, members of the Frente 
Democratico Campesino said that they wanted 1,900 t of beans back. They said 
that Conasupo had paid them only 1,940 pesos a tonne when the market price 
was 4,000.  

 Labastida also claimed that the government would not alter its policy of 
subsidising staple foodstuffs. He said that the tortilla subsidy alone would 
cost 6bn pesos this year. 

 Infrastructure strains. The huge increase in Mexican imports of grains is 
putting a heavy strain on the country's infrastructure. Recently 30,000t of 
maize could not be unloaded at the port of Coatzacoalcos for two weeks 
because there were not enough railway wagons to transport the grain. 

 Cycle. The government has admitted that this year's production of grains 
will be badly hit by the drought. Farmers have been unable to sow for the 
spring summer season. The worst hit states according to the government are 
Baja California Sur, Coahuila, Chihuahua, Durango, Nuevo Leon, Sinaloa, 
Sonora and Tamaulipas.

 The problems this year follow on from a poor crop last year. US figures, 
cited by Proceso, put last year's harvest in Mexico at 23.77m t of grains 
and oilseeds. This was 11% down on the previous harvest of 26.8m t.

 The Union Nacional de Organizaciones Regionales Campesinas y Autonomas 
reckons that this year Mexico's maize, wheat, rice and bean crops will be 
13% down on 1995's. It reckons that the oilseeds crop will be 33% down. 
Unorca reckons that the country will have to import more than the regular 3m 
t of maize it has averaged over the past six years. The deputy trade 
minister has said that the government expects to import 5m t of maize and 
250,000t of beans. According to Ricardo Celma, director of the Consejo 
Norteamericano de Granos Forrajeros, the Secretaria de Comercio y Fomento 
Industrial has already authorised maize imports of 7.3m t for 1996. 

 The government reckons that the drought in these states (the worst for 50 
years) has prompted an increase in immigration. The government says that 
day-labourers have lost 25m working days because of the drought.

 Worries. Mexico has been using credit to help buy grain from US farmers. As 
part of the bailout package last year, the Mexican government got a credit 
line from the US Department of Agriculture of US Dollars 1.1bn which it has 
drawn down. 

 The problem this year is that US farmers are loth to allow grain to go to 
Mexico at subsidised rates. Ranchers in particular are putting pressure on 
the US government to halt the exportation of animal feed to Mexico. US 
ranchers say that the price of their animal feed has increased because of 
the drought in the Great Plains and that they have been forced to cut their 
losses by slaughtering cattle early. They now want the US to halt grain 
exports so that the price of feed can come down and they can start making a 
profit again.

 The US harvest this year is likely to be well down on last year's 275m t. 
The wheat crop this year is likely to be around 56m t (or 3m t less than 
last year. Wheat available for export is likely to be around 26.5m t (or 35% 
less than last year). The same sort of figures apply to maize. 

 Policy issue. The Mexican government is being criticised for having to 
spend so much on imports when it could avoid them by investing a fraction of 
the money in domestic agriculture. In particular, farmers say that the 
government should encourage banks to lend to agriculture. Farmers leaders, 
from the Congreso Agrario Permanente and the Union Nacional de Trabajadores 
Agricolas, claim that bank lending to agriculture has dropped by 50% since 
the economic crisis and the consequent increase in bad debts. 

 The Union Nacional de Organizaciones Regionales Campesinas y Autonomas 
recently distributed a report, Mexico y la Seguridad Alimentaria, which 
claimed that Nafta had severely damaged the prospects for 80% of Mexican 
farmers: the 3m ejidatarios and the 2.5m small farmers. Unorca also blames 
the agricultural reforms pushed through by the Salinas government (as a 
result of Nafta) for the fall in agricultural output. Essentially, the 
Salinas administration wanted to move from subsidising maize production to 
subsidising small maize producers. 

 The report reckons that the country will have to import a third of its food 
this year. This is despite a 29% fall over the past six years in demand for 
basic grains. 

 Dams: An official report by the Secretaria de Agricultura reported that at 
the beginning of June the country's 137 dams, which have a capacity of 
135,000m cubic metres, held only 10,000m cubic metres of water. This is only 
5m cubic metres more than the lowest figure ever recorded. The water levels 
at the beginning of June were 15,000m cubic metres below the normal level 
for this time of year and 15,000m cubic metres below the levels of a year 
ago. In round figures, the dams now hold 68% less water than they did a year 
ago. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: GAS: PRIVATE PIPELINES: 10 NETWORKS

 The government is inviting bids from the private sector for the 
construction of 10 new pipelines to supply industrial zones with natural 
gas. 

 One of the most attractive franchises will be to supply Mexico City. Its 
16m people use 350m cubic feet a day. Guanajuato also looks promising: its 
industrial zones at Leon, Salamanca, Celaya and Irapuato are also heavy 
users of gas. 

 The government hopes that bids will be made over the next 18 months and 
that the licences will be awarded and work will start at the end of 1997. 

 Pemex: The government's second attempt to sell off the country's 
petrochemical industry is not going well. Even the government admits that 
there are lacunas in the documentation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: THE UNIONS: TEACHERS' DEMO ENDS IN VIOLENCE: MEXICO CITY POLICE 
chief sacked

 The President sacked Mexico City's police chief at the end of May after his 
brutal crackdown on a teachers demonstration in the capital. To the horror 
of the opposition the new police chief is General Tomas Salgado. Salgado 
further alarmed the opposition by saying that he in turn would appoint 
soldiers to the principal police jobs in the capital.

 The dissident teachers were demonstrating for higher wages. They wanted a 
doubling of their US Dollars 150 a month salaries. Their union had settled 
for a 10% rise in January and a further 12% rise in May. 

 The official teachers union, the Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la 
Educacion, is one of the most powerful unions in the country. Its head, Elba 
Esther Gordillo, has been mentioned as a possible president of the ruling 
Partido Revolucionario Institucional. The teachers have embarrassed  
President Ernesto Zedillo before when he was minister of education. They 
forced him to withdraw a revisionary history textbook that put a positive 
gloss on the Porfirio Diaz period. Earlier textbooks had focused on the 
Revolution, which followed Diaz's fall, as laying the basis for modern 
Mexico. 

 The demonstration against the smallness of the pay award was led by the 
dissident Coordinadora Nacional de Trabajadores de la Eduacacion. The police 
argued that they had been attacked, but the President, in sacking the police 
chief David Garay, said that they had used too much force. 

 Fears that the country might be facing a wave of labour unrest are abating. 
The university teachers at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico have 
settled for the 12% increase offered. 

 On the other hand the Sindicato de Telefonistas is taking a tough line with 
Infonavit, the state organisation charged with supplying cheap housing. The 
union says that Infonavit has not been offering mortgages to telephone 
workers in proportion to the worker's contributions. 

 The telephone workers' union is one of the strongest in the country. It has 
survived the privatisation of the state telephone company, Telmex. The 
union's leader, Francisco Hernandez Juarez, has long squabbled with other 
unions which he sees as arms of the ruling PRI.

 The telephone workers' union is also concerned that Infonavit has not 
invested the money collected from workers wisely. Most of the money is 
currently held in low-yielding government bonds. The union wants its 
members' contributions to be invested in higher yielding (but not 
speculative) instruments. 

 Colosio killing: The judge has said that he will take another month to 
decide whether Othon Cortes Vazquez was in fact the man who fired a second 
shot in the murder of Luis Donaldo Colosio. Colosio was the ruling PRI's 
presidential candidate. He was killed on 23 March 1994 in Tijuana.

 Othon Cortes's lawyers argue that the prosecution case is weak: they point 
out that the only witness who says that he saw Cortes fire a shot was 17 
metres away. Another two witnesses who claimed to see Cortes brandishing 
what looked like a gun could not agree on his appearance. The defence also 
noted that the prosecution had not found the gun that Cortes was supposed to 
have fired, nor had they produced any forensic evidence to suggest that he 
had fired any gun. 

 The prosecution alleges that Cortes fired into Colosio's body while the 
convicted assassin, Mario Aburto, fired at Colosio's head.

 The Procuraduria General de la Republica said that the investigation into 
the supposed plot behind Colosio's assassination would continue to be run by 
Pablo Chapa Bezanilla, even though he was now moving to be subprocurador de 
procedimentos penales.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNet
July 18, 1996

 MEXICO: FOCUS ON THE SALINAS BROTHERS: THE PRESSURE MOUNTS

 The scandal over the way Raul Salinas de Gortari, the elder brother of the 
former President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, acquired his wealth refuses to 
die down. At the end of June, following a couple of US TV investigations 
into Raul's finances, the procurador general de la Republica, Antonio Lozano 
Gracia, announced that the Mexican authorities were investigating to see 
whether Raul had committed tax evasion. He is already in prison, accused of 
being the mastermind behind the assassination of the secretary general of 
the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional, Jose Francisco Ruiz 
Massieu.

 According to the investigation, broadcast on CBS, Raul had used false 
identities to accumulate US Dollars 300m in bank accounts outside Mexico. 
The implication is that Raul used his position as a senior official, and his 
relationship with his brother, for his own purposes. A programme on NBC 
implied that the President knew of this.

 The procurador said that his investigation had already discovered that Raul 
had understated his assets in Mexico alone by US Dollars 24m. In his 
position at the Comision Nacional de Subsistencias Populares, Raul's annual 
income should never have exceeded US Dollars 190,000. 

 The procurador is coming under pressure to take evidence from Amy Elliot, 
Raul's banker at Citibank. She is presumed to know more about Raul's 
finances than anyone else. CBS claimed that she had already been 'secretly' 
interviewed by officials from Mexico, the US and Switzerland about her 
client. CBS said that she had checked into Raul's background and been told 
that the money he was depositing came from the sale of a construction 
company.

 The procurador also claimed that the notion that Raul was involved in drug 
trafficking comes from the US Drug Enforcement Agency. 

 According to an article in La Jornada, which seems to draw on information 
that Raul gave to the Swiss authorities when they interviewed him in gaol 
last year, US Dollars 86m of his fortune was payment for advice he gave 
Mexican firms. Raul apparently said that this money would be used to set up 
an investment fund to promote Mexican economic development after his brother 
left office.

 This chimes with what Carlos Peralta, the head of Iusacell, a mobile 
telecoms company, said in January: he said that he had paid Raul US Dollars 
50m towards a fund. 

 Property: Before the programmes were broadcast the authorities seized 13 of 
Raul's properties on the Pacific coast. He has 10 apartments and two 
building lots in Ixtapa-Zihuatanejo and one apartment in Acapulco.

 Carlos: The government tried to deny that it has dismissed its ambassador 
to Ireland, Agustin Gutierrez Canet, for sponsoring the interview between 
the commentator, Jorge Castaneda and the former President, Carlos Salinas. 
It said that it had offered Gutierrez Canet the ambassadorship to Haiti 
which he had turned down. 

 The foreign minister, Jose Angel Gurria, said that the ambassador had lost 
the government's confidence and that the Irish post was important since 
Ireland held the presidency of the EU for the second half of 1996.


 Wages: The government said that claims from the independent Alianza Civica 
that President Zedillo's pay had trebled to 82,000 pesos (US Dollars 10,900) 
a month over the past 18 months were nonsense. It said that the President's 
pay had in fact dropped from 124,372 pesos (US Dollars 16,583) to 59,139 
pesos (US Dollars 7,885) a month. The Alianza was equally surprised when the 
presidency claimed that President Salinas had been paid US Dollars 36,050 a 
month. The Alianza thought he was being paid US Dollars 4,000. 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>