
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B28-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000320-B036-350</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ae23.html 205.156.212.5 19970114202440 text/html 52173
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 20:21:48 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:45:23 GMT
Content-length: 51986
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ae23.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet <BR>
September 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FRONT PAGE NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>     Welcome to the first issue of SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(246 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NASA UNLIKELY TO SUBMIT REVISED LUNAR/MARS PLANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OUTREACH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ORGANIZERS REPORT FAVORABLE RESPONSE TO OUTREACH EFFORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1139 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BUDGET</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EXPLORATION PLANS FACE UNCERTAIN BUDGETARY OUTLOOK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>EXPLORATION PROPONENTS BET ON MIKULSKI</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(914 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF HOUSE MARK-UP&nbsp;NASA PORTION OF FY '91 EXPLORATION INITIATIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(289 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>HUNTSVILLE FOCUSED ON TRANSPORTATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1113 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MOON/MARS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>JOHNSON LOOKS TO DIFFERENT LUNAR/MARS "PHILOSOPHIES"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(635 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>FUEL CELL RFP STALLED DUE TO BUDGET UNCERTAINTIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DNA SEEKS DESIGN FOR NON-NUCLEAR SPACECRAFT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>SDIO SEEKS PARTICIPATION IN ADVANCED PROPULSION PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>NASA SEEKS RESEARCH FOR STRATOSPHERIC AIRCRAFT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(39 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>CONTRACTOR SUPPORT NEEDED FOR NRL RESEARCH PROGRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>JSC SOLICITING PROPOSALS FOR DEFINITION STUDY ON SESA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NASA</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>NASA SEEKS SOLAR SYSTEM RESEARCH PROPOSALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SOVIETS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>SOVIETS LOOKING TO SELL PHOBOS SPACECRAFT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(432 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>DESIGN FOR MIR FOLLOW-ON SAID TO BE COMPLETED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

     Welcome to the first issue of SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY,

     Welcome to the first issue of SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY,
the new monthly newsletter devoted to covering developments in
the field of advanced space exploration.  In the months ahead we
will provide you with actionable information on technological
developments, strategies and procurements related to future
manned and unmanned space exploration.
     While we follow the broader congressional and White House
policy and budgetary decisions affecting future space activities,
our primary focus will be to provide you with a comprehensive
update on the wide range of technologies necessary for space
exploration.
     Each month we will brief you on on-going developments
related to the various vehicles and infrastructure facilities
contemplated in future space exploration plans.  We will also
report on technological developments in areas such as advanced
space power, propulsion and life support.  In addition, you will
be provided with the latest information on mission architecture
concepts and related organizational planning activities of NASA,
the Departments of Defense and Energy, as well as industry and
other interested groups.
     You will receive 4 months of SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY at
no cost.  After you've sampled the publication's news and
insights, we will ask you to become a subscriber--an offer you
can refuse without obligation or explanation.
     We hope this newsletter will serve your business needs as
well as provide a forum for discussions on advanced space-related
activities.  We welcome your suggestions and hope you will feel
free to contact our editors at 202/429-1888 when you have
relevant information.
     Now, here's the news:



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

NASA UNLIKELY TO SUBMIT REVISED LUNAR/MARS PLANS

     NASA will most likely not submit a formal alternative
lunar/Mars mission architecture plan to the Administration's
recently established "Synthesis Group," according to Jeffery
Rosendahl, NASA's Assistant Director For Space Exploration
(International).
     The Synthesis group was established by the Administration to
evaluate alternative lunar/Mars approaches, technologies and
ideas gathered through a public outreach program kicked-off last
spring.  According to organizers, the ultimate goal of the group
is to produce 2 or more relatively distinct final mission
architectures which would then be studied for 3-5 years.
     While NASA has taken a further look at the various issues
surrounding accomplishment of the lunar/Mars missions since
submitting its "90-day Report" on the subject last fall,
Rosendahl told SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY last week that NASA
officials are currently leaning against submitting any kind of
revised lunar/Mars mission architecture plans.

A Cautious Approach To Lunar/Mars Recommendations

     Last fall, the agency received sizable criticism for the
conservative approach it used when outlining how the United
States could accomplish the President's goals of manned missions
to the moon and Mars.  But although NASA Administrator Richard
Truly had yet to make a final decision on the issue last week,
according to Rosendahl it will not likely use this latest
opportunity to answer that criticism.
     "If the Synthesis Group does its job right, they will
produce the architectures" following their review this year,
Rosendahl said.  "Our indications from the (Synthesis
Group)...are that they don't want NASA to bring in an
architecture or anybody else, necessarily.  They believe that's
their job," he said.
     But, he admits that there are other reasons why the nation's
space agency is taking such a cautious approach to further
lunar/Mars-related recommendations--the bulk of which appear to
be undeniably rooted in experience.
     Rosendahl explained that there are 2 primary "traps" NASA
officials hope to avoid and 2 potential newspaper headlines
they'd rather not read.
     The first "trap" could be a situation where NASA makes
recommendations that are too specific and is subsequently seen as
backing a plan that may be in competition with the lunar/Mars
plans of others.  "We do not want to get into a situation where
we're seen as getting into a contest" with other potential
exploration organizers or see newspaper headlines that read "NASA
BACKS PLAN X."
     On the other hand, perhaps an even worst perception would be
that after months of further study and in the midst of many
innovative lunar/Mars suggestions coming forward, the agency
couldn't produce any further creative ideas on the subject.
"NASA FAILS TO COME UP WITH ANY IDEAS," Rosendahl jokes.
     He admits, though, that the agency is much "smarter" on the
missions than it was last year and has conducted further
lunar/Mars studies at both NASA headquarters and field centers
     "We've looked at a broader range of options," he said.
"Different schedules, different content, different levels of
ambition, different levels of technology."

Small Number of Factors Will Drive Program Content

     "In a certain sense, it's beginning to look like there are
really a small number of things that wind up driving program
content, what a total program might look like.  They seemed to be
sort of the scope and scale of what you'd like to do when you get
there, the kind of presence you'd like to have, the kind of
operations you'd like to do, the number of people you want to
have to carry them out, the level of technology that you
employ...Are you going to use simple extrapolations of current
technology or are you going to try and make major developments in
new technology?"  Other variables include cost and schedule,
Rosendahl added.
     Lockheed's Director for Space Station Operations, Gus
Gustafero, agrees that those types of top-level decisions are
critical to how a lunar/Mars mission architecture is actually
shaped.  "Those are the things that have to be defined.
Sometimes architecture is defined in terms of what you want to do
when you get there and some people define it as `Here's how you
get there and don't worry about what you do when you get there.'
But I think you've got to work the problem backwards.
     "You have to decide, either on the moon or Mars, what you're
going to do when you get there and then build a mission scenario
of how you're going to get there and then below that, start
working with functional requirements that decide things like what
kind of propulsion system do you want to work with--a nuclear or
chemical propulsion system?  Do you want solar arrays on the
surface or do you want radioactive isotope generators or do you
want to use fuel cells for power?"
     When and at what level the broader decisions will be made is
not clear yet.  "That's an interesting question," Rosendahl said.
"We have not been getting any strong signals from the (National)
Space Council as to what the boundary conditions and constraints
might be.  I think they're waiting to see what options (the
Synthesis Group) might want to come in with and what the
differences are."

NASA Will Strive For Flexible Management Plan

     With regard to what NASA's inputs will consist of, Rosendahl
said the agency will most likely steer its latest recommendations
toward broader management issues of how the Space Exploration
Initiative (SEI) program should be laid out during the next 3
years.
     "I think we are going to discuss something about how you
might lay out a near-term program...The real issue is the next 3
years.  (NASA's recommendations) are basically a programmatic
approach to laying this out which would make some sense so that
you have a way of developing enough information to make
intelligent decisions.
     "There is also an issue...as to whether you could
overspecify things now by specifying, for example, `Use this
particular engine and that particular component' versus `Here are
3 alternative technologies you ought to pursue.  When you have
the answers to the following sets of questions, then you can make
a decision.'
     "We will probably lay out the program, what our views are as
to what information needs to be developed to make decisions and
we will probably wind up giving our views on technologies.  How
much further, whether we're actually going to talk about systems
and architectures, I'm not sure.  We're more interested in making
sure that we present enough information for (the Synthesis Group)
to work on based on a perspective, rather than any particular
approach.
     "...We obviously have an interest in making sure that...a
sensible set of options come out...from the other end of the
Synthesis Group.  I think our interest is in having a sensible
program that we can go out and execute on behalf of the country"
should Congress and the Administration decide to do so, he added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

ORGANIZERS REPORT FAVORABLE RESPONSE TO OUTREACH EFFORT

     After a relatively slow start, organizers of the space
exploration outreach program say a recently completed 3-month
effort to gather innovative ideas on the subject was a success,
both quantitatively and qualitatively.
     The outreach effort, begun late last spring, consisted of
calls to the traditional aerospace community, as well as the
general public for alternative methods of achieving manned
missions to the moon and Mars.
     The 2 primary methods of solicitation involved the American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), which requested
ideas from its members, as well as the Rand Corp., which, under
NASA's direction, set up a toll-free public phone number and
issued response packages to anyone wishing to submit an idea.  In
addition, universities, NASA employees and various other
technical groups were called upon.
     In mid-summer, responses to the Rand and AIAA effort were
reportedly light.  But "it's obviously picked up since then,"
NASA's Jeffery Rosendahl said.  The Rand Corp. is expecting to
get some 3,000 ideas from its outreach efforts "which is going to
give them plenty of things to do or to take a look at.  We are
just starting to break it up (the responses) by discipline, but
the responses were rather broadly spread across over every
technology that the sciences consist of...So they're beginning to
go through the job (of sorting through the responses) and to make
some sort of an input to the (Synthesis Group) towards late
September or October," Rosendahl said.
     As of Aug. 17, the Rand Corporation had received more than
10,000 requests for response packets under the outreach program
and 3,302 notices of intent to submit ideas.  Of the intended
responses, 68.7% are expected to come from individuals; 16.3%
from aerospace companies and other for-profit enterprises; and
8.1% from educational institutions.  The remainder are in other
categories.
     Space transportation was the largest category of intended
responses to Rand with 16.7%.  Other categories include mission
concepts (16.5%); life support systems (10.3%); structures and
materials (9.8%); space and surface power (7.4%); space
processing and manufacturing (6.3%); system design and analysis
(5.7%); automation and robotics (4.7%); communications (4.1%);
ground support and simulation (3.4%); and information systems
(2.3%).

AIAA Gets Good Response; But Few Surprises

     In addition to the Rand effort, "the AIAA is hard at work,"
Rosendahl said.  "They've collected hundreds of ideas and they've
got a number of technical committees that have been set up that
are going through those ideas and coming up with their own ideas.
A lot of that is going to culminate at the AIAA Space Exploration
Initiative (SEI) outreach conference Sept. 5 and 6.  And we
ourselves will get the first inkling, I think, of what's coming
out of that at that conference."
     AIAA's Director of Science and Technology Policy, Dr. Jerry
Grey, told SET that the association received a total of some 530
responses from its members.  Of those, Grey estimates that about
450 could be considered "really responsible."
     "The response was much greater than we thought and the
quality was extremely high."  Most of the ideas that were
submitted were not surprising though, Grey said.  "There's almost
no such thing as a new idea.  Many of them (the responses) were
revised concepts" of ideas that have been around for awhile or
"old technology done in a new way."
     Grey said the type of responses received varied greatly from
overall mission architecture concepts to a new way to make a bolt
fasten better.


From Bolts To Architecture--Type of Responses Vary

     AIAA's criteria for evaluating the proposals was extremely
loose, Grey explained.  "We didn't take any programmatics into
account," he said.  The primary criteria used to analyze the
responses were things such as `Does the idea violate the laws of
physics?  Is it applicable to space exploration?  Is it already
being considered or included in the baseline technologies under
study?  And does it have any benefits over the current
baseline?'"
     AIAA's process of evaluating the responses is already well
underway.  About 120 volunteers are assessing the responses, with
5 working technical analysis groups established.  They include:
architectures, transportation, planetary surface systems and
technologies, human support technologies and, finally,
infrastructure.
     An AIAA spokesperson said the largest number of responses
have been in the categories of architecture, planetary surface
systems and infrastructure.
     As of late August, about 200 people had signed up for AIAA's
upcoming SEI outreach conference with final attendance expected
to range between 300 to 400 people.  The conference will include
presentations of AIAA's initial assessments of the responses.
AIAA is slated to make a preliminary report to the Synthesis
group in the beginning of September.  On Oct. 1, it will produce
another version of its assessment which will incorporate some of
the requests made previously by the Synthesis group for more
intense focus, Grey said.  A final AIAA report is due to the
Synthesis group in December.
     Representatives of 10 major aerospace corporations
meanwhile, will meet with the Synthesis group Sept. 10-14 to
present their perspectives on future space exploration.
     While the exact timetable for the Synthesis Group's efforts
had not yet been announced at our deadline late last month, the
group has been working to a spring deadline for presentation of
the major architectures.

Stafford Group Membership Announced

     At a press conference late last month, Synthesis Chairman
Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Stafford announced that the senior membership
of the group would include 21 well known aerospace and defense
officials including, Dr. Robert Seamans, Vice Chairman of the
group, and Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson USAF (ret), current
executive of Hughes Aircraft Co. and former Director of the
Strategic Defense Initiative.
     Other members included: Edward C. "Pete" Aldridge, Jr.,
President of McDonnell Douglas Electronic Systems Corp. and
former Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. David Black, Director,
Lunar and Planetary Institute; Dr. Eugene Covert, professor at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Lt. Gen. Donald Cromer,
Commander, Space Systems Div.; Dr. Max Faget, Chief Executive
Officer, Space Industries Inc.; Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., Senior
Management Consultant, Grumman Corp.; Buz Hello, retired
Corporate Senior Vice President, Rockwell International Corp.;
George W. Jeffs, President and Center Director, Strategic
Defense, Rockwell International; Dr. Chris Kraft, aerospace
consultant and former Director of Johnson Space Center; Dr. John
McLucas, Chairman, NASA Advisory Council; Lt. Gen. Thomas S.
Moorman, Commander, Air Force Space Command; Chuck Ordahl, Vice
President and General Manager of Advanced Products Development
and Technology Div., McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Co.; Gen.
Bernard A. Schriever, USAF (ret); Dr. Joe Shea, consultant,
Raytheon Co., and retired Senior Vice President, Engineering,
Raytheon Co.; H. David Short, M.D., Cardiovascular Surgeon,
private practice, Tyler, Tex.; Dr. Lee Silver, professor for
resource geology, California Institute of Technology; Dr. Guy
Stever, retired corporate director and former Presidential
Science Advisor; John Yardley, retired President, McDonnell
Douglas Astronautical Co.; and Thomas Young, President and Chief
Operating Officer, Martin Marietta Corp.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

EXPLORATION PLANS FACE UNCERTAIN BUDGETARY OUTLOOK

     Although the President's Space Exploration Initiative (SEI)
could give a significant boost to advanced space development
efforts, it is currently facing an unusually tough and uncertain
budgetary outlook.
     The space community has been hoping for a more favorable
reception from the Senate to the Administration's FY 1991 SEI-
related budget request than was granted by the House earlier this
year.  But there was little indication of that prior to Congress'
August recess.
     [The House cut a total of about $337 million in SEI-related
funding from NASA's FY 1991 budget earlier this year including
all of the $188 million in new funding for initial technology
studies.  The total request includes about $800 million to a $1
billion in total SEI-related funding.]
     The key Senate panel, which oversees NASA's appropriations,
is facing a significantly tougher fiscal predicament than its
House counterpart faced earlier this year when it marked up its
version of the FY '91 NASA money bill.  Specifically the Senate
HUD, VA and Independent Agencies panel, chaired by Sen. Barbara
Mikulski (D-Md.), has received a total allocation that is some
$627 million lower than the House had to work with.
     At issue with regard to the SEI funding request, is the
relatively small amount of "new funds" for SEI-related technology
and mission architecture studies.  The $188 million earmarked for
technology studies in NASA's $15.125 billion FY '91 request and
$37 million in mission architecture studies sparked a debate
earlier this year that almost rivaled those which occurred in the
early years of Space Station Freedom development.  The House
subsequently zeroed all such funding complaining that
Administration had failed to make a convincing case as to how the
President's SEI would be paid for in later years.  SEI proponents
have countered that the request represents funds only for initial
study work which would help to answer basic questions surrounding
potential lunar/Mars missions and that the request does not
represent a commitment to actually carrying out the program.
     Nonetheless, a grim overall federal budget picture with the
potential for significant sequestration in October, as well as
little progress reported in the high-level White
House/congressional budget talks, are adding up to a dim outlook
for space exploration-related funding in FY '91.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

EXPLORATION PROPONENTS BET ON MIKULSKI

     Proponents of SEI hope that Mikulski can come up with
anywhere from $37 million to $100 million of the SEI funding
which they believe would be enough to keep the initial studies
going, as well as industry interest, etc.
     How likely that will be and how much more of the
Administration's support will be forthcoming for the initiative
given the overall federal budget issues facing the nation and the
less than favorable response it has already received on the Hill
so far is an open question.  While the timing of the recent
galvanization of the technical community through the SEI outreach
program has been the source of concern and uneasiness in light of
the budget predicament, as well as NASA's recent technical
problems, it may actually work to the benefit of SEI proponents
by keeping attention focused on initiatives.
     Regardless, a top space expert told SPACE EXPLORATION
TECHNOLOGY that the National Space Council appears to have had no
choice but to move forward with the highly visible outreach
program, as most of its planning occurred before it became
apparent that sizable congressional opposition to the initiative
existed.  "There is a bit of a disconnect, I think, between the
plans for the outreach program and the political reality.  All
these plans for outreach were put in place early this year before
it became apparent that at least many in Congress weren't
interested in buying into this program.
     "I think there's an interesting disjoint between mobilizing
the technical community and giving the high visibility to their
conclusions and suggestions, setting the Rand program up and
doing newspaper advertising...and the fact that the political
fate of the program still is uncertain.  But nobody is gonna' go
back and say, `Whoops, it's too early to do a high profile
outreach.'  We just go through it.  A lot of people believe that
the timing isn't the best.  But you know you take Presidential
endorsements when you can get'em, not when the timing is right.
     "It is my impression, and it is only an impression, that
they anticipate getting a little money out of the Senate and out
of the (budget) conference in order to not kill SEI as a concept,
but to limp along with some low-level studies during fiscal '91.
But I don't have a high level of confidence in having said that."
     Others remain optimistic.  Although it is clear that a much
more convincing case for the missions has to be made both to the
Congress and the American public, NASA's Jeffery Rosendahl said
he remains hopeful that some of the funds in question will be
approved.  Clearly, "We have a lot more explaining to do,"
Rosendahl said.  But he believes a significant amount of work
could be done even if the agency gets only $35 million to $50
million of the study funds.
     "We've done a remarkable amount of work" just with related
FY 1990 funding, he said.  A major step forward could be made
with a small amount of FY 1991 funding for major technology
identification as well as specific mission architectures, he
added.
     AIAA's Jerry Grey said while the association's members were
clearly disappointed with the recent congressional action on the
SEI request, he believes a better explanation of what the funds
will be used for could help to free up $50 million or so for the
studies.

Most Major Aerospace Corp.'s Will Vie For A Piece Of The
Exploration Pie

     While the traditional aerospace industry has been seen by
some as less than enthusiastic on the SEI effort, nearly all of
the major aerospace companies have expressed interest in playing
a significant role in SEI or bidding on the larger mission
architecture contracts which could be awarded in the years ahead.
And many say they are prepared to make a substantial investment
in preparation for the initiative.
     Martin Marietta's Ben Clark, who has overseen many of the
company's Mars studies, said Martin has and will continue to
invest in advanced space activities such as the Mars study work.
Clark said the company is also investing in the public education
activities which are deemed critical to success of the effort.
Martin, which is a contractor on the upcoming unmanned Mars probe
effort, is presently studying a number of ways to accomplish
manned Mars missions and will present its ideas to the Synthesis
Group in mid-September, Clark added.  Likewise, Lockheed's
Director of Space Station Operations, Gus Gustafero, said his
company is also prepared for what promises to be a series of long
and tough SEI-related political funding battles.
     "We're at a period of time in a program of this size that's
going to be with us for possibly the next 30 or 40 years.  It is
something that Lockheed, from a business viewpoint, has to be
interested in and we do recognize, without getting into the
temporal problem of the NASA budget and what the Congress might
do, that there's a challenge before the executive branch, the
President, the NASA team and the synthesis team and everything
else that's been organized to bring their case before the
American public and the Congress.
     "I guess I would have to say that what has been done to date
has not convinced our representatives that the country is ready
to move in this direction.  I, personally, have been in this
business 36 years and I remain confident that these things need
to play out and what's going on is the right thing to go on."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF HOUSE MARK-UP
NASA PORTION OF FY '91 EXPLORATION INITIATIVE

                      (dollars in millions)


                             FY 1991             House Mark

               1990     Total     SEI      Total     Amount
              Program  Request   Increm*   Mark      Cut
NASA:

National
 Aerospace
Plane          59.0      119.0    0.0      114.0       5.0
 Space Research
 and Tech.    124.6      314.9    88.0     115.9     199.0
R&T Base       35.2       36.3              36.3
 Exploration
Mission Studies 5.0        0.0               0.0
 Exploration
Tech (Pathfinder)21.9     179.4   88.0      25.4     154.0
Civil Space
 Technology (CSTI)57.1     92.3             47.3      45.0
In-Space Experiments5.4     6.9              6.9

Exploration
 Mission Studies (15.0)    37.0    0.0       0.0      37.0

Space
 Transportation
 Cap Dev          21.2     64.3   50.0      10.4      53.9
ALS Civil Systems  0.0      3.9              0.0       3.9
ALS Propulsion     0.0     40.0   40.0       0.0      40.0
Exploration Studies5.0      0.0              0.0
Advanced
 Transportation
 (base)            5.7     10.4             10.4
Shuttle
 PhB/Heavy Lift   10.5     10.0   10.0       0.0      10.0

Life Sciences     50.4     80.0    0.0      72.0       8.0
Extended
 Duration (SSF)    0.4    10.0              10.0
Lifesat
 Def./
 Centrifuge/SBI    7.8    16.2               8.2       8.0
Research &
Analy/Spacelab    42.2    53.8              53.8

Space Station      5.7    30.8    20.0      10.8      20.0
Solar Dynamics     5.7    10.8     0.0      10.8
Exploration        0.0    20.0    20.0       0.0      20.0

Planetary        186.9   227.6    30.0     212.6      15.0
Mars Observer (MO)98.9    83.9    15.0      83.9
MO Launch
 Vehicle/TOS      73.2   124.2             124.2
Mars Balloon Relay 4.4     2.0               2.0
Exploration Studies5.0     0.0               0.0
Lunar Observer
 Phase B           2.5    15.0    15.0       0.0      15.0
Other MRSR/Network 2.9     2.5               2.5

Facilities         0.0    32.3     0.0      32.3       0.0

Research &
 Program Mgmt     55.0     56.9    0.0      56.9       0.0

Total, NASA      502.8    962.8  188.0     624.9     337.9

Other Agencies:
Department
of Defense      323.0     263.0

National
Aerospace
Plane          192.0      158.0
SP-100          20.0       20.0
Advanced
 Launch System 111.0       85.0
Department
 of Energy     30.0        51.0
SP-100         30.0        51.0
Total,
Other Agencies 353.0      314.0

TOTAL,
SPACE
EXPLORATION    855.8      1276.8
* This represents "new money" or funds requested for new SEI-
related efforts.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

HUNTSVILLE FOCUSED ON TRANSPORTATION

     (Huntsville, Ala.)     The Huntsville, Ala., space community
is using its knowhow to attack one of the prime obstacles facing
space exploration planners--a lack of adequate space
transportation systems capable of carrying out the U.S.'s future
space goals.
     Bill Huber of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center's Program
Development Office is coordinating the center's SEI studies which
are based, in part, on studies already in place when Space
Exploration Initiative (SEI) was formed, reports SPACE
EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY special correspondent Dave Dooling.  The 3
largest activities are the Space Transportation Infrastructure
Study (STIS) with General Dynamics and 2 Space Transfer Vehicle
(STV) studies with Martin Marietta and Boeing.  "These contracts
were really in place ahead of SEI," Huber said, "but they are
supporting us directly and the results are being fed directly
into our activities."
     The STIS effort initially will develop a data base
incorporating virtually everything that can be compiled about
space transportation systems, costs and projections.
     NASA will then task General Dynamics to impose different
mission requirements--such as landing on Mars or servicing the
Space Station--on the database.  The system will then describe
transportation system requirements to support the mission and
describe what other missions may also be supported.
     "STIS start on the ground," said Boeing's James Kingsbury.
"We start in space."  The STV studies look at "transferring mass
from Point A to Point B, and Points A and B can be most anything
you want."  The latter definition has been stretched to include
points on the planet's surface.
     The STV studies descended from Space Tug studies in the
1970s.  Activities at Boeing and Martin Marietta include
analyzing concepts systems to go from Earth orbit to the surface
of the moon and Mars and include pressurized and unpressurized
rovers.
     Huber said that "the main SEI activity [at MSFC] in the last
6 months has been to go back and examine the `90-day study' [a
preliminary SEI study], do some trades studies and look at other
ways of going to the moon and Mars."
     Marshall is the lead center for Shuttle-C, an all-cargo
derivative of the Shuttle that could support lunar missions and
is NASA's lead center for the Advanced Launch System (ALS).  But
even ALS, most analysts concede, would be inadequate for the
large quantities of cargo that a Mars base would require.
     "We are looking at bigger launch vehicles" for the Earth-to-
Orbit leg, Huber said. "That would reduce the amount of assembly
in lunar orbit."  Studies now focus on Shuttle derivatives and
ALS and have not seriously considered Russia's Energia because of
its inclination problems.  "It's hard to think of a totally
`clean-sheet' design," Huber added.  "There's almost an infinite
number of combinations of engines and staging."  Part of that
consideration includes the Advanced Manned Launch System under
study by Rockwell and Langley.
     Marshall's studies are also focusing on the role of the U.S.
Space Station and whether assembly nodes in low Earth orbit or in
geostationary orbit are better than in lunar orbit.  One way to
reduce launch and assembly requirements would be to use one-way,
direct-ascent cargo landers.
     "Getting there" is the next problem.  One of the biggest
trades in the 90-day study was to select chemical propulsion and
aerobrakes, Huber said, but there is a role for nuclear and
electric propulsion techniques.  "In terms of early candidates,"
nuclear thermal, like the Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle
Application (NERVA), is the most likely.  The technology is well
understood and the project was near flight test when cancelled in
the 1970s.  However, open-air testing is not likely to be
repeated.
     A less powerful but more efficient system is championed by
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, a former associate director of Marshall and
now an independent consultant.  His electric propulsion theories,
first published in 1954, remain the same even with technology
updates, he said.
     Electric propulsion ionizes a working fluid, then repels it
from like-charged electrodes.  Although the technology has been
flown on a small scale, it remains limited because the thrust is
too low for quick escape from a planet.  Stuhlinger proposes
chemical propulsion to boost a Mars ship to 40,000 km altitude
(about geostationary) and nuclear-electric propulsion for the
trip to Mars.  There would be 2 vehicles, each carrying a crew of
2 or 3, and a freight vehicle with exploration equipment.
     The departure mass would be up to 320 tons, including 140
tons of mercury fuel, which would serve as solar storm shielding.
A 50-megawatt reactor would power the thrusters.
     Stuhlinger calculates that the trip out would take 180 days.
Such a mission should be designed for a high scientific yield and
not be a "Kilroy was here" mission.
     Another key issue also is "To `g' or not to `g.'  That is
the question" when crew health and weightlessness are considered.
Artificial-gravity is included in designs by Gene Austin's space
transportation and exploration office at Marshall.
     One concept has 2 Space Station-type modules that pivot out
to produce "down" along the long axis behind the protection of
the heat shield for planetary aerobraking.  Mike Remus of Thiokol
Corporation has used computers to produce a striking video of
this.
     Transportation on a smaller scale is under study by engineer
Brand Griffin and artist Paul Hudson of Griffin-Hudson (formerly
Spaceworks).  Their work is familiar to many in the space
business through Hudson's paintings of Griffin's
designs.  Griffin said that he is hoping for funding from AIAA's
outreach program for 2 proposals.  The first is a manned/autonomous
work station based on Wernher von Braun's "space bottle," which
would contain an astronaut at full cabin pressure and be equipped
with integral propulsion plus various mission kits and effectors.
It could also operate unmanned.
     The other concept is the "lunar hopper," which would be a
flying jeep for astronauts working on the lunar surface.
     Kingsbury said the rover studies incorporate requirements such
as construction (and instability of vehicles that become
lightweight on the moon and Mars) and extended treks to explore the
surface.  The latter might require hauling a large life support
trailer or, like Antarctic explorers, setting up mini-outposts
along the trail.
     MSFC's Huber said that while there has been some examination
of novel approaches--such as a low, wide Griffin-Hudson lunar
lander design--most lander concepts are "pretty much like Apollo,"
he said.
     Finally, feeding and watering crews on long space journeys is
being studied at 2 universities here.  The Center for Space Life
Sciences at the University of Alabama in Huntsville is defining
water quality requirements for any system that would recycle water.
And Alabama A & M University is analyzing rabbits as a potential
space food that could be grown and harvested in relatively short
cycles (every few months) and yield high-protein, low-cholesterol
meat.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

JOHNSON LOOKS TO DIFFERENT LUNAR/MARS "PHILOSOPHIES"

     Johnson Space Center officials said they have spent a
significant amount of time during the past year reviewing new
"philosophies" related to future space exploration.  "In the 90-
day effort, we put together one way of doing the mission and that
was based on some work that had been done over a period of
years," noted Doug Cook, director of the Moon and Mars
Exploration Program office.
     "We knew that was a possible way to go which would work and
which would hold together.  But we knew there were other options.
So, as an agency, we are currently looking at other
alternatives."
     JSC officials explained, however, that they are looking into
new philosophies as opposed to alternative architectures.  "As
far as new technologies go, we really don't know what might come
up," said one official.  "We're trying to come up with a
different approach, alternative management and decision-making
programs.  The object is to do it [land on the moon and Mars] as
best, as fast and as cheaply as we can.  With a looser management
approach. We're not locked into any kind of set architecture.  If
we find a way that would get us there faster or cheaper, it can
be built in."
     The Moon and Mars Exploration Program Office, located at
JSC, is responsible for coordinating NASA's input and bringing
forth recommendations for the Synthesis Group, as well as for
tracking the lunar/Mars studies that are being conducted at the 9
field centers.
     Cook explained that the program office is divided into
mission and development, which is concerned with "actual in-space
operations," and systems engineering and integration.  "Here, we
are making sure that the end-to-end design of the entire set of
elements [all the major hardware, such as space vehicles and
habitats] are consistent and that they match up in their
capabilities and interfaces.
     "You don't want to build, for instance, some kind of vehicle
servicing unit that sits on the moon that supplies, say, 75KW to
a lander.  Then the lander gets there and it doesn't need but
5KW.  So we want to make sure we balance the capabilities with
the requirements."
     Under a second office recently set up at JSC, the Moon and
Mars Exploration Projects Office, JSC officials are studying
planet surface systems, including inflatable habitats, power
systems on the surface, roving vehicles and construction tools,
and provide support to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in robotics
studies.  In addition, the Human Robotics Spacecraft Office is
planning JSC's part of the Mars Rover Sample Return.
     Cook noted that 60 JSC employees are currently working on
SEI-related projects.  "We are in a study mode," he explained.
     Cook also stated that no (major) contracts have been awarded
on any projects that are being studied under NASA's current
proposal.  The budget allocated to Johnson for SEI-related
studies is projected at $6.9 million for FY '90, a figure Cook
defined as "insignificant compared to JSC's budget."
     Although JSC has been evaluating NASA's data and will
recommend alternative plans, Cook said that the program office
has not been asked to evaluate any outside proposals.  "We assume
we may be asked for some help in certain areas.  But I think that
is possible with the other big agencies too, so I don't see
ourselves as the primary source of technical capability for that
group."  JSC has been working towards a September deadline for
new lunar/Mars inputs, but Cook expects that NASA's study period
to continue through the end of the year.  He also pointed out
that a center's study responsibility is not necessarily the area
that the center will develop. "We don't know what the spread of
responsibility is going to be across the agencies within the
government," he said.  "It would be premature for NASA to divide
up what they think the pie is going to be."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

FUEL CELL RFP STALLED DUE TO BUDGET UNCERTAINTIES

     Lewis Research Center is still contemplating release of a
request for proposals (RFP) for a regenerative fuel cell system
to be used on the moon's surface, although recent cuts to the FY
1991 Pathfinder budget request may stall the effort, according to
program officials.
     Lewis issued a solicitation for proposals on the system in
July and received an "overwhelming response," according to
project manager Paul Prokopius.  Prokopius said at least 10
qualification statements have been received from various
companies.
     But an RFP release date is uncertain due to recent budget
actions by the House HUD, VA and Independent Agencies panel.  The
panel cut the Administration's $179.4 million Pathfinder request
down to $25.4 million earlier this summer.  The Pathfinder
program consists of a broad-range of advanced space technology
research efforts.
     Prokopius said the RFP could still be released later this
year should funding be made available.
     Prokopius said the system, which would help to provide power
during the lunar night or the period when no sunlight is received
on the moon, will consist of a power producing fuel cell stack
and an electrolyzer to regenerate water produced by the fuel cell
into hydrogen and oxygen required for fuel cell operation.
     The total value of the multi-year contract was initially
estimated at $10 million, Prokopius said.  Proposals were
requested for a complete fuel cell and electrolyzer system or for
the fuel cell and electrolyzer separately and more than one award
could made at the discretion of the government.  For more
information contact: Paul Prokopius, NASA Lewis Research Center,
21000 Brookpark Rd., Cleveland, OH 44135.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

DNA SEEKS DESIGN FOR NON-NUCLEAR SPACECRAFT

     The Defense Nuclear Agency seeks investigations into basic
science, phenomenology and engineering design relating to
designing, fabricating and operating a non-nuclear powered
spacecraft system in space.  Contact: Billy Burks, 202/325-6627,
DNA, 6801 Telegraph Road, Alexandria, VA 22310-3398.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

SDIO SEEKS PARTICIPATION IN ADVANCED PROPULSION PROGRAM

     The Strategic Defense Initiative Organization is seeking
qualified participation in the Advanced Propulsion/Composite
Materials/Structures Analysis for Strategic Systems government
support contract.  Contact: Rosalyn Gose, 205/722-1187, U.S. Army
Strategic Defense Command, ATTN: CSSD-CM-CC, PO Box 1500,
Huntsville, AL 35807-3801.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

NASA SEEKS RESEARCH FOR STRATOSPHERIC AIRCRAFT

     NASA is seeking research proposals in support of its High-
Speed Research Program directed towards understanding and
predicting the atmospheric effects of a projected fleet of
stratospheric aircraft.  Contact: John Moore, 202/453-1850, NASA
Headquarters, Acquisition Division, Washington, DC 20546.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

CONTRACTOR SUPPORT NEEDED FOR NRL RESEARCH PROGRAMS

     The National Research Laboratory has a need for contractor
support for research programs dealing with pulsed power and
advanced energy sources. Support for programs in charged particle
beam physics, mass drivers, space pulsed power, high energy
density materials, dense z-pinch physics and spin-offs will be
required.  Submit requests for N00014-90-R-BY14 to Gerald L.
Boyer, ATTN: Code 3240.BY, Naval Research Laboratory, 4555
Overlook Ave., S.W., Washington DC 20375-5000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

JSC SOLICITING PROPOSALS FOR DEFINITION STUDY ON SESA

     Johnson Space Flight Center is soliciting proposals for a
study to define a Shuttle Evolution System Assessment (SESA) with
emphasis on a Block II Shuttle system.  The Block II system is
scheduled to be operational in 2005.  A one-year performance
period is contemplated with a contract award in February 1991.
This procurement action has a "not to exceed" budget allocation
of $1 million.  An RFP is anticipated being released on Sept. 17,
1990.  The recommended concept will address vehicle weights,
flight and ground operations, cost impacts and an overall
assessment of the implications to the total transportation
architecture.  To request a solicitation from BD 35, contact the
Bid Board at 713/483-4511.  For more information, call Vince
Eklund at 713/483-8510.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

NASA SEEKS SOLAR SYSTEM RESEARCH PROPOSALS

     NASA is soliciting basic research proposals for the Origins
of Solar Systems Research Program.  All proposals are due by Jan.
7, 1991.
     The primary goals of the program are to complement and
extend ongoing research efforts in this area, in addition to
those already sponsored by several divisions within the Office of
Space Science and Applications and to foster effective
communications among researchers actively working on this highly
interdisciplinary topic.
     Proposals are encouraged which involve joint research
efforts by investigators from different scientific disciplines.
Interdisciplinary proposals may request support for studies
utilizing any appropriate research methodology.  However, the
proposer must also provide assurance that access can be obtained
for the use of specific equipment, data sets, facilities, etc.,
required for the proposed research.
     The funding level for this program is estimated to be $4.5
million, which is expected to support up to 90 investigations.
     Submit all proposals to NRA 90-OSSA-22, The Origins of Solar
Systems Review Panel, The Lunar and Planetary Institute, 3303
NASA Road 1, Houston, TX 77058, Dr. Joseph A. Nuth, III, 301/286-
9467.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

SOVIETS LOOKING TO SELL PHOBOS SPACECRAFT

     The Soviet Union's space program, in need of hard currency,
has decided to forego plans to fly the third in a series of
probes to the Martian moon Phobos and instead has put the
spacecraft up for sale on the open market, according to SET
correspondent Seth Arenstein.
     An official of the Los Angeles-based import-export firm
Phoenix International, in a telephone interview with SET, said
his company has received the rights from Moscow to sell the third
Phobos spacecraft.  In addition, he said, the Venera-7 satellite,
which was launched in August 1970, is also available for sale.
"The spacecraft are ready to be shipped" to the United States,
the official said.
     A leading analyst of the Soviet space program, who has
discussed the venture with Phoenix International, is convinced of
the authenticity of the spacecraft.  "They (Phoenix
International) provided too many details about the spacecraft to
be faking," he said.
     The Phoenix official said a number of parties had expressed
interest in the hardware, although he would not mention specific
names, nor prices.  "The Phobos craft would probably be more
valuable because it is newer," the executive added.

Potential Buyers Could Include Museums And Universities

     Other sources said museums and universities would likely be
interested.  Although a Japanese firm acquired backup hardware
for the Soviet Mir space station last year, Tokyo is not a likely
customer for the Phobos craft, sources said.  "They can build a
better spacecraft themselves," one said, referring to the fact
that both Phobos missions ended in failure.
     The Phobos craft put on the market by Moscow served as the
backup hardware for the 2 nearly identical probes sent into space
on July 7 and 12, 1988, respectively.  Both missions failed,
however, when they lost contact with mission controllers.  The
first probe lost contact with Earth on Sept. 2, 1988; the second
of the 6,200 kg probes was incapacitated on March 26, 1989.
Soviet officials said poor workmanship and a series of incorrect
ground commands were the culprits.
     The proposed sale surprised a number of analysts since
Moscow had expressed interest in launching the third Phobos
craft.  In July 1989, Valeri Barsukov, a senior Soviet space
official, said the uprated ground test vehicle could "in theory"
be flown prior to the planned 1996 Phobos sample return mission.
     "We could fly sooner, in 1992, but we do not want to repeat
the mission profile of the and schedule of the Phobos mission, we
want to add something... (like) a sample return mission,"
Barsukov said.  "But, we need time to get ready for such a
mission," he added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
SPACE EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
September 1990

DESIGN FOR MIR FOLLOW-ON SAID TO BE COMPLETED

     Meanwhile, Soviet engineers have apparently completed work
on the design of the large Mir-2 space station, which will be the
follow-on to the current Mir facility and will be transported by
the Energia heavy-lift vehicle, according to Soviet news reports.
     Mir-2 will weigh several hundred metric tons and fly at high
altitudes to avoid drag.  The station is likely to be placed into
an orbit of more than 400 km and consist of several 100-metric-
ton structures, dwarfing today's Mir station, which weighs in at
approximately 90 metric tons.
     Soviet officials have varied on a launch date for Mir-2,
with some saying initial elements could be orbited as early as
next year, while most have set 1995 as the target date.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>