
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B27-188</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000320-B032-136</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ad30.html 205.156.212.5 19970114195144 text/html 44531
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 19:49:55 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:45:09 GMT
Content-length: 44344
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ad30.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet <BR>
May 6, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>HOT WIRE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(239 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>TO COMMUNICATE BELL ATLANTIC/NYNEX MERGER, WEB PAGES ARE SENT TO&nbsp;REPORTERS VIA E-MAIL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(702 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>EVOLVING INTO AN INTERACTIVE MARKETING TOOL, SCREEN SAVERS PROTECT&nbsp;BRANDS, NOT MONITORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(739 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>'A CACOPHONY OF VOICES, A MASS OF CLUTTER',  ANOTHER DISCUSSION ON&nbsp;INTERACTIVE MARKETING </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1360 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>ONLINE INTERVIEW:  JEFF OSTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1278 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>NEW WEB AD NETWORK LETS MARKETERS, OTHERS, TARGET AUDIENCES TO AN&nbsp;UNPRECEDENTED DEGREE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(523 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>INTERACTIVE NEWS & IDEAS </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(597 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ONLINE MEDIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(556 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>THE WELL </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(488 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

HOT WIRE

NEW YORK C:\risis! Throw Out Those 3-Ring Binders. Crisis management
has finally entered the computer age.  Burson-Marsteller (B-M)
introduced the industry's first computer-based crisis management
system, called C:\risis.  B-M is certainly one of the world leaders in
this field, having worked on crises from Tylenol and Bhopal to Perrier
and Pan Am at Lockerbie.

No Time, Information. Losing control of a crisis is almost always a
result of either not enough time or not enough information, Ray
O'Rourke, director of B-M's U.S. practice, told IPR.  So C:\risis was
developed to save time and provide accurate real-time information in
managing a crisis for tracking and evaluating a rapidly evolving
situation, formulating strategy, and responding quickly.   

No Plug & Play.  The system provides resources, such as online
monitoring, database and Net search tools; communications drivers,
such as e-mail, fax polling, and satellite paging; and an electronic
manual of procedures, policies, contact lists, and background
materials. Of course, all this information must be customized to a
organization based on its business and the kind of vulnerabilities it
faces.    

Beam It Up, Scotty.  O'Rourke said C:\risis will be especially helpful
on site at an emergency, where facilities are often lacking. The
software fits in a laptop, and info can be received or sent out via
modem and cell phone, if needed.  It even has a built-in hand-held
page scanner, to send out local media stories that won't be found
online.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

TO COMMUNICATE BELL ATLANTIC/NYNEX MERGER, WEB PAGES ARE SENT TO
REPORTERS VIA E-MAIL

      WASHINGTON  To communicate its information and spin on its
recent merger agreement with Nynex, Bell Atlantic has embraced a new
Internet technology that allows it to deliver its media relations Web
site to a self-selected group of reporters and other influencers using
e-mail.  Thus, instead of waiting for reporters to log onto the Web
and remember to surf over to its site, Bell Atlantic goes directly to
them.
      This capability is enabled by e-mail programs that allow for the
sending and receiving of e-mail messages with embedded HTML, Live
Objects and images  i.e., the ability to send or receive Web pages
via e-mail.
      Bell Atlantic public relations/public affairs has been an
Internet innovator since launching the Web's first major corporate
public affairs site back in December 1993 during another proposed
merger, this time with Tele-Communications, Inc.  The media relations
site, ba.com <http://ba.com> went up well before the general Bell
Atlantic site <http://www.bell-atl.com>, and today remains one of the
best on the Web (see IPR story, Aug. 10, 1995). 
      Bell Atlantic has always used a listserv, which is a mailing
list of e-mail addresses to which it can send messages almost
simultaneously.  People interested in receiving Bell Atlantic
information subscribe to the list.

1,000 On Listserv

      The listserv is a good communications strategy in itself. Due to
interest in the merger, Bell Atlantic's listserv has grown to about
1,000 people, and can be found on a special Media  Resource Center
site on ba.com for merger information <http://ba.com/nynex>.
      The ability to deliver Web pages to this listserv provides added
benefits, according to Ken Deutsch, director of Washington-based Issue
Dynamics, Web site manager and consultant for Bell Atlantic.     
      "The problem with the World Wide Web is you have to have people
coming back to your site but as people go out and browse the Web, they
find other sources and do not come back to yours," he said.  "Sending
individuals HTML documents by a listserv delivers the Web to their e-
mail. Since most Internet users check their e-mail on a daily basis,
you'll always be able to get to them."
      Photos, charts or tables can be e-mailed to users, but the
ability to sent hyperlinks to the Web is the most powerful benefit. 
When a specific announcement is e-mailed to reporters, they can simply
click on a link to send an e-mail query to the relevant Bell Atlantic
or Nynex contact.
      For example, one recent announcement, on responses to the
merger, was based on comments by Ed Young, a Bell Atlantic vice
president.  The document referenced the merger and linked to the Media
Resource Center. It then highlighted Ed Young's name, and a hyperlink
could be clicked on to pull up his bio, photo and past speeches.  At
the bottom of the page was a link back to the main ba.com site.
      "In Bell Atlantic you can get any corporate profile, you can get
any speech, you can do a keyword search of the whole site." Deutsch
said.  "You can do a search and find out everything that Ray Smith
(Bell Atlantic's CEO) said about mergers before this announcement."

Growing User Base 

      Most e-mail programs do not support the sending and receiving of
Web pages, although it's almost certain they'll add the feature to
remain competitive, so the user base should grow.
      Today, it's available in the e-mail programs in the Netscape
Navigator browser, version 2.0 and higher, and in the Microsoft
Network.  
      Eudora, the most widely used e-mail program, does not have the
feature, but its latest 2.2 version supports what it calls "Active
URLs."  Users can be sent an e-mail with an embedded URL (e.g., "to
learn more, see http://ba.com/nynex"), and by clicking on the URL,
their Web browser is automatically opened and the specific Web page is
downloaded. 
      It's not quite the same as directly receiving a Web page, but
it's close.  From a sender's point of view, users can still be
directly linked to the Web.  Major Web publishers, such a c|net, use
the feature in newsletters e-mailed to subscribers.   
       Deutsch said that about a third of the new people joining
ba.com's listserv for merger updates opt to receive Web pages rather
than plain text messages.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

EVOLVING INTO AN INTERACTIVE MARKETING TOOL, SCREEN SAVERS PROTECT
BRANDS, NOT MONITORS

      LOS ANGELES - It used to be that a screen saver just kept you
from burning a picture in your monitor. But in the last year it has
evolved into a powerful and popular branding and one-to-one marketing
tool of choice.
      Improved computer monitor technology has eliminated the need for
screen savers, yet millions are sold, downloaded, and given away as
promotional items.  
      That's because on today's screen savers, increasing quality,
sound, interactivity and variety has become  de rigueur.
      "It's priced right up there with a coffee cup and baseball cap
and pen, traditional items that companies give to their customers or
prospects, said Jeff Oster, president of Interloc Design Group,
specialists in customized screen savers (see Online Interview). "It
puts something right in front of  customers to keep the name in front
of them."
      Interloc has developed custom promotional screen savers for
companies such as Sprint, Nintendo, CompuServe and Yonex golf clubs.
      "The strongest recognition of the power of  this whole thing is
starting to come through now as people see what PointCast is doing,"
said Oster. 
      The PointCast Network (PCN) online news service works like a
hybrid screen saver/browser that automatically or manually downloads
an astonishing breadth of current news headlines, weather, sports and
U.S. stock chart and ticker information, and can be customized to
receive only the information the user desires, such as the number of
companies the user wants to monitor. (See IPR, April 8). 
      The service is free, paid for with a section of its screen that
provides animated commercials: Click on any of the commercials, and
you jump directly to the advertiser's Web page.  
      When the PC is inactive, the PCN screen saver kicks in and rolls
various news headlines and leads that the user can click directly to
from the saver.  Some have described the PCN screen saver application
as a taste of the killer app for the business Internet PC. 

Incentives Make A Difference

      Fun and original screen savers are well and good but matters
little if the user doesn't install it and keep it active for some
period of time. Thus it becomes necessary to create an intrinsic value
to the user. That comes most readily in the form of incentives, as in
information, entertainment, or most likely, money and prizes.  
      Interloc is developing a screen saver for a store grand opening.
Diskettes will be mailed out in enticing packaging that tells people
to bring the disk to the store to find out if they've won a prize. 
Even non-winners who install the program can benefit from store
coupons and rebates that can be printed from the screen saver at the
home or office. 
      "They're using it to draw people to the opening, and then
they're using it as another delivery vehicle for coupons later," noted
Oster.
      To keep users from ignoring or uninstalling the saver, time-
released information may come in handy. Programmers can release any
specified information over time, so that a contest or vital piece of
information may not appear on the screen for a while after the screen
saver is installed, say one week or 90 days later.
      PC Dynamics Inc., another screen saver developer, lays a
practical set of rules at its Web site <http://www.pcdynamics.com> on
what not to do when you go about designing a screen saver, such as,
"Computer users don't want screen savers that are blatant
advertisements," and "Don't even think of showing a bouncing or
animated logo." PC Dynamics, incidentally, created the Energizer Bunny
Screen Saver.
      Bouncing cookies however, may whet one's appetite. The winsome
Nabisco screen saver <http://www.nabisco.com/cgi-
bin/playground/ssaver.htp>, is housed in the company's kids site, but
is equally amusing for adults who grew up on Oreos and Fig Newtons.
      The animal motif has worked for successful screen savers
starring the Budweiser frogs
<http://budweiser.com/fresh/freshchoice.html> and Coca-Cola's skiing
polar bears <http://www.galttech.com/ssheaven.shtml>
      Interactive Marketing, Inc., also of Capistrano Beach, Calif.,
designed a screen saver for King World Productions, distributors of
Wheel Of Fortune, Jeopardy and Oprah, that was designed to read the
internal clock of the user's computer so that message changed every
day and reminded users of various promotions and other pertinent
activities during certain sweeps periods.
      "We incentivized users by telling them the screen saver was
seated and that one day a clue was going to pop up and if they knew
the answer they could win a trip to Hawaii," said Andrew Batkin,
president of Interactive Marketing.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

'A CACOPHONY OF VOICES, A MASS OF CLUTTER',  ANOTHER DISCUSSION ON
INTERACTIVE MARKETING 

      NEW YORK   The year 1995 ended paradoxically for the
interactive marketing industry, said Alfred Sikes, president of Hearst
New Media & Technology. "Despite a great year for the Internet, the
cognoscenti ended the year soberly. Never have so many invested so
much in the future." 
      Is there a business in interactive? This is "the recurring
question that gnaws at us," he said.
      His answer:  he's "certain there is."
      Sikes keynoted IM'96: The 7th Conference & Expo on Interactive
Marketing, organized by Capistrano Beach, Calif.-based Interactive
Marketing Communications April 16 to 18, which both looked to the
future of the industry while trying to help attendees grapple with the
more immediate issues of the day.
      Sikes said three forces will work together to makes today's Web
"look like black and white TV," he explained:  1) competition
resulting from the new telecom law, 2) the seemingly infinite capacity
to improve the performance of digital systems, and 3) market demand. 

Golden Era

      Another keynoter, Martin Yudkovitz, president of NBC Interactive
Media, was also optimistic.
      "I'm firmly convinced we live in the most invigorating era to
live in in information and entertainment the golden era of TV," he
said. 
      And no "rank amateur" upstart is going to beat NBC in seizing
this new era, the way Ted Turner did with cable TV.
      "We're not going to let that happen in interactive media,"
Yudkovitz proclaimed. 
      Indeed. NBC's been playing for keeps since clinching a strategic
alliance with Microsoft more than a year ago.  
      MSNBC Cable, a 24-hour news and information service, and MSNBC
Interactive, an interactive online news service, will both launch this
summer.
      NBC already has launched Web sites for the last Superbowl, in
golf, the Olympics, and coverage of Bosnia, to name a few.  It's
developed other initiatives, as well.
      One is the NBC Desktop Video, which provides full-motion video
for the financial community on its desk tops.  It's an "expensive, but
terrific product," Yudkovitz said, and "Wall Street can afford it."
      NBC has also embraced Intercast technology, which links the
Internet and television on desktop computers so that information or
multimedia delivered via HTML pages can be delivered simultaneously
with normal TV broadcast programming.  It's a way of delivering
interactive TV without the expense of set top boxes, Yudkovitz said,
and NBC will use it with the Olympics. 
      Full motion video was his message.
      He said the Web's been "sorely disappointing in its
entertainment power."  
      Good product is "absolutely necessary," he said, but "being good
isn't good enough" for the Web, where there's "a cacophony of voices,
a mass of clutter."
       "Design your content for where the medium is going, not where
it's been," he urged. "It is a full-motion video medium, a transaction
medium."

Thirst For Bandwidth

      Not everyone at IMC'96 was desperate to turn the Web into TV,
into a marketing model based on TV advertising.
      Steve Goldberg, manager of advertising development and strategy
for Microsoft Network, said he was "fascinated by marketers thirst for
more bandwidth," since they still haven't figured out how to do the
simplest things, such as design and place an ad banner. 
      "Focus on how to improve that as an art form," he challenged.
"We have a long way to go."
      Martin Sloane, president and CEO of Supermarket Shopping
Network, strongly suggested that brand marketers in general, and
packaged goods marketers in particular, should abandon resident Web
sites altogether.  
      "Let corporations do this for IR (investor relations) and
corporate purposes," he said.
      "Resident Web sites are becoming less attractive" because they
are "too much trouble," he said. "Packaged goods marketers "don't want
to be the publisher of an interactive magazine"; rather, they want "a
vehicle they can turn on and just as quickly turn off."  
       Sloane outlined alternatives.
      He said the advertising route is targeted, flexible, measurable,
accountable in sales, and can offer full interactive facilities such
as surveys, promotions, contests and feedback.
      The umbrella Web site alternative, sometimes called the "virtual
mall," offers lower costs and "relief from the burden of creating
frequently changing and engaging content," he said. All participants
jointly promote the site, and achieve the necessary mass of consumer
promotions to offer the gratification and rewards needed to keep
consumers coming back, he added. 

Brands Will Blossom

      Lynn Upshaw, Ketchum Advertising's EVP for brand marketing, was
more enthusiastic about brands and Web sites.
      "Brands will blossom on the Web," he said, and all the
successful brands he mentioned had resident Web sites.
      He said the Web will be "Brand Central" and that brands "will be
one of the drivers, part of the super structure" of the Web.
      Brands are using the Web to "outflank competition," he said, in
some cases attracting a younger and richer demographic.  Ragu, for
example, had an older demographic than its competitors before it
became one of the first consumer products on the Web, he explained. 
      The session on "Site Promotions:  Both On & Off The Net,"
provided three panelists all charged with promoting entertainment
products on the Web. 
      They stressed the power of deal making.
      Stuart Halperin, EVP of marketing for Hollywood Online explained
a nifty deal he worked out with National Theater Owners Association
(NATO).  NATO theaters run 30-second trailers promoting Hollywood
Online prior to their feature movies.  In exchange, Hollywood Online
provides movie listings on its sites (on all the online services and
the Web)  something that's in its interest to do anyway!

Linking Thinking

      "Cut deals, find ways to form partnerships," said Roberta
Jacobs, SVP sales and marketing for Viacom New Media, which markets
video and CD games.
      She said online guerrilla marketing campaigns are "more
impactful than TV ad campaigns," and at far less cost:  "hundreds of
thousands rather than millions of dollars."
      She said sales with promotions linked to the Net can be graphed.
      To promote the Beavis & Butthead In Virtual Stupidity game on
the Net, a promotion was done with MTV Spring Break Weekend and links
were made to MTV's homepage as well as to TV and print advertising. 
      "Use linking thinking," Jacobs enthused.
      To get into this mindset, she said to identify companies that
also reach your target market, and to "think of things to build into
your site that others would like to link to."
      She said Viacom New Media gets approached a lot for cross-
promotional links. 
      "There are no established promotional models on the Web," she
said.
      "Linking thinking" was also emphasized in a session on
"Hyperlink Marketing."
      When asked, "how do you find hyperlink opportunities," Daniel
Stone, SVP for Turner Broadcasting Sales, Inc., said: "They're all
over the play, you just need the perspective to see them."
      He offered that many sites are looking for content providers and
that a strategic alliance with the right company "can bring an
additional 50,000 people to your site."
      He also said: "We see this as a branding medium; we see the
value of the branding impression as important as an ad promotion," 
      Back at the session on site promotion, Annie Van Bebber, a VP at
Attitude Network, which publishes the Happy Puppy software game Web
site,  also emphasized the value of cyber marketing over traditional
channels.
      "Focus first on marketing online then roll out into other
media," she said. 

It's So Easy

      She advised companies to hire one good person internally for
online marketing, but didn't think the position required much
experience.
      "Students are a great resource," she said. "They don't have to
have any marketing experience  just be able to type a word in a
search engine" because "it's so easy to get around the Internet."
Maybe monkeys can be trained to do it.
      The subject of newsgroups wasn't raised until the end of the
session, when Van Bebber said they're "a great source" because "word
can spread like wildfire."  She suggested to "find one in your niche."
      An attendee said he'd heard there was danger in using
newsgroups, and asked, "What is proper?"
       "Use proper Netiquette," Van Bebber replied.
      "What is that?" the attendee asked.
      "Well you should know," Van Bebber bristled.  
      Apparently, she didn't.//
      For contact information on companies or people mentioned, e-mail
<editor@interactivepr.com>.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

ONLINE INTERVIEW:  JEFF OSTER

Marketing With Screen Savers 

Jeff Oster is president of Interloc Design Group (IDC), based in
Capistrano Beach, Calif. IDC is a leading developer of custom screen
savers, having developed promotional, communications-directed screen
savers for a range of companies. IDC also develops commercial screen
savers sold at retail, such as the official 1996 Atlanta Summer
Olympic Games screen saver.

IPR: What is the killer app in marketing for screen savers today?
Oster: Today the screen saver can be updated from the Internet.  You
distribute the screen saver and then information can be downloaded
into it on a regular basis.  So it continually becomes a new device.
The information can be from a company that's trying to get information
to the consumer level, or it can be delivered over an Intranet.  It's
almost like an electronic sign. Messages can scroll across the screen
when the computer is inactive, and those messages can be information
the user wants. 

IPR: How are they used internally?
Oster: We've done internal screen savers for MCI and Sprint and other
corporations that want time-released messages in front of employees.
These might be advertising schedules or corporate information, mission
statements and goals. This is just a new way of putting it in front of
them on their computer screens. Really, the applications are
unlimited. 

IPR: Are companies starting to send customized information to their
audiences?
Oster: In fact we're meeting with an agency for one of the automobile
manufacturers and that's exactly what they want to do.  They want to
have a module similar to PointCast where the user can say, "Okay,
here's the news I want. Here are the things I'm interested in and
here's the schedule I'd like to receive it in." (Note: PointCast is a
desktop screen saver that provides users with updated, customized news
and information from news sources via the Internet.  See IPR, April 8,
or http://www.pointcast.com).

IPR: Can a screen saver draw traffic to a Web site?
Oster: Yes, it could.  In fact that's something one agency we're
working with wants to do. We can build a screen saver on disk that's
given away to a consumer, like a phone card. It's got free Internet
access time on the disk, it's got a browser, and the screen saver. All
the user needs is a modem. Now they've got 20 minutes of free time on
the Internet, and the program launches them right to the Web site of 
the company that gave it to them. This is similar to a phone card with
30 free minutes of long distance calling on it and  you hear a little
commercial before you make your call. That's just one way to do it.

IPR: With all the screen savers out there how do you make your's stand
out? 
Oster: Since we've developed this as a marketing tool one of the first
questions people ask is, "Why is someone going to load this on the
system? And then once they get it there, why are they going to keep it
there?" And you know, if you load something and it doesn't work or
it's a bit frustrating or you just see the same thing over and over,
you think "Okay, give me something new." So we've spent a lot of time
researching that and found that incentives are very effective. We've
done instant cash prizes for radio stations, golf clubs, tickets to a
PGA event, and American Express gift certificates. Some clients will
use a grand prize. Radio station KOST 103.5 had five disks with
instant cash winners of  $1,000. The screen saver disk had a serial
number etched into the shutter so that somebody couldn't duplicate it. 
Others have spread those prizes over a wider number of disks. One
distributor of computer products had about 4,000 disks and 100 of them
had $25 American Express gift certificates that were time-released, so
people would be inclined to keep it loaded on their system over the
next ninety days. ViewSonic's screen savers announced an incentive
trip for resellers, with pictures of the Caribbean. 
      But now we're getting into more people wanting to release
information as the incentive. And that's really what PointCast is: if
the information that ends up on your screen is something you want to
see, then that's a value.  An incentive to someone in a corporate
environment may not be an incentive to a university student. We've
found that if information is valuable to the market we're going after,
it's almost a stronger incentive than cash. If you thought you could
get information that would put you a step ahead of your competition,
that would probably be pretty valuable to you as a business person.
      The other thing that we've found in doing this is that, whether
it's a CD or a diskette, this kind of direct mail gets a significantly
higher response rate than a printed piece. You'll load it in your
system and spend about 20 minutes fiddling with it as opposed to the
direct mail piece that you might look over briefly and throw away.

IPR: What do you say when a client asks what this is going to cost?
What's the analogy?
Oster: Good point because really the analogy is we view this as a
software program that can be given away and has a retail value of
maybe $15.00. We price these to our clients based on quantity anywhere
from $1.00 to $7.00 apiece, which includes the disk, labeling,
software duplication royalty or licensing fees. The creation of the
master can range anywhere from $1,000 to $15,000, average $3,000 to
$5,000. That generally includes putting in some kind of motion.  Most
of the cost is building in the interactivity, if you want to hit a key
and have something else happen. We've rebuilt some where the user can
actually put in their own information, like reminders or quotes. It
generally takes four to six weeks from the time we get a story board.

IPR: When is a screen saver not an effective marketing vehicle?
Oster: I talked to the Los Angeles Dodgers more than a year ago about
doing a screen saver night, and they said, "When we give somebody a
baseball cap we know it fits everybody's head."  So you've got to look
at the audience first. 

IPR: How do you work with communications agencies on these projects? 
Oster: Agencies obviously are creative people so it's something that
we look to them for.  They generally come to us with the story board. 
Sometimes they come to us with the content as well. If you go back a
year, nobody knew what the Internet was. We used to go call on all
these agencies and had to describe to them what a screen saver was.
Today a lot more people know what it is.

IPR:  Are there any media relations applications for screen savers?
Oster: The Nintendo screen saver was done for Golin/Harris, which is
Nintendo's public relations firm. It became part of an electronic
press kit so that reporters could load the disk and see 3D screens
from Donkey Kong.

IPR: It seems screen savers have come a long way.
Oster: We're developing a trademark on the word "Kinetic Screens"
because our engine is really more than a screen saver.  It's a
development tool where we do 3D animation, video, sound, and all
multimedia components.  But once we've worked with all those things we
can make a kiosk out of it, a Web site, a CD-ROM. The screen saver is
really a part of that. It just happens to have this unfortunate name
that everybody knows.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

NEW WEB AD NETWORK LETS MARKETERS, OTHERS, TARGET AUDIENCES TO AN
UNPRECEDENTED DEGREE

      NEW YORK  DoubleClick, the first Web advertising network (see
IPR, Feb. 19) has just ended its beta test phase and is now live
<http://www.doubleclick.net>.  
      DoubleClick is intended to help advertisers reach the people
they want in a highly efficient, and therefore cost-effective manner. 
And for Web sites seeking advertisers, an ad network like DoubleClick
may remove the need to have an ad sales department or rep firm.
      But because targeting an audience through DoubleClick can be so
precise, the network may prove a useful tool for purposes beyond
general advertising, such as public relations, public affairs, or any
application where a specific group of people is to be reached with a
specific message, and quickly.  
      DoubleClick offers this example on its Web site:  "you can
target females who work for aerospace component manufacturers in the
Los Angeles area with at least $100 million in operating revenue who
use PCs with Windows 95 and like sports."

Most Advanced Medium

       "We've taken it from one of the most primitive mediums to the
most advanced medium," said Kevin O'Connor, DoubleClick CEO and
president.  "We do more right now with this medium than any other
medium can possibly do."
      The network enables targeting by Web page/site category (e.g.,
arts and literature, entertainment, health and medicine), by one or
more geographic locations (e.g., by countries, states, area codes or
zip codes), by operating system, browser type, by Internet domain,
organization type (using SIC code), by organize size or revenue, by
personal interests, and time (i.e., days or hours to display an ad
banner).
      Advertisers can also control the types of banners, banner
distribution, as well as banner frequency and ad banner series.
      "We have some advertisers using six different parameters, so we
have to hone it into a very specific group," O'Connor said.  
      "I'm waiting for a restaurant to take out ads between 4:30 and
5:30 Thursday, Friday and Saturday to get you to go to the
restaurant," he added. "It's inevitable."
      The DoubleClick service is based on a massive database of
information on Internet users/organizations, combined with
sophisticated  proprietary application software.  It lets advertisers 
control reach and frequency in real time, and provides measurable
results so advertisers can improve their campaigns.

Non-Advertising Applications

      That's great news for advertisers, but also imagine the
possibilities for political campaigning, grassroots lobbying, issues
management, and other applications such as financial communications 
especially as other ad networks sprout on the Web, some dedicated to
vertical industries areas such as health care, for example.
      "We're not going to be the only network," O'Connor said.  
      However, DoubleClick is the first and appears to be off to a
good start.
      According to O'Connor, since the beta phase began in February,
DoubleClick has delivered ads to more than two million Web users.  It
has grown from five to 25 participating Web sites, with more than 200
sites asking to participate.  And advertisers are pleased with the
results.
      "(DoubleClick's) targeting capabilities allowed us to bolster
our night-time traffic and better hit our demographic by doing late
night blitzes to the '.edu' domains," said Stephan Paternot of
WebGenesis, a site targeting the college market.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

INTERACTIVE NEWS & IDEAS 

      NEW YORK  c|net Look Out, Tech Marketers Get Ready.   The Ziff
Davis Publishing Company is creating a new independent unit called
ZDTV to produce television and Internet programs, and its first
project, a daily, hour-long TV program, will be devoted to covering
the digital revolution.  The new show is being developed and co-
produced by MSNBC  the  new Microsoft/NBC alliance for producing
programming for cable TV and the Web.//

WASHINGTON  More Kids And Teachers On The Net.  The Federal
Communications Commission voted unanimously to set aside some low-
power radio frequencies for schools, at no charge, so they can link
classrooms to the Internet without the cost of laying telephone lines.
This move would also speed low-cost telecommunications advances for
hospitals, libraries and other institutions.//

NEW YORK  Ketchum Public Relations has been awarded a Bronze Anvil
for its Ketchum Kitchen Web site <http://www.recipe.com> by the Public
Relations Society of America (PRSA) in the category of "Home Pages." 
PRSA's Bronze Anvil Awards are for the innovative use of public
relations tools and tactics as part of PR programs.// 

NEW YORK  Poppe Tyson Advertising and Public Relations, a full-
service agency with top-notch New Media capabilities, is acquiring New
York-based agency, Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell Advertising.  MJM is a
leader in consumer and considered-purchase client programs, and its
staff will assume "immediate and active" roles in existing Poppe Tyson
client activities.// 

SILICON VALLEY  Billion-Dollar Clients.  High-Tech PR agency firm
Niehaus Ryan Group, formerly Niehaus Ryan Haller (Haller recently left
to form her own cyber-PR firm), announced that it has helped its high-
tech clients create wealth.  With the recent IPOs of clients Yahoo!
and CyberCash, the market capitalization of NRG's clients has topped 
$1 billion.  NRG also has helped in M&A activity for clients Uniface,
Spry, Global Network Navigator and Ubique.  "In public relations,
you're only as good as the success of your clients," said NRG
president Ed Niehaus.//

SILICON VALLEY  Laptop Theft Scam. A lot of laptops are being ripped
off in airports at the security check point area.  After a laptop is
put on the x-ray conveyor belt, two perpetrators walk through the
metal detector ahead of the victim.  The second one intentionally sets
off and takes a lot of time emptying pockets, while the first grabs
the laptop in the confusion and disappears into the crowd, possibly
handing it off to a third perp.  So don't put the laptop on the belt
until you're sure you're next through the metal detector, and keep an
eye on it.  Thanks to Andy Marken of Marken Communications
<marken@cerfnet.com> for the tip.//
 
SILICON VALLEY  Java In Operating Systems.  Sun Microsystems is
working to make Sun's Java programming language a standard feature in
all operating systems. With Microsoft and IBM behind the move, and
Novell already committed, the prospects look good. This will enable
Java applications to run on the desktop as well as in Web browsers.// 



PR PROS ARE SLOW TO EMBRACE INTERNET

Survey of Internet Usage Among 500 Corporate 
Communicators In The U.S. And Europe

Have Internet Access At Office     66%

Consider Internet Unimportant:

*     As a communications tool     80%
*     For customers                85%
*     or employees                 88%
*     For shareholders             91%

Internet Uses Conducted At Least Weekly:

*     Operating a Web site         26%
*     Distributing information     24%
*     Monitoring newsgroups        20%
*     Monitoring competitors       17%
*     Primary research             17%
*     Secondary research           15%
*     
Source:  Manning, Selvage & Lee 
Cyber-Dash Survey of 500 corporate communicators 
      in the U.S. and Europe, April 1996





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

ONLINE MEDIA

For New England Travelers
      On April 15, Yankee Publishing, Inc., publishers of Yankee
Magazine, The Old Farmer's Almanac and numerous special interest
publications on New England travel and leisure, launched
NewEngland.com <http://www.NewEngland.com>. With nearly all of its
content presently derived from the company's print travel guides,
NewEngland.com contains travel tips, restaurant and lodging reviews,
calendar listings and links to travel related resources. According to
Janice Brand, editorial director of Yankee Publishing's Travel Group
<janiceb@yankeepub.com>, the site plans to eventually generate its own
unique online content. Sponsors can purchase banner ads and indexed
listings in the site's database of products and services of interest
to New England tourists. Forward advertising inquiries to Jamie
Trowbridge, publishing director <jamiet@yankeepub.com>.//

Disney's Family Megasite
      Self described as "the ultimate online resource for family
information," Family.com <http://www.Family.com> is the latest venture
of Disney Interactive's Disney Online division. Currently in a "soft
launch" period that will conclude with an official public introduction
tentatively scheduled for October 1, Family.com is intended to compete
with other family-oriented Web sites including Starwave Corp's. Family
Planet and Parent Soup from iVillage. The site contains eight separate
content areas -- activities, computing, education, entertainment,
finance, food, health and travel. According to Susan Wyland,
Family.com's vice president and editorial director, the in-house
editorial staff should be fully in place by the end of summer. Until
then, most content is provided by publishing affiliates  from around
the country, mostly small family oriented specialty publications.
"It's really too early to pitch story ideas, but stay tuned," says
Wyland. Charter advertisers can secure exclusive sponsorship of entire
content areas. Forward advertising inquiries to Michael Barrett,
Disney Online's vice president of advertising
<michael_barrett@online.disney.com>.//

Targeting Erudite Teenagers
      Virtual React <http://www.react.com> is an online news magazine
that offers teenagers a forum to voice their opinions on timely news
issues. The site contains numerous opinion polls, discussion areas and
peer advice columns. Editorial content is original, but thematically
related to stories that appear in React Magazine. The print magazine
is distributed as a weekly supplement in more than 100 newspapers
nationwide.  According to Sarah Cohen, senior editor of new media, the
Web site and the print magazine are unique in the teen-oriented
publishing market because they equally target both boys and girls.
Forward teenage-related lifestyle story suggestions to
<editor@react.com>. Sponsors can purchase banner ads on content pages
and in the site's Mall area, which can also be used to conduct focus
groups and other market research. Forward advertising inquiries to
Bunny Fensterheim, vice president of advertising,
<bfensterheim@react.com>.//

Microsoft's Politics/Culture Site 
      On April 24, Microsoft Corp. announced that Slate
<http://www.Slate.com> will be the name of its new interactive
magazine about politics and culture. The company also announced that
Slate's editor, former CNN commentator Michael Kinsley, appointed Jack
Shafer, formerly of the San Francisco Weekly, Jodie Allen, formerly of
the Washington Post, and Judith Shulevitz, formerly of New York
magazine, as the first members of online magazine's executive
editorial staff.  While few other details were released, Microsoft
officials said that Slate will draw from the community of leading
journalists, political and cultural figures, and policy makers to
shape its editorial calendar. Editorial features, interactive forums
and reviews will provide commentary on public policy and culture.
Specific content areas and sponsorship opportunities will be announced
in the coming weeks. Slate is scheduled to premiere this summer.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INTERACTIVE PR via NewsNet
May 6, 1996

THE WELL 

PointCast For Intranets
      The PointCast Network (PCN), a free service that broadcasts news
and information via the Internet directly to a viewer's computer
screen, recently announced the first broadcast capability for
corporate Intranets.  PointCast I-Server enables companies to
broadcast internal news on their own channel via PCN.  It resides
behind a corporate firewall and lets companies broadcast public
channels such as news, industries, weather, sports, etc., along with
internal news.  A beta version will be available soon at
<http://www.pointcast.com>.

Locate Trade Shows Worldwide
      Convergent Media Systems' Trade Show Central  uses an extensive
searchable database to give easy access to information on over 8,800
global trade shows <http://www.tscentral.com>.  It lets users search
by show event, current/future dates, locations, venues, industry
categories, and provides information on number of exhibitors,
attendees and exhibit space.  It links users directly to an event's
Web page, and lets them request specific information, via e-mail, on
any event.//

Computing Trade Shows
      Developed in association with Convergent Media Systems, Ziff-
Davis Interactive's recently launched ZD Net Trade Show Calendar is a
good source for identifying and learning about upcoming computing-
focused trade shows
<http://www.zdnet.com/zdi/calendar/calendar.html>.//

A Site That Evaluates Healthcare Sites
      BOSTON, Mass.  A new website called The Six Senses Review is
dedicated to evaluating and rating healthcare and medical websites
<http://www.sixsenses.com>.  Developed by ECHO Strategies Group, a
healthcare and medical marketing communications firm specializing in
new media, Six Senses uses an expert panel to evaluate sites by six
criteria -- aesthetics, content, innovation, interactivity, freshness,
and character  and scores each from 1 to 6.  Sites scoring a total of
24 or higher get the Six Senses Seal of Approval.//

One-Stop Health Care Website
      GeoHealthWeb is an international and multidisciplinary website
designed to serve the health care information needs of health care
professionals and consumers on a global basis. It's a non-profit
service of the National Center for Computer Education and Research in
Healthcare at the St. Louis College of Pharmacy. For information about
prescription and non-prescription drugs, surveys, continuing health
care information and much more, see  <http://www.geohealthweb.com>.//

Distribute Photos, News To Asia Pacific 
      PR Newswire <http://www.prnewswire.com> has just affiliated with
AsiaNet Photo Network to give its members a direct conduit to the news
rooms of Asia's leading media.  PRN members can now transmit photos
and graphics to the newspapers in countries ranging from India to
Australia, Vietnam to Japan. 

For Female Business Travelers
      The Executive Woman's Travel Network is a new site on the Web
dedicated to the female frequent business traveler <http://www.delta-
air.com/womenexecs>.   Published by Delta Air Lines and American
Express Travel Related Services Company, the site offers tips and
information on travel safety, health and fitness on the road, what and
how to pack, guidelines for tipping, what to ask for when booking a
hotel room, and more. An interactive news group called the Travel
Forum lets female business travelers share insights and tips from
their own experiences.//



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>