
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B30-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B007-298</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/de35.html 205.156.212.5 19970114212655 text/html 29343
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:25:11 GMT
Last-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:55:10 GMT
Content-length: 29155
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/de35.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
MISSILE DEFENSE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
November 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>INSPECTOR GENERAL FINDS FAULT WITH PATRIOT PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(742 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>SBIRS CONTRACT AWARDED TO LOCKHEED MARTIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NATIONAL MISSILE DEFENSE SOLICITATION HITS STREETS MONDAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(971 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ARMY MOVING ON TACTICAL LASER FORCE PROTECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(422 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>MISSILE DIGEST tm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1713 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MISSILE DEFENSE REPORT via NewsNet
November 22, 1996

INSPECTOR GENERAL FINDS FAULT WITH PATRIOT PROGRAM


Although the Army effectively managed the $7.3 billion Patriot Advanced
Capability (PAC) 3 program its acquisition strategy is risky, its chemical and
biological survivability questionable, its future reliability unknown, its
future reliability testing program non-existent, its inventory plan wastes
money and its contract management resources are underused, said a
just-released Pentagon report.

The Department of Defense Inspector General audit report "The Patriot Advanced
Capability-3 Program" (dated Nov.  4 but just released) recommended adding
development test report dates and revising PAC-3 program exit criteria
supporting low- and full-rate production decisions.  Also recommended was
establishing adequate chemical and biological survivability, improving the
reliability test program, using more efficient spares and replenishment
concepts and using contractor Raytheon Co.  resources more smartly.

The Army concurred with almost all the audit findings.  But the service did
not agree to add additional development test reporting dates saying reporting
requirements were adequate.  And the Army requested the Pentagon direct test
and evaluation master plan revision recommendations to the Army Materiel
Systems Analysis Activity.

A June 28 letter from Michael Hartwell, deputy director of the Missile
Command's Integrated Materiel Management Center Air Defense Directorate,
included in the report takes issue with the finding that the inventory plan
wastes money.  At issue are so-called "just-in-time" and "direct vendor
delivery" strategies.  The former refers to delivering parts as needed and not
storing them, and the latter to sending parts right to the user and not to a
warehouse.

"Once a system has been deployed and the sustainment concepts initiated for
several years [like Patriot]...it requires a major overhaul of all facets of
the support structure" to use the two strategies, said the letter.

In addition, Patriot parts are such that they require intense management
attention, making it unfeasible to store them at the contractor, said the
note.  "In fact, the prime contractor [Raytheon] is currently requesting the
removal of all GFM [government-furnished material] that is...stored at the
facility."

George Schneiter, undersecretary of defense for strategic and tactical
systems, disagreed with the audit recommendation that PAC-3 s so-called "exit
criteria" needed to move into production require that components meet
reliability levels established in the Operational Requirements Document (ORD).
He said that action was not necessary.

"What must be demonstrated for such decision points is that the program is on
track or at the proper point on its reliability growth curve to achieve ORD
standards" by the time of deployment, he wrote.

The Ballistic Missile Defense Organization agreed with all the conclusions and
recommendations.

The audit s purpose was to determine if PAC-3 management is cost-effective and
sufficient to lead to a low-rate initial production decision in early fiscal
1998 at an estimated cost of $252.4 million.

The report listed a number of management actions or plans to respond to the
recommendations.  For the low-rate initial production strategy risk, the
Pentagon issued a Program Budget Decision (No.  224) last February which
deferred deployment until the first quarter of fiscal 1999.

In addition, the Army instituted a risk-reduction program ("final scope and
level of effort will depend on contractor response to non-to-exceed package")
and inserted extra time between flight test for analyses and potential fixes.

For the chemical and biological survivability issue, the Patriot office took
several steps.  First, it established and applied exit criteria involving
chemical and biological survivability in the critical design review process;
and second, established a five-step general approach to address chemical and
biological survivability issues.  The steps included:

o defining quantitative and measurable chemical and biological survivability
hardness requirements in the Operational Requirements Document in compliance
with Army policy;

o completing a system survivability assessment and report to determine the
current status of the Patriot s vulnerability;

o performing trade-off analysis and studies to determine what survivability
enhancements that can becan be cost-effectively achieved;

o briefing the Nuclear and Chemical Survivability Committee Secretariat on
system assessment and trade-off analysis results; and,

o incorporating chemical and biological survivability into the Patriot system
in the most cost-effective manner.

On the issue of better use of contractor resources, on Oct.  26, 1995, the
Patriot office established a Memorandum of Agreement with Loral Corp.  (now
part of Lockheed Martin Corp.)  to provide program manager real-time
assessment through participation in Integrated Product Teams, participate in
planning, executing and following risk reduction plans to determine missile
production readiness; and, strengthen engineering, surveillance and contract
compliance activities.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MISSILE DEFENSE REPORT via NewsNet
November 22, 1996

SBIRS CONTRACT AWARDED TO LOCKHEED MARTIN


The Air Force has awarded a $1.8 billion contract to a Lockheed Martin
Corp.-led team to build the potential $17 billion Space Based Infrared System
early warning satellite follow-on to the Defense Support Program.

The team, including Northrop Grumman Corp., Honeywell and Aerojet beat a
Hughes Aircraft Co.-TRW Inc.  team.

The contract is for the SBIRS so-called "high element."  The "low element" or
Space and Missile Tracking System used to be the Pentagon s Brilliant Eyes
program.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MISSILE DEFENSE REPORT via NewsNet
November 22, 1996

NATIONAL MISSILE DEFENSE SOLICITATION HITS STREETS MONDAY


The Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) has formally said the final
Request for Proposal for the National Missile Defense Lead Systems Integrator
contract should be released Nov.  25, 10 days later than originally intended.
No explanation for the delay was offered.

Bidders expected on the contract include a Lockheed Martin Corp.-TRW
Inc.-Raytheon Co.  team.  Also expected to bid are McDonnell Douglas Corp.
and Boeing Corp.  It is not clear if Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle (EKV)
contractors Rockwell International Corp.  and Hughes Aircraft Co.  will be
allowed to bid as prime contractors, said industry sources.

The missile defense office said it is negotiating with the two firms to obtain
their EKV design and performance information.  The contracting office promised
that at least non-proprietary data will be provided to the bidders.  "No
proprietary information will be made available prior to the award of the CD
[concept definition] Phase contracts," said the contracting office in its list
of questions and answers to industry.  The process for post-award handling of
proprietary information is under consideration.

And regarding whether the two EKV designs are the only options for the weapon,
BMDO said proposed configurations can include any kill vehicle option that
meets system requirements and can be developed and deployed with "acceptable
risk and cost.  The only requirement that is specific to EKV is to recommend
an approach to the down select or continuation of the current competitive
efforts," said the contracting document.

Contractors which sent representatives to a Sept.  19 Lead Systems Integrator
briefing include GTE Government Systems, Aerojet, Litton Data Systems, Alliant
TechSystems Inc., Coleman Research Corp.  and Teledyne Brown Engineering.

Regarding Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty-compliance issues, the government will
provide contractors a standard set of architectures and schedules.  "These
architectures will reflect a common set of treaty considerations so the CD
contractor will not need to independently determine treaty compliance," said
BMDO.

The missile defense office also released a list of objectives and criteria for
the fiscal 1999 system test.  They include:
     o  Demonstrate end-to-end integrated system performance. 
     o  Demonstrate end-to-end target detection, acquisition, tracking, 
correlation and handover performance.
     o  Demonstrate real-time discrimination performance.
     o  Demonstrate NMD system kill assessment capability;
     o  Demonstrate the ability of the NMD system to develop and coordinate 
battle engagement plans; prepare, launch and fly out a designated weapon; and
kill a threat representative target.
     o  Demonstrate integration, interface compatibility and performance of NMD
system, subsystem hardware and software and so-called "human-in-control"
operations.
     And in support of a fiscal 1999 deployment decision, BMDO developed 27
performance (14 effectiveness and 13 suitability) objectives.  They address
critical NMD system functions and interoperability, intraoperability and
peacetime operations.

Effectiveness Objectives

     o  Demonstrate surveillance coverage to support threat representative 
launches and associated trajectories.
     o  Demonstrate target detection, reporting (quick alert and attack 
assessment) and typing of all threat missile events.
     o  Demonstrate end-to-end target tracking performance.
     o  Demonstrate real-time discrimination.
     o  Demonstrate key BMC3 functions develop/coordinate battle plans, monitor
and assess situation, warn of ballistic missile attack, coordinate and direct
BMD response and maintain mission readiness.
     o  Demonstrate interoperability between the NMD system and specified 
external and existing systems.
     o  Demonstrate interoperability between all specified internal NMD 
elements (communications connectivity, message handover timeliness and
accuracy, and message traffic capacity).
     o  Demonstrate real-time NMD human-in-control operations for all mission 
modes.  Demonstrate capability to perform day-to-day functions, transition to
BMD operations, command and control of operations and timeline adherence.
     o  Demonstrate required interceptor kinematics and guidance capability.
     o  Demonstrate that the intercept is lethal to the target.
     o  Demonstrate kill assessment in a tactically realistic NMD system 
scenario.
     o  Demonstrate multiple engagements and threat loading in a tactically 
realistic NMD system scenario.
     o  Demonstrate that the required operational connectivity will be 
maintained in both natural and man-made environments.
     o  Demonstrate end-to-end test, training and exercise capability.

Suitability Objectives

     o  Availability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of the 
NMD system to meet the user threshold availability requirement for each 
element.
     o  Computability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of the 
NMD system to operate/function under representative normal and wartime 
scenarios.
     o  Transportability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of 
the system to be transported to representative operating locations in support
of deployment, maintenance and replenishment activities and timelines.
     o  Interoperability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of 
the system to be operated/maintained/supported by multiple national and or
/multinational services
      o  Reliability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of the 
NMD system to meet the user specified threshold reliability requirements.
     o  Maintainability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of 
the NMD system to be restored to operational condition after experiencing a
failure and within user prescribed timelines.
     o  Safety Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of the NMD 
system to protect or prevent death, injury, illness, or equipment loss or
damage during representative normal and abnormal operations.
     o  Human Factors Demonstration Objective - Demonstrate the ability of the
projected personnel to operate, maintain, and support the representative 
normal and wartime functions 
     o  Manpower Supportability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the 
ability to identify, acquire and maintain the skilled personnel necessary to
operate and maintain the NMD system.
     o  Logistics Supportability Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the 
ability to support the NMD system under projected peacetime and wartime 
scenarios.
     o  Natural Environmental Effects and Impacts Demonstration Test 
Objective - demonstrate the ability for the NMD system to operate in its
intended natural and manmade environments.
     o  Documentation Demonstration Objective - demonstrate the ability of the 
NMD system support infrastructure to provide documentation that allows skilled
personnel to operate and maintain the system and its functions.
     o  Training Requirements Demonstration Objective - demonstrate that the 
training capability provides the NMD operators and maintainers with the
necessary skills and abilities to operate and maintain the system to its full
potential.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MISSILE DEFENSE REPORT via NewsNet
November 22, 1996

ARMY MOVING ON TACTICAL LASER FORCE PROTECTION


The Army Early Entry Lethality and Survivability Battle Lab (EELS) is studying
the utility of high energy ground-based lasers to protect forces from airborne
threats like ballistic and cruise missiles, unmanned aircraft, mortars and
artillery rounds, according to Army sources.  The weapon to be applied to the
mission is the $100 million Tactical High Energy Laser being developed at the
Army Space and Strategic Defense Command (SSDC).

EELS is specifically interested in survivability and situational awareness to
protect forces at the point when troops first enter a battlefield area.  That
means the system must be tactically deployable (a trailer towed by a Humvee),
be highly reliable, need little sustainment and be able to operate in an
austere environment with no depot or logistics readily available.

To this end EELS is performing a small-scale study to create a data base that
next year can be plugged into EELS battlefield simulation system.  Last July
TRW Inc.  won an $89 million contract to develop and field the system in
conjunction with Israeli firms Rafael, Israel Aircraft Industries and Tadiran.
U.S.  subcontractors include McDonnell Douglas Corp.  and W.J.  Schaefer
Associates.  The system is to be completed next November.

According to the Army SSDC, THEL will be able to rapidly fire for close-in
engagements and cost "only a few thousand dollars per kill or less with a deep
magazine to counter saturation attacks."

The price tag is an important consideration, given that THEL is a chemical
laser powered by deuterium fluoride.  Deuterium is extremely expensive,
costing about $1 per gas liter.  The Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser
(MIRACL) upon which THEL is based used 6,000 liters a second for two to three
second bursts, said a knowledgeable industry source.  Safety is also an issue
because fluoride is a deadly gas.

A high energy laser against short-range rockets was tested and demonstrated in
the "Nautilus" program, an outgrowth of Project Strong Safety, in
collaboration with Israel.  The program was conducted primarily at SSDC s High
Energy Laser Systems Test Facility at White Sands Missile Range, N.M., and
utilized a fraction of the MIRACL s megawatt power to emulate the THEL weapon
concept performance, according to SSDC.  The program successfully destroyed a
short range rocket in flight on Feb.  9, 1996.

The Army Air Defense Artillery School in Fort Bliss, Texas, has been
designated as the THEL proponent by the Training and Doctrine Command and
plans to develop a mission need statement and operational concept that could
lead to an operational requirement.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MISSILE DEFENSE REPORT via NewsNet
November 22, 1996

MISSILE DIGEST tm


o Air Force Wright Laboratory is interested in receiving proposals for
countermeasures for missile infrared seekers.  The purpose of this Imaging
Seeker Countermeasure program is to address both surface-to-air and air-to-air
imaging seeker threats and define and develop innovative countermeasure (CM)
solutions, methods and techniques to defeat them.  Existing CM techniques have
been optimized against reticle scan missile seekers.  New systems will need to
address current and advanced (imaging) missile threats.  A Program Research
and Development Announcement (PRDA) is being used for this solicitation to
encourage new and innovative concepts for both near-term and far-term
applications.

This program consists of three technical efforts to accomplish this goal.
They include Imaging Threat Investigations (ITIV), Imaging Sensor
Countermeasure Follow-On (ISCF) and the Imaging Countermeasures Concept
Development (ICCD) program.  Alternative approaches will also be considered.
The objective of the ITIV effort is to determine possible imaging threat
seeker configurations and key technologies.

Of particular interest are surface-to-air and air-to-air configurations which
shall be directed against aircraft.  This effort shall investigate components,
subsystems and technologies used in imaging seeker development.  This program
shall begin with a survey of key technologies and existing data describing
system functions of potential imaging threats.  This shall include optics,
sensors, processors and architectures, as well as, image processing techniques
and tracking algorithms.  During this investigation, the offeror shall combine
R&D with available intelligence information to predict one or more imaging
seeker configurations.  This effort shall postulate hardware configurations,
and define and create software flowcharts and/or block diagrams for each
imaging seeker threat defined.  Components shall be identified along with
equations, transfer functions, or any other necessary information to model the
threat system and subsystems.

The objective of the ISCF effort is to evaluate the performance of signature
management based countermeasures (CM) against imaging seekers through field
testing.  This program shall continue the development of candidate
technologies and techniques for imaging sensor countermeasures.  The need
exists to explore concepts which are robust against an expected difficult
threat.  This effort shall take advantage of, and then advance the results of
contract No.  F33615-93-C-1224 (Imaging Sensors CM (ISCM) Program) which
performed countermeasure and signature analysis against imaging sensors.
Information on the ISCM is available from a classified annex.  The ISCM Final
Report shall be made available to the contractor after contract award.  This
new ISCF effort shall concentrate on testing the CM concepts in the field.  A
determination shall be made if signature management based CM concepts are a
viable means to defeat imaging sensors.

The approach for this effort is to first review the Final Report and auxiliary
data from the ISCM program, then evaluate the progress that was made.  Next,
explore new and past paint and coatings technology and its application to
countermeasure concepts.  This technology may be either new or resulting from
the ISCM contract.  This effort shall also update the CM concept priority list
developed on the ISCM program.  Field testing is expected to make use of radio
controlled models and appropriate sensor devices to evaluate performance.  It
is important that lessons learned from the first program combine with the
contractors expertise to define and execute a field test that adequately
evaluates CM concept performance.  The contractor shall develop a methodology
(test plan) that tests the concepts to clearly determine if the CM techniques
merit transition to full scale.

Some critical areas to be considered are the problems associated with field
testing and the unique problems of scaled testing.  Unique, imaginative use of
available scale model technology and resources are encouraged.  Concepts
tested shall not enhance current seeker performance, but may allow improved
conventional CM performance against imaging seekers.  This effort shall
implement these Infrared Countermeasures (IRCM) concepts (from both the
previous ISCM and this contract) by obtaining the material, coatings, etc.,
that exhibit the desired effects, and test for effectiveness.

Effects may have to be simulated where technology is unavailable or too
expensive for this effort.  If possible, this effort shall take advantage of
other programs or contractors own IR&D to supply technology.  If information
is available in a timely manner, this effort may take advantage of findings
from the ITIV effort to help predict potential vulnerabilities of imaging
seekers and use the predicted threat configurations for the advanced sensors
required during field testing.  An Associate Contractor Agreement may be
required to coordinate the ITIV with this effort.  The first effort (ISCM)
used one scale model, tested at one geographical location, using limited
flight profiles, and did not attempt cooperative concepts.  The goal of this
effort is to demonstrate the performance of the best concepts under a wider
range of environmental conditions, more small-scale aircraft, additional
scenarios and combinations with traditional CM s, if possible.

Testing should include flightworthy (full scale) materials when possible and
shall use advanced sensor platforms which allow determination of effectiveness
and robustness.  The test results will be analyzed in order to determine if
integration of the ideas and concepts into an aircraft countermeasure system
is possible.

The objective of the ICCD effort is to develop innovative CM solutions,
implementation techniques, and methods to defeat the anti-aircraft imaging
seeker threats.  This program shall research and evaluate past and existing
imaging seeker CM work to focus on solutions to defeat the threat.  As it
becomes available, this effort shall utilize any findings from the parallel
ITIV effort described above.  From this review and the contractors own
expertise, the contractor shall theorize a potential set of CM solutions and
outline methods to implement them.  Potential countermeasures should consider
the overall systems approach as well as address operational issues.

The results shall be tested using a missile simulation (and environment) to
rank and evaluate the countermeasure effectiveness.  The environment used for
testing shall include missile models that includes all necessary components,
preferably industry recognized.  Selection and use of a model shall be
discussed at the design review prior to testing.  It shall be a goal of this
effort to breadboard at least one concept and demonstrate performance.

The total length of the technical effort is estimated to be 24 months for the
ITIV and 30 months each for the ISCF and ICCD.  An additional 5 months shall
be added to the technical period of performance to provide for processing and
completion of the final report.

The expected award date is May 1, 1997.  The Government funding is expected to
be $1,475,000, allocated as follows:  a total of $350,000 for ITIV including
$35,000 (fiscal 1997) $200,000 in 1998 and $115,000 in 1999; a total of
$525,000 for ISCF including $100,000 in fiscal 1997, $250,000 in 1998 and
$175,000 in 1999; and a total of $600K for ICCD including $20,000 in fiscal
1997, $300,000 in 1998 and $280,000 in 1999.

A classified annex for the Imaging Sensor Countermeasure Follow-On is
available upon request to qualified offerors.  (Solicitation (PRDA)
#97-08-AAK, R&D Contracting Directorate, WL/AAKE, Bldg.  7, 2530 C Street,
Wright Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45433-7607, ATTN:  Edward Caulfield,
937/255-2976.  The ombudsman is Daniel L.  Kugel, ASC/SY, Bldg.  52, 2475 K
St., Suite 1, Wright Patterson AFB, OH 45433-7642; phone, 937/255-3855;
e-mail, "kugekdl@sy.wpafb.af.mil"; and a World Wide Web site with information
on the program is "http://www.wl.wpafb.af.mil/contract".


o Army Space and Strategic Defense Command intends to negotiate with Delta
Research Inc.  of Huntsville, Ala., for continued effort under an existing
contract which supports the Program Executive Officer, Air and Missile Defense
Arrow Project Office.  This effort requires the contractor to provide
preflight predictions of Arrow target missile performance, Arrow interceptor
missile performance, and interceptor RF seeker performance for flight tests;
recommend any changes to guidance, homing, fusing or test range facilities and
operations acquiring the data appropriate for each test; provide post-flight
analyses of Arrow target and interceptor missile against expected performance;
and recommend changes to correct or improve design deficiencies in time to
maintain the flight schedule.

This acquisition will provide a short-term extension of the existing contract
with Delta Research in order to allow the orderly completion of on-going test
support activities and to provide transition support as necessary for any new
sources for these services which may emerge from the multiple-award Systems
Engineering and Technical Assistance Contract competition currently being
conducted under Request For Proposals No.  DASG60-96-R-0005.  This short-term
extension will provide approximately 9,750 additional hours of support over a
period of nine additional months.  (Contract #(DASG60-91-C-0029, Army Space
and Strategic Defense Command, ATTN:  CSSD-CM-CN, P.O.  Box 1500, Huntsville,
AL 35807-3801)

o Defense Special Weapons Agency has announced that its earlier solicitation
for a railroad yard engine for missile dismantlement in Russia is no longer a
total small business set-aside.  (Synopsis # 97-03, Defense Special Weapons
Agency, 6801 Telegraph Rd., Alexandria, VA 22310-3398, ATTN:  Susan Benik/AMA,
703/325-6962)

o Army Space and Strategic Defense Command intends to negotiate on a sole
source basis a follow-on contract with the Institute for Foreign Policy
Analysis Inc.  Cambridge, Mass., to examine and assess the current state of
advanced missile defense policy and technology in light of the potential
missile related capabilities that are likely to confront the United States and
its deployed forces seven to fifteen years in the future.  (Solicitation
#DASG60-97-R-0008 Army Space and Strategic Defense Command, ATTN:  CSSD-CM-CT,
P.O.  Box 1500 Huntsville, AL 35807-3801)

o Army Communications and Electronics Command plans to modify a contract with
Lockheed Martin Corp.  s Sanders Countermeasure Division for Advanced Threat
Infrared Countermeasure/Common Missile Warning System (CMWS) Integration
Laboratory design, development and fabrication.  The SIL will be utilized at
their facility to perform software development, hardware and software
integration and system performance testing on the CMWS.  This acquisition is
to procure up to 10 additional SILs for testing at the prime aircraft
contractor facilities.  The SILs will be used throughout the Developmental and
Evaluation Testing, Operational Test and Evaluation and the Follow-on
Operational Test and Evaluation phases of the engineering and manufacturing
development program.  (Contract #DAAB07-95-C-D606, solicitation
#DAAB07-97-R-D313, Army Communications and Electronics Command, C4IEW
Acquisition Center, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey 07703-5008)

o Army Space and Strategic Defense Command has awarded a $2,017,416 contract
to Computer Systems Technology Inc.  of Huntsville, Ala.  for national missile
defense ground-based radar cost and program analysis.  (Contract
#DASG60-97-C-0021, Army Space and Strategic Defense Command, ATTN:
CSSD-CM-CN, PO Box 1500,Huntsville, AL 35807-3801)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>