
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B10-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B023-209</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb13.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040711 text/html 31179
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:05:17 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:27 GMT
Content-length: 30992
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/pb13.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Spot Color</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(690 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI> . . .MORE. . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(508 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>The Status of Print</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(917 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Make an Original Sound</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(648 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI> . . .MORE. . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(884 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Tips for Writing to Government&nbsp;Employees.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Get Authors' Permission for Reprints&nbsp;Whether Electronic or Print</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1023 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Spot Color


For many magazines, it's too much of
a good thing.

By John Johanek

At one time or another we've all been
exposed to the effects of that deadly
combination of bad taste and too much
money. You know -- that house up the
road with just a few too many
turrets, the evening gown laden with
sequins and rhinestones, or maybe
it's that magazine you subscribe to
with its garish color.

Whether publishers feel they're
getting their money's worth or
(sadly) whether they actually believe
this reflects good design, many
magazines don't seem to know where to
draw the line when it comes to color.

Some publications have a natural
curbing device -- budgets. Depending
on the arrangement you have with your
printer, color costs typically
parallel usage. And magazines that
keep an eye on such excesses will
naturally tighten the purse strings
on rampant color, forcing the
designer to be more selective about
its application.

But, for those without such built-in
constraints, the need for critical
color sensibilities becomes
paramount. Here are some simple
guidelines.

Don't Let Spot Color Upstage Four
Color

When a magazine has the benefit of
glorious photography or top-notch
illustration, designers should let
those elements be the stars.
Frequently, the images will benefit
 that remain solid black. Trying to
tie in a color from the image onto
the larger type will likely cause the
type to compete with the image (or
images) for importance.

If you need to give type more
importance on the page, try other
options like making the type larger
or designing it into a higher
position on the page. In some cases,
making the type bolder will also
work.

Be Selective About Spot Color

If you must use color in a layout,
limit the application. Find a place
you want the reader to go first, then
put that item in color. Instead of
doing an entire headline in color,
highlight just one key word. This
will also let readers determine the
content of the story more quickly.
Drop caps are another popular
candidate for color. When using them,
you'll be more successful when the
headline is short and large. That way
the drop cap can still play a
secondary role in the design even
though it's in color.

Sometimes the best use of spot color
is something as incidental as a band
or rule that will bring the reader's
eye to the part of the page or spread
where you've placed important text,
like a subhead or pull quote. The
important thing to remember is that
color will attract attention when
used sparingly. Be sure there's
something worth seeing when you draw
the reader to a point on the page.

Use Solid Versions with Tints

When tinting sidebars or screening
large type, it's wise to also use the
tint color in full strength somewhere
on the page. Tints alone can often
smack of weak print quality, but when
that color is also a solid, there's
no question about the intent of the
 This approach works well for sidebars
that have a screen covering the box
while the border and headline are
printed in a solid. Another variation
is to print the sidebar box as a
solid color, then knock the type out
of the solid. When doing this, go
back into the headline and make it a
10 or 20 percent tint of the box.
It's best to limit this treatment to
short sidebars. No one will want to
read a large mass of knock-out type.

Avoid Critical Registration

Don't expect too much from your
printer. Printing small type or fine
rules is difficult to keep in
register. If you elect to print a
fine box rule in color, limit it to
one of the base colors like magenta
or cyan. Boxes are especially
difficult because they require both
horizontal and vertical registration.
Likewise, typography -- even large
type -- will challenge the most
skilled printer when the final color
calls for tint combinations to align
on especially thin diagonal strokes
or delicate serifs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

 . . .MORE. . .


Use Appropriate Color

Some designers tend to select colors
in a void, ignoring the underlying
message certain colors (or
combinations) convey. Just as red and
green will surely conjure up images
of Christmas, other colors project
moods and reflect attitudes. Wise
designers will work this to their
advantage, using blood red to infer
terror or a cool blue to suggest
winter.

More importantly, be careful that the
color you've selected isn't sending
out an inappropriate signal to the
reader. Businesslike subjects call
for reserved colors. If your
editorial content needs to be taken
 use serious colors when you want the
message to be playful.

Using color effectively walks the
reader through stories in much the
same way as images and type do -- the
big blast comes at the beginning of
the story and gradually tapers off as
it progresses. Color may, in fact,
drop off to nothing by the end of the
story. This not only allows the next
new feature to have more impact, but
also lets readers unwind as they move
through a story.

Smart designers will also use color
to unify the pages of a story or
several stories as a section. A
distinctive color on each spread of a
story will serve to unite them. This
is even more effective when the color
appears similarly throughout the
pages, such as in the type or band of
an overline that's in the same
position on each spread, or as the
tint color on all sidebars, or when
all pull quotes are the same color.
On sections, bands that bleed in from
the top of each page or color icons
on the opener of each story can pull
the stories together.

Use a Little Gray Matter

For magazines limited to black and a
second color, don't overlook the
value of combining the color with
gray tints. Adding a touch of gray to
a tint of red will change it from
pink to mauve. Gray working with a
screen of yellow can create a rather
unique and pleasing putty color --
just right for a sidebar. Various
combinations of gray and cyan can
result in rich, businesslike tones.
Not only will this avoid the monotony
of repetitive color, it's also a way
to take the edge off raw, harsh
colors.

Avoid Flooding Color

Perhaps the biggest abuse of color is
 give them the appearance of colored
paper stock. Rare is the situation
that warrants this treatment. Quite
simply, avoid it until you feel
you've mastered the craft of
designing with color.

Color is the designer's best friend
when used correctly. In the wrong
hands, however, it can be your
readers' worst nightmare.

John Johanek is a partner in the
design firm of Ayers/Johanek
Publication Design, 4750 Rolling
Hills Drive, Bozeman, MT 59715; (406)
585-8826; or, on the East Coast:
Ayers/Johanek Publication Design,
2003 31st St., SW, Allentown, PA
18103; (610) 797-8253. His firm
specializes in editorial design for
consumer, trade, and association
publications nationwide.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

The Status of Print


Are printed magazines a dying breed?
Are electronic magazines the wave of
the future . . . or, perhaps, even of
the present?

By Jack Powers

Every page delivered on disk, on-
line, or on demand is a page that is
no longer produced on press. As new
media grows, old media shrinks and
adapts to a changing communications
environment.

 --What is the future of print in the
Information Age?
 --How will it evolve to meet rising
expectations and changing demands?
 --Will batch printing be replaced by
customized, on-demand xerography?
 --And what will happen to all those
professionals who make their livings
crafting paper pages?

Here are some thoughts on the status
of today's print media:


New computing, communications and
imaging technologies have automated
most of the print production
business. Word processing, desktop
publishing, computer graphics,
electronic photography and digital
imaging have eliminated most prepress
jobs. Laser-to-plate systems, digital
printing presses, color laser
printers and in-line finishing
equipment are pushing automation into
the pressroom and bindery. Publishers
are living most of the production
manager's dream of workflow "from
brain to mouse to press," and it's
easier than ever before to make more
print.

Nobody Wants More Print

Except for the people who sell paper
and ink, nobody in the developed
world wants more print, more
"information" dumped on our desks
every morning that we never get a
chance to read, more magazines piling
up on the floor awaiting recycling
day, more catalogs that go directly
from the mail box to the trash.
What we need -- what publishers are
striving to create -- is better
print, more effective publication,
and these days that might mean
ink-on-paper, toner-on-paper or
pixels-on-screen. Instead of a single
pressrun of a million impressions,
buyers are asking for ten pressruns
of a hundred-thousand each and many
are shooting for a hundred-thousand
pressruns of ten impressions each.

Printing Belongs to the Industrial
Age

Conventional printing (along with
broadcast television) typifies the
batch manufacturing approach of the
Industrial Revolution: a single
standardized product produced in vast
quantities with terrific economies of
scale and constantly improving
process efficiencies.
 processing nirvana in which every
cylinder of every press is churning
out perfect pages 24 hours a day, 7
days a week for a single customer, a
house account, who pays -- every
Friday -- in cash. New technologies
like desktop publishing, image
processing and digital prepress have
dramatically improved the efficiency
of batch printing and at the same
time made smaller batches more
affordable.

Interactive Media Belongs to the
Information Age

Advances in computing, communications
and imaging technologies improve the
targeting of publications. On the
creative side, electronic design and
production tools make more
customized, more timely and more
economical page forms. On the
distribution side, new media formats
make the delivery of the publication
better, faster and cheaper. Smart
publishers in every industry segment
are crafting a new generation of
interactive publications that tune
themselves uniquely to the needs of
the "Audience of One." (Some printers
are expanding into new media
services, some of which make money.)

The Costs of Conventional Paper-based
Publishing are Rising

Print is getting more expensive and
losing its competitive edge to
alternative media.

 --Paper costs are rising rapidly and
may never return to their historical
lows since demand from the developing
world is increasing and pressure from
environmental groups opposed to paper
mills is strong worldwide.
 --Distribution costs (including
postage) are based on constantly
increasing labor and energy costs and
will never get any cheaper.
 --Out-of-date information costs,
which don't show up on many
 publishers in all segments.

The Expectations of Readers are also
Rising

Now that nearly every literate person
has used a computer, a revolution of
rising expectations is sweeping the
publishing markets. These new
expectations cover both the editorial
and the commercial aspects of
publication.

 --Readers expect faster turnaround
to compete with electronic media.
 --They prefer the searchability of
interactive products to the dead
weight of paper.
 --They like the superior
illustration opportunities of
multimedia.
 --They expect to pay-per-view for
the information they need rather than
subscribe to pages they may never
use.

There are Three Kinds of Publishers
and Three Kinds of Publications.

Defined by their environments and
their audiences, publishing
operations fall into three broad
classes:

 --Commercial publishers print for
profit and produce newspapers,
magazines, books and other products
which generally carry a price tag.
 --Corporate publishers create pages
for advertising, marketing, corporate
communications, technical
documentation and collateral material
that they usually give away for free.
 --Government publishers in federal,
state and local divisions generate
mountains of legislative, regulatory
and judicial documents that are paid
for by our tax money.

Defined by their intended use, most
publications do predominantly one of
three things, although most pages
contain all three in varying
  --Inform readers with breaking news,
analysis, reference data,
specifications, prices and other
facts.
 --Entertain audiences with stories,
novels, poems, jokes, gossip and
other forms of narrative.
 --Persuade prospects with
advertising spiels, marketing
communications, sales notices and
promotional material.

[Editors Note: What are your
reactions to Jack's characterization
of the status of print? In what ways
are your publishing activities
adapting to the changing information-
delivery environment? Let Editors
Only know -- we'll present a roundup
of your comments in an early issue!]

Jack Powers is the director of
G,Graphics Research Laboratory Inc. in
Brooklyn, New York; 718 768-8031,
(http://www.electric-pages.com).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Make an Original Sound

    
Writing that causes readers to stop
in their tracks.

By Peter P. Jacobi

We've addressed the subject of
detail, the power thereof.

We've also discussed the issue of
show vs. tell: that to show means to
bring the reader close to place or
person or situation.

In each case, the writer is using the
right information, concrete
information, and attaching to it just
the right words in just the right
combinations.

It's writing that makes a reader stop
in his tracks.

It's writing that opens a world in
her mind.

 sound in the world, it makes a
thousand echoes." That's what detail
is, at least potentially: an original
sound. It's what showing does.

You are There

Robert Mads Anderson is, according to
the records, the first person to have
made a solo climb to the highest
mountain on every continent.
Recently, for USAir Magazine, he
adapted a chapter from his book,
Summits: Climbing the Seven Summits
Solo, this particular chapter dealing
with a harrowing effort to reach
Antarctica's highest peak.

"The ice was blue and crisp," he
writes, "my ice tools barely
penetrating the surface. The air
temperature, steady at 40 below zero
Celsius, froze my breath into
crystals that floated onto the ice.
The air froze into the back of my
throat and seemed to be dripping
icicles into my lungs."

I'm there, or at least I can begin to
understand what it's like.

It reminded me of a very different
place and situation, as described by
Jean Fritz, the children's book
writer, in her autobiography. "Who
would know by looking at a map what
the Yangtse River really was?" she
asks. And then she answers:

"Orange-brown, muddy mustard-colored.
And wide, wide, wide. With a river
smell that was old and came all the
way up from the bottom. Sometimes old
women knelt on the riverbank, begging
the River God to return a son or
grandson who may have drowned. They
would wail and beat the earth to make
the River God pay attention, but I
knew how busy the River God must be.
All those people on the Yangtse
River! Coolies hauling water. Women
washing clothes. Houseboats swarming
with old people and young, chickens
 they could see where they were going.
I loved the Yangtse River, but, of
course, I belonged on the other side
of the world. In America with my
grandmother.

"'Twenty-five fluffy little yellow
chicks hatched from our eggs today,'
my grandmother wrote.

"I wrote my grandmother that I had
watched a Chinese magician swallow
three yards of fire."

I'm there, or at least I can begin to
understand what it's like.

As in the case with Susan Orlean when
she writes for The New Yorker: "The
people who shop at Sunshine Market, a
grocery store in Jackson Heights,
Queens, are thin and beautiful. They
are also fat and plain, relaxed and
frantic, Colombian, Italian, Jewish,
Indian, African-American, Bolivian,
Uruguayan, Vietnamese, young, middle-
aged, elderly, rowdy, meek, cheerful,
world-weary, rich and broke. They buy
health food. They buy Ding Dongs and
Diet Coke. They have just come to
America. They have lived in America,
in Jackson Heights, in the same
apartment, with the same furniture in
the same arrangement, for sixty
years. They are in a big hurry. They
are in no rush and hoping to bump
into their neighbors for a chat. They
are in minks. They are in their
pajamas, wearing stacks of hair
curlers and no makeup. They are
buying the works for a dinner party.
They are buying a Lean Cuisine
Chicken Fettucini to eat alone." And
so forth.

Yes, I'm there, or at least I can
begin to understand what it's like.

These writers are doing their job.
They are linking a reader to their
own experiences.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

 . . .MORE. . .


James Kilpatrick, that always lucid
commentator on writing, has said: "We
must look intently, and hear
intently, and taste intently. . .we
must look at everything very hard. Is
it the task at hand to describe a
snowfall? Very well. We begin by
observing that the snow is white. Is
it as white as bond paper? White as
whipped cream? Is the snow daisy
white, or egg-white, or whitewash
white? Let us look very hard. We will
see that snow comes in different
textures. The light snow that looks
like powdered sugar is not the heavy
snow that clings like wet cotton.
When we write matter-of-factly that
last night it snowed and this morning
the fields were white, we have not
looked intently."

Such intensity comes from a curious
and gripping direction in a passage
written by Brenda Miller, this for an
essay in The Georgia Review. "I have
never been touched by someone blind,"
she writes, "but I can imagine what
it would be like. She would read me
like Braille, her fingertips hovering
on the raised points of my flesh,
then peel back the sheets of my skin,
lay one finger on my quivering heart.
We could beat like that, two
hummingbirds, and become very still.
Her hands might move across my
abdomen, flick the scar below my
belly button. My eyelids would
flutter at her touch, and my skin
dissolve into hot streams of tears."

Richard Rhodes in How to Write speaks
of writing as "a craft that cuts
windows through the terrifying
opacity of the world." Brenda
Miller's words do that.

So does David Stout when, for The New
York Times, he expresses a complex
feeling this way: "So much has been
written about the joy of hunting and
so little about the sadness, the
sadness that fills the silence after
 hunting. "I was not squeamish, say,
about slitting the belly of a freshly
killed rabbit and dumping the
steaming guts onto the damp leaves on
a chill November day. But I cannot
forget the day when I was 13 and shot
at a big rusty fox squirrel three
times before it came tumbling down
from the trees, bounding off limbs as
it fell, then trying to crawl away.

"And this hunter who would not remain
a hunter grabbed the animal by its
tail, dragging it to a clearing to
finish it off with the gun butt. Then
he stood still in the dusk, listening
to a chain saw in the distance and
waiting for his sadness to go away.
He has been waiting for 40 years."

Intense. Penetrating. I am at one.
I'd be at one even if I felt
differently about such activity.

I return to the word "understanding."
Stout makes me understand.

As does Neil de Grasse Tyson in a
very different way. His recent
article, "When Galaxies Collide," for
Natural History, warns of such
universal events. They're happening
even as I write, even as you read.
Horrors. Fears. But then he tells me:
"During the cosmic acrobatics,
individual stars easily pass by each
other through interstellar space
because galaxies are mostly empty, in
spite of how packed they look. For
example, if there were just four
snails running loose in the
continental United States for a
billion years, then two of them would
be more likely to accidentally bump
into each other than would two stars
during a galactic collision."

I can breathe easier.

Give-my-all Writing

Much closer to home, George Dismukes,
an independent filmmaker, reflects on
"What it's like to live in prison,"
for Newsweek. "At day's end we were
returned to our night cells," he
says. "Night is when the morons and
neurotics holler and shake their
bars, when the fanatics cry out
entreaties to their God. One can
shout obscenities at the neighbors
with impunity. Those who would like
to sleep are not permitted to have
earplugs.

"The jail," he continues, "also
offers the pleasures of solitary
confinement. That's where I am right
now, in lockdown. One day they came
and brought me here, without
explanation. After the bedlam of
where I had been, the quiet was a
blessing, for I like to read and
exercise my mind by filling yellow
legal pads with introspection. That's
me; solitary is tougher on those with
little education or sense of
contemplation. On the wall of my cell
are graffiti left by former
residents. One welcomes the newcomer
to hell, others speak of the horrors
of aloneness. I realize how fortunate
I am that for me silence holds no
terror."

This is give-my-all writing.

It is what Annie Dillard calls for in
The Writing Life when she says: "One
of the few things I know about
writing is this: spend it all, shoot
it, play it, lose it, all, right
away, every time. . . .The impulse to
save something good for a better
place later is the signal to spend it
now. Something more will arise for
later, something better."

Peter P. Jacobi is Professor of
Journalism at Indiana University. He
is a writing and editing consultant
for numerous associations and
magazines. He also serves as a media
trainer, speech coach, and workshop
leader for various institutions and
corporations.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Tips for Writing to Government
Employees.

   
Understanding the needs and
idiosyncrasies of a "unique culture"
-- that of the U.S. government -- has
made one publication something of an
authority on covering computer news
for governmental employees.

Government Computer News, a biweekly
that has won eight Computer Press
Association awards and consistently
outdistances its competitors in
readership, targets the buyers and
users of computers in government.
Chief editor Tom Temin let's us in on
some of his publication's trade
secrets:

 --Focus on products, technology.
Although the government buys the
computers covered in GCN, the federal
procurement process is given minimal
coverage in the paper. Instead,
editors take a technical-product
oriented tack with their editorial.
"Research over the years shows
readers are less interested in the
arcane points of procurement than
they are in the computers," says
Temin.

 --Keep readers apprised of what
their colleagues are doing.
Government employees want to know how
their associates are doing in their
own agencies, says Temin.

 --Run product reviews. "We were the
first, and until this year, the only
government publication to have its
own product test facility and to run
every-issue product reviews," says
Temin.

 --Always take the government user's
point-of-view. "We're very parochial
about covering the government,"
remarks Temin. "Even when we do
product coverage -- the same product
everybody's covering -- we don't
cover it unless there's a government
angle to it."  --Patricia Donohue,
assistant editor.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EDITORS ONLY via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

Get Authors' Permission for Reprints
Whether Electronic or Print


Understanding reprint rights under
current copyright law.

By Ellen M. Kozak

A magazine establishes a Web site on
the Internet to familiarize more
people with the magazine, create a
favorable impression of it, and
hopefully increase readership. Each
month they put up a copy of the table
of contents for people to browse and,
in addition, the editors select the
best article in the issue and put it
on the Web site, as well. What's
wrong with this picture?

Another editor is about to publish an
article about the transportation
strikes in Paris. In the article, the
author mentions Jacques Chirac. The
editor adds an editor's note that the
magazine published an article on the
French president last year, and
invites readers to get a copy by
sending an s.a.s.e. Is that
permissible?

A Matter of Copyright/Contract

Both of the examples above boil down
to reprints -- one in print, and the
other electronic. Whether a magazine
has the right to issue either kind of
reprint is a matter of copyright and
contract; both kinds of reprint are
considered publication under the law.

Although electronic rights are
turning out to be a hot area for
copyright lawyers, the answers to
some of the questions that occur seem
fairly clear under current copyright
law. Others, however, are less so --
and may become more complicated as
customary author/publisher agreements
evolve to meet the needs of new
technology.

Writer's Status Determines Writes

What rights a publisher has in
relation to a contributor depend on
the status of the writer. Is the
piece written by a staffer as part of
his or her job? If so, it is legally
classified as a work made for hire,
and you, as publisher, own all the
rights and can publish or distribute
it as you choose.

But pieces written outside the scope
of employment -- for example, a
humorous column written by your copy
editor -- like pieces contributed by
freelancers, are works in which all
rights (including reprint and
electronic rights) originate and
remain with the author.

Exceptions to Rule

There are three exceptions to the
rule that the creator of the work
retains the full copyright. The first
exception is for works made for hire.
To fall into this category, an
article, sketch or photo (all three
are copyrightable) must (1) be
specially ordered and commissioned,
(2) fit into one of nine classes (one
of which is collective works such as
newspapers and magazines), and (3) be
subject to an agreement in writing
signed by both parties stating that
the work is and was always intended
to be made for hire.

The second exception requires an
assignment of rights. An author can
assign all or any portion of the
rights that make up the copyright in
a work but the law requires copyright
assignments to be in writing.

Special Provision in Law

Both of these exceptions obviously
require a contract. If you are not
using a contract with your
contributors, there is a third way
that you acquire at least some
rights. The drafters of the current
U.S. copyright law understood that
many newspapers and magazines do not
habitually use contracts, so they
built in a special section of the law
to address the rights of authors in
their contributions to collective
works. It reads as follows:

"Copyright in each separate
contribution to a collective work is
distinct from copyright in the
collective work as a whole, and vests
initially in the author of the
contribution. In the absence of an
express transfer of the copyright or
of any rights under it, the owner of
copyright in the collective work is
presumed to have acquired only the
privilege of reproducing and
distributing the contribution as part
of that particular collective work,
any revision of that collective work,
and any later collective work in the
same series."

Ambiguity in Section of Law

The first sentence of this section of
the law is pretty clear: copyright --
the right to reproduce a work,
distribute it, display it, perform
it, and create derivative works based
on it -- initially belongs to the
creator of the work.

However, the second sentence,
although it's construction seems to
imply a restrictive reading
("acquired only the privilege
of . . ."), does contain a certain
amount of ambiguity. Just what
constitutes a revision of a
collective work or a later collective
work in the same series? Could either
of these conceivably include an
electronic version?

Get Written Agreement

Until Congress or the courts clarify
this, your best way of making sure
you have acquired the rights you want
is a written agreement. Bear in mind
that supplying reprints, either in
hard copy or on-line -- or
authorizing others, such as UnCover
to do so, may well constitute an
infringement of the author's
copyright. If doing these things is
important to you, get the permission
in writing.

Bear in mind, however, that acquiring
these rights may mean you have to pay
the author a higher fee, or a
royalty, or an annual license fee.
Writers survive economically by
reselling articles to non-competing
markets. The availability of an
article out on the Web cuts down on
its value to other publications.

As for the answers to the questions
at the beginning of this piece -- if
the articles are not works made for
hire or if you haven't obtained all
rights to them, your best course of
action is to obtain the writer's
written permission to distribute or
electronically display the articles.
Putting it into your contract is your
best way to preserve good relations
with a contributor and avoid the
possibility of copyright
infringement.

Ellen M. Kozak practices copyright,
publishing and media law with the
Milwaukee law firm of Nilles &
Nilles, S.C. She is the author of
From Pen to Print: The Secrets of
Getting Published Successfully and
Every Writer's Guide to Copyright and
Publishing Law, both from Henry Holt
& Co. This article is (c) 1995, Ellen
M. Kozak.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>