
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B038-112</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te39.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050629 text/html 39533
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:04:31 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:01 GMT
Content-length: 39346
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te39.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet <BR>
January, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>SPECIAL REPORT THE MFJ--FRONT PAGE NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>RHCs PLAN 1990 GRASSROOTS EFFORT TO RELAX MFJ RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1744 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NETWORKS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>CONGRESS, BUREAUCRACY HAVE HANDS-ON EXPERIENCE WITH NEW PHONE&nbsp;SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(740 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NATIONAL AUDIENCE FOR 900 SERVICE DOESN'T MATERIALIZE DURING&nbsp;DECEMBER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(406 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEW VENTURES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NEW COMPANIES FIND INFO PHONES NOT MONEY MAKERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(442 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONTRACTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>GTE AHEAD OF THE GAME IN GETTING PHONE SERVICE ON BOARD FOR BOWL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(410 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>NTIA INQUIRY SEEKS DATA FOR MAJOR TELECOM LEGISLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMMENTARY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>THE CHANGING WORLD OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(876 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BACK PAGE NEWS--MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>TELECOM*USA, ALC SIGN LETTER OF INTENT TO MERGE OPERATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(402 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

RHCs PLAN 1990 GRASSROOTS EFFORT TO RELAX MFJ RULES

     The 7 regional holding companies (RHCs) are preparing
expensive lobbying campaigns for this spring to urge local
telephone users to contact their Washington representatives and
demand legislation that will relax the hold U.S. District Judge
Harold Greene has over the modified final judgment (MFJ).
     The RHCs, however, are opposed by powerful informational
services and consumer lobbies that for years have been telling
the American public that if the restrictions are relaxed, the
RHCs may increase rates for voice services to subsidize the new
services.
     This year's campaign will claim through published articles,
mailings and print advertisements that 80% of the American public
supports the holding companies and wants the sophisticated
informational services the local Bell operating companies (BOCs)
want to provide, but--because of the restrictions--legally
cannot.
     The RHCs know that they must excite the American public into
action so Congress will be compelled to address what amounts to
the formation of a national telecommunications policy, THE LONG-
DISTANCE LETTER has been told.  If the issue is swept under a rug
once again, America's role as a telecommunications leader in the
global market may be threatened.
     Legislation that will revise Greene's oversight of the MFJ
is among high-priority items on the House telecommunications
subcommittee list, we are told, and will be pushed early in the
legislative session by subcommittee Chairman Edward Markey (D-
Mass.)
      Greene's restrictions to keep the holding companies out of
the manufacturing, long-distance and informational services
businesses have kept half of the nation's telecommunications
industry idle, the RHCs complain and may reduce America's future
in the telecommunications explosion to that of a buyer of
foreign-made goods and services.

Again, RHCs Say That the Situation Has Changed in Last 6 Years

     Conditions that existed 6 years ago when divestiture was
ordered have been outdistanced by changing world conditions, the
RHCs claim.  Located and oriented to regional markets, the
companies claim they do not have the capability any longer of
developing the monopoly that was foreseen in Greene's ruling.
     The RHCs also say that America already has fallen behind
other countries where such services as electronic mail delivery,
data inquiry, shopping, banking, hotel reservations, cable
television and others are being provided by telephone companies.
     France's Minitel has offered videotex and electronic
services since the mid-1980s, building a customer base of 5
million by providing free terminals.  Today the government-
subsidized company adds 10,000 customers per month and no longer
provides free terminals.
     Minitel's customers can use their videotex terminals to make
airplane reservations, trade in stock, buy from a catalog or find
out about weather conditions,employment opportunities, local road
conditions, and telephone and address listings from a database
inquiry service that accounts for 20% of the system's traffic.
     According to a study commissioned by the RHCs late last
year, 3 out of 4 Americans believe that "it is absolutely
critical" that this country provide services offered by other
countries.  Four out of every 5 people in the survey said they
would use a telephone computer to make appointments, review
supermarket "specials," communicate with government or school
officials or scan community "bulletin boards" if those services
were available on their telephone lines.

Public Pretty Much in the Dark About Strictures, Study Finds

      Amazingly, according to Dr. Harold E. Quinley, a senior
vice president for Yankelovick, Clancy and Shulman, the Westport,
Conn., research firm that conducted the survey for the RHCs, of
the 17,000 who participated in the survey, few knew that local
telephone companies could not provide the services described in
the survey, and most were surprised to learn that the reason the
services were unavailable was because of restrictions by the
federal government!
     "We are sure that the people we talked to did not know
(about the restrictions),"  Quinley told us.  He said surveyors
provided partial explanations of the restrictions to each person
taking part in the survey.  Some RHC lobbyists reported "victory"
in the last Congress with 2 anti-divestiture bills--one in the
House and one in the Senate--and see an early introduction of
revised bills this session.  However, even though members
described last session's bills as "highly charged" with "strong
interest on all sides,"  the bills did not get out of committees
because members were not compelled by their constituents to take
action, observers said.
     One House member, sympathetic to the RHCs' cause, said last
year that divestiture was "very esoteric" and not a subject that
was often discussed "at the dinner tables of middle America."
But the telephone companies hope that much will be changed this
session, said Sam Simon, a Washington-based telecommunications
consultant who heads Issue Dynamics Inc.  He said RHC lobbyists
"are already jockeying" to be in position when divestiture
legislation is revived.
     Simon said the holding companies--whose revenues were cut
when they were severed by the court from the parent company 6
years ago--"crucially" need the added incomes the restricted
services would provide.  But, Simon said, they may be content to
accept compromise legislation from Congress if a Court of Appeals
decision expected in the spring alters rulings Greene made
recently to uphold the 1984 restrictions.  "If for instance, the
court lifts restrictions against information services, the BOCs
might be satisfied with legislation that retains the other
restrictions," Simon said.
     But other observers aren't so sure. Catherine Sloan, who
monitors legislation for the Competitive Telecommunications
Association (CompTel), told us the RHCs would not likely be
satisfied with a compromise.  "They need the long-distance
service to provide the information services, and they need the
ability to research, develop and manufacture new technology to
support all their services," she said.

Legislation Could Result in New National Policy

     Mike Brand, a spokesman in Chicago for American Information
Technologies Corp. (Ameritech), one of the 7 RHCs, told us the
RHCs were "set up" to push for legislation that will eventually
result in a new national telecommunications policy.  He said the
holding companies rely on "substantial contacts" with Washington
legislators and "grassroots" campaigns in congressional districts
that urge telephone users to tell their Washington
representatives that they do not favor the restrictions.
     In past years, Ameritech has stuffed dividend envelopes with
bulletins urging its shareholders to write their congressmen
about the divestiture restrictions, involved educational and
public-policy organizations that rely on Ameritech research
grants and received unexpected help from well-known radio
commentator Paul Harvey, for its cause.
      Harvey, whose daily broadcasts reach a vast national
audience, told listeners "the Congress must be made to realize
that information is the lifeblood of contemporary commerce and
industry."  He said,  "The Baby Bells, although orphaned by Ma
Bell, have picked themselves up, dusted themselves off and
continue to serve the public and to profit and prosper."
      Brand said the endorsement--while appreciated--"was
completely Harvey's own doing" and that his dinner appearance
before Ameritech managers 6 days before the broadcast, for which
he received his normal $30,000 fee, did not influence the content
of Harvey's radio broadcast.

Lobbyists Should Seize on Association Opinions

     Simon, who presents seminars to Congress about issues facing
the telecommunications industry in behalf of Bell clients, said
the RHCs must gain support from national consumer organizations
such as the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) if
they are going to gain favorable legislation.
     But the AARP does not make up its official mind until later
this month, when the membership will be polled on the
telecommunications issue, said AARP senior policy analyst Larry
Fenster.  AARP--whose members are retired and live on fixed
incomes--is one of Washington's strongest consumer lobbies.  It
planned to reveal a "new in-depth telecommunications study on the
expanding information services and their impact on consumers and
policy choices at a press conference [Jan. 11].
     The Consumer Federation of America, which joined AARP in
that press conference, has been on record to oppose the relaxing
of restrictions, stating that the new services will mean higher
costs for basic voice services and the possibility of another
monopoly.
     But the major opposition comes from the American Newspaper
Publishers Association (ANPA), whose members have feared
competition from electronic classified and directory inquiry
services from phone companies for more than a decade.
     Not only have ANPA members appeared before Congress'
committees to speak against loosening the restrictions, but
editorials in members' newspapers consistently remind readers
(and members of Congress) that relaxing the restrictions might
well mean a move toward government control of the information-
generating process and a violation of the First Amendment.
     While the players align themselves for the legislative
kickoff, a smaller game--played at the U.S. Court of Appeals
where the RHCs are seeking legal relief from Greene's
restrictions--has produced strange teammates.
     The Justice Department--the same federal agency that carried
the burden of the government's year-long trial that shattered
AT&T's 100-year monopoly in 1983 and created the restrictions--
filed briefs recently stating the time may be ripe to relax those
restrictions.

In the End, MFJ Impacts Nation's Bottom Line, Justice Says

      Justice said in the brief that continuing Greene's
restrictions could be harmful to the telecommunications industry
that, Justice said, "measures in the billions dollars."  Justice
said that continuing the restrictions concerns the well-being of
the "country's entire national welfare and security."
     The brief justifies relaxing the restrictions because of
technological advances, developing global markets and the
corporate health of competitors that precludes one firm attaining
a monopoly position.
     Although not the major concern, the Justice Department cites
the administrative "burden" caused by more than 200 waivers the
RHCs have filed since 1984, creating heavy workloads for both the
Justice Department and the court system.
     Before the Court of Appeals can make a decision, 3 judges
must review thousands of pages of testimony and examine hundreds
of exhibits submitted during the lengthy court process.
Testimony taken in the 1987 triennial review alone--which is the
subject of the appeal--has created a document containing more
than 6,000 pages.
     Early last fall, hundreds of typewritten pages written by
dozens of attorneys representing many of the 80 different parties
interested in the appeal--along with exhibits--were submitted to
the court simply to request that each side present 2 hours of
oral argument to the court.  Those briefs took several months to
file and filled several folders in the clerk's office.  But those
arguments--granted after the court presumably reviewed the briefs
and examined the exhibits--were heard Dec. 6.
      They lasted exactly 4 hours.
     (Editor's note: The preceding article is second in a planned
series docu-menting proposed changes in the modified final
judgment and how such changes will impact the long-distance
industry.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

CONGRESS, BUREAUCRACY HAVE HANDS-ON EXPERIENCE WITH NEW PHONE
SYSTEMS

     While Congress and its bureaucracy may be wrangling over
national telecommunications policies later this year (see
preceding story), it is hoped that Hill and agency staffers will
be making clearer and more efficient long-distance and local
calls thanks to multi-billion-dollar technology now being
installed in Washington and 1,200 other government locales.
     When the final cutover from the old FTS long-distance system
is completed in May, nearly 1 million federal employees will be
using up-to-date fiber optics and the new FTS 2000 system.
     Two of the major suppliers, AT&T and US Sprint, were awarded
the 10-year contract by the General Services Administration (GSA)
in mid-1989 over the protest of MCI, a late-bidder that claimed
AT&T's prices did not reflect true costs.  MCI subsequently
threatened legal action.
      AT&T was given 60% of the contract and US Sprint the
remaining 40%.  Both vendors will have an opportunity to re-bid
the contract in its fourth and seventh year.
     The contract was awarded to supply basic voice service to
the agencies but allows the vendors to offer added voice services
(such as 800), video switched data services and digital
integrated services as needed that potentially raise the
contract's value to $25 BILLION over the 10-year life of the
contract, making it the largest federal civilian contract ever
awarded!
     Not only is the government's long-distance service being
improved, but 34 U.S. agencies and 130,000 federal employees
scattered throughout the Washington area have new desktop
telephones, switchboards, wiring and switches as a result of a
$282 million contract awarded last January to the Washington,
D.C.-based C&P Telephone Co.
     The goal of that new system--known as Washington Interagency
Telecommunications Service (WITS)--is to update government
offices with advanced technology and services available to the
private sector and the military. Complete installation will take
3 years.

Watchdog Agencies Keep Eye on Costs of New Systems

     While still in the hands of technicians and installers, the
systems nevertheless have the attention of the GAO [Congress'
investigative arm] that is overseeing the work to see that it is
done on time and according to the specifications of the contract,
and a Senate investigating committee that is concerned that the
contract's huge dollar value could generate waste and possible
irregularities.
     Ron Famous, a GAO evaluator, assures us that the first four
FTS switchovers--which started in October--have been on schedule
and on-site work problems, minimal, so far.  GAO also regularly
observes work progress being made by AT&T and US Sprint
technicians who--possibly for the first time--work side by side,
bringing the agencies on line.
     Jack Brock, a GAO spokesman, said a comprehensive breakdown
of the complicated FTS 2000 contract is being prepared for
members of Congress "so they will have an understanding of what
they bought."
     Investigators from Sen. John Glenn's (D-Ohio) Senate
Governmental Affairs Committee also are observing FTS' progress,
mostly  because of a 1988 investigation the committee conducted
that resulted in the resignation of a GSA executive who admitted
to contract irregularities with bidders for FTS service
contracts.

Investigation Tightened Contract Procedures

     That investigation--involving AT&T and BellSouth, both of
which were bidders on a dozen federal service contracts worth
about $55 million--tightened contract award procedures used by
GSA in awarding the new FTS and WITS contracts, THE LONG-DISTANCE
LETTER was told.
     Sureshar Lal Soni, the $60,000-a-year GSA executive,
allegedly "slipped" confidential AT&T bid information to
competitor BellSouth, where his daughter was employed while
contracts were being bid.  Soni later pled guilty to criminal
charges of accepting $400 in meals from BellSouth while BellSouth
and AT&T competed for contracts to service electronic tandem
network switches on the FTS system.
     Soni, who faced up to a year in prison and fines up to
$100,000, was fined $2,000 and placed on one year's probation
last April by a federal magistrate. Under terms of his plea
agreement, Soni resigned as director of GSA's Office of Network
Services, where he supervised the review of technical and cost
evaluations submitted by vendors seeking FTS contracts and is now
believed to be working for a private telecommunications company.
     Michael Corrigan, an investigator for the Governmental
Affairs Committee, said the committee's investigation turned up a
number of problems associated with telephone service contracts
and changes have been made in the agency's telephone contracting
procedures.
     He said that, so far, nothing appears irregular about the
new contracts, but the committee plans periodic reviews of the
projects.  "There's just too much money involved not to,"
Corrigan told us.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

NATIONAL AUDIENCE FOR 900 SERVICE DOESN'T MATERIALIZE DURING
DECEMBER

     900's debut as a prime-time television attraction (TLDL,
November 1989, pp. 1-4) was less than successful last month with
only 21,000 viewers--out of an expected 175,000--paying $2 on
their telephone bill to participate in a national volunteer
recruiting drive backed by the White House, THE LONG-DISTANCE
LETTER has learned.
     Participants in the mid-December test that exposed 900
numbers to 290 million primetime viewers of 6 of America's most
popular television shows are meeting in California Jan. 20 to
determine--among other things--if the 900 telephone number is a
viable national marketing tool.
     The 900 numbers were flashed on the screen near the
conclusion of such popular programs as "Cheers," "Designing
Women" and "The Cosby Show," urging viewers to dial the number
and obtain the list.  The project's organizers criticized the
networks for not giving the number more exposure and not
providing storylines that gave the messages more impact.
     But while far short of the expected response, Jerry Michaud,
executive director for Prime Time to End Hunger, the project's
sponsor, said the project lost no money because the $2 telephone
charge covered by the caller's long-distance bill.  He said the
printing order was reduced when it became apparent to sponsors
that the response would not be high, we were told.
     Michaud said the project will be thoroughly critiqued at the
January meeting.  He expected network and telephone company
executives to attend.
     While the primary purpose was to determine if television
networks were effective ways to recruit volunteers, Michaud said
a "secondary" consideration was the effectiveness of the 900
number as a response media.

Long-Distance Carriers Disappointed in Response

     Long-distance carriers--including the Big 3 and Telesphere
Network Inc. of Oak Brook, Ill.--who participated, viewed the
project as a field test for a national 900 services and a way to
elevate the often-maligned 900 service to respectibility.
     "I think the telephone companies were disappointed that we
didn't have millions and millions of responses," said Glenn
Lebowitz, president of Optima Direct, a Washington-based
technical consulting firm that designed the 900 "hunger" network.
     Lebowitz, who said the network's technology lived up to
expectations, criticized the television networks for not exposing
the 900 number longer than 15 seconds and giving the message
"more impact" with viewers.  "I don't think 15 seconds gives
people enough time to absorb a telephone number," Lebowitiz said.
     Spokesmen for the long-distance suppliers had no comments
prepared about the project when they were queried just before
presstime.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

NEW COMPANIES FIND INFO PHONES NOT MONEY MAKERS

     Neil Sleevi of Weston, Mo., and J. Russell Leatherman of Los
Angeles share something in common--they want to give telephone
calls away.  But the 2 entrepreneurs are in the embryonic stages
of developing telephone information services, and their give-away
schemes have--so far--been less than profitable.
     Sleevi told us he has not made "a single nickel" with Phone
Spots Inc., a plan he has to provide free, one-minute long-
distance or 3-minute local telephone calls to patrons at
airports, hotels or bus terminals.
     Leatherman and his partners have lost almost $1 million in
PromoFone Inc., a service for Los Angeles moviegoers seeking
accurate movie listings and starting times.  A New York City
PromoFone service also is available.
     Sleevi's free airport telephone call and Leatherman's movie
service also are similar in that they offer paid advertising
messages--pitched quickly and professionally between rings and
lasting less than 4 seconds--to pay the phone bills that make the
free call possible.
     Sleevi said in an interview with The LONG-DISTANCE LETTER
that he hopes to sell advertising on Phone Spots to businesses
located within a few feet of his free-call phone booth--an
airport florist, a newsstand or restaurant, for instance.

Pay Phones Being Offered as Marketing Ploy

     But Sleevi also is thinking big.  He is trying to interest
one of the country's Big 3 long-distance carriers to place a
Phone Spot payphone in an airport and offer free one-minute calls
home to patrons so they can assure families of a safe arrival or
deliver a similar message.
     Between rings and while the caller awaits his connection, a
message would remind the patron that the sponsor's long-distance
service is available for longer calls at other airport locations.
     Sleevi, who is discussing an airport market test this summer
with the phone giants, said surveys show 9 out of 10 people will
take advantage of a free telephone.  He said the advertising
message "in no way" delays the call and does not interrupt
conversation.
     Leatherman--a former rock musician--seeks rock stations or
show-business publications to welcome PromoFone users to his
movie service.  The short advertising message makes what
Leatherman calls "a needed public service" (movie information)
available to vast amounts of people.  So far, however, it only
pays the phone bills and some of the overhead.
     Leatherman said in an interview that for his service to be
profitable, it must attract "millions" of users.  He uses
billboards, small local circulation newspapers and television to
get PromoFone's telephone number (777-FILM) known, but was
dependent on the Los Angeles Times for its massive circulation.
He said he was caught off guard when the Times declared PromoFone
a "competitor" and refused his advertising.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

GTE AHEAD OF THE GAME IN GETTING PHONE SERVICE ON BOARD FOR BOWL

     The upcoming NFL Super Bowl--scheduled for Sunday, Jan. 28
in New Orleans--is labeled a sporting event, but to GTE
technicians who have been wiring the mammoth Superdome for Super
Bowl XXIV since Jan. 4, it is a major telecommunications event.
     For the sixth consecutive year, GTE is providing all the
telecommunications service to the entire "Super Bowl community"
of participating teams, league personnel, the media, corporate
sponsors and fans.  A giant communications net that will cover 8
different official NFL locations in and near the stadium that
will be connected by 275 private telephone lines will also
include 6 consoles, 24 cellular telephones and a high-speed data
link to the NFL's New York headquarters.
     GTE also will provide telecommunications services to the
participating AFC and NFC team, 100 lines for the major
television and radio networks, approximately 430 telephone lines
for domestic reporters and another 30 lines for the foreign press
covering the game.
     Glen Miller, GTE Telecom's director of East Coast
operations, said planning for telecommunications services in the
giant Superdome began 15 months ago.  Preliminary budget work,
site surveys, ordering of dial-tone services, the hiring and
selecting of contract personnel, the setting up of offices,
transportation and hotel accommodations will be done long before
crews arrive on the game site.
     Last October, when the 1989 NFL season was in its infancy,
GTE had opened a 800 line that began taking service orders from
television and print reporters who plan to cover the upcoming
championship.  Miller said orders ranged from a simple private
telephone line to the complex, multiple-location telephone line
that includes multi-button sets and other special services.

Technicians on the Job a Month Early

     When technicians arrived in New Orleans Jan. 4, their first
duties were to test all the wiring, cables, telephone connectors,
common control equipment and other miscellaneous equipment in the
stadium.  Another function scheduled to be performed before
gametime is the training of on-site workers, management people
and others.  Miller said that while many GTE technicians have
worked the Super Bowl and other special events, their
responsibilities change each year or technology has changed to
require constant retraining and updating.
     GTE's Special Events Division provided telecommunications
services to such events as the 1988 Republican and Democratic
national conventions for the major networks, the Miss America
Beauty pageant, remote broadcasts for the "Today" show and
numerous sporting events.  The NFL's management service contract
with GTE is in effect through the 1993 Super Bowl.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

NTIA INQUIRY SEEKS DATA FOR MAJOR TELECOM LEGISLATION

     What could turn out to be the nation's first total
telecommunications policy may be written from comments now being
sought by the Department of Commerce's National Telecommu-
nications and Information Adminsitration (NTIA); NTIA is the
principal telecommunications policy advisor to President Bush.
     NTIA published and released a 99-page notice of inquiry
(NOI) Jan. 9 in the Federal Register seeking comments from
industry sources and other parties on subjects ranging from rural
telephones to global competition.  Comments must be filed by
March 19; reply comments are due April 23.
     Janice Obuchowski, assistant secretary for the Commerce
Department and head of NTIA, said recommendations will be drafted
for Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher's approval and then
forwarded to the White House for consideration as the nation's
first total telecommunications policy.
     According to Obuchowski, NTIA's inquiry will:
      Examine the nation's telecommunications infrastructure;
      Consider the technological and market trends that determine
the industry's growth in this country and elsewhere;
      Evaluate ways in which telecommunications affects
international competition; and
      Assess government's role in promoting the development of a
telecommunications infrastructure.
     Industry observers are saying that telecommunications is as
important to the nation's production as transportation once was.
NTIA's study will determine the importance of telecommunicationas
to the country's economy and social welfare, Obuchowski said.
     Besides examining the importance of telecommunications as a
factor of production in the national economy, the inquiry raises
for discussion the links between telecommunications and economic
development in local, urban and rural areas.  It also will
examine the industry's role in such services as education, health
care and public safety.  The inquiry also seeks comment on
regulatory changes that might encourage improvements in the
industry, including modifications to the rate-of-return
regulation, depreciation practices, the AT&T consent decree,
cable TV/telephone company cross-ownership restrictions and open
network architecture.
     Further, the inquiry asks advice on ways of encouraging
competition to the local exchange companies while maintaining
current price levels for residential



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

THE CHANGING WORLD OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS

by William G. McGowan, chairman and CEO, MCI Communications Corp.
     Whether you want to talk about geo-political developments,
the economy, technology, science, social attitudes, business
management, careers, the arts or education--everything important
these days seems to be in a perpetual state of never-ending flux.
There can be little doubt that the times we inhabit are, indeed,
changing...and changing at breakneck speed.
     I would suggest to you that the communications technologies
we take for granted--radio, television, telephones, fax machines,
everything--really are revolutionary in nature.  They force
change in business and politics and throughout society.
     The old adage, "The more things change the more they stay
the same," just isn't true any more--if it ever was.  Nowadays,
it seems, the more things change, the more things change.
     Technology propels change.  And the world's ability to
innovate technologically is at an all-time high.  It's been
estimated, for instance, that 85% of all the scientists who ever
lived in human history are alive today.  Significantly,
imagination and technology have changed the way business views
the world.  What we're seeing today is a powerful trend toward
globalization of business and the erosion of geography, time
zones and national boundaries as stumbling blocks to economic
activity.
     Whether we like it or not, the future IS global.  Nothing
attests to this more than EC '92.  As you all know, this drive
toward a single market of 325 million people and a grossnational
product (GNP) of $4.5 trillion--about the same as the United
States--will "harmonize" major sectors of the European economy.
     The telecommunications sector in the EC is expected to more
than double in size over the next 10 years, growing from 3-7% of
the gross domestic product (GDP) among the 12 EC countries.  The
EC plan calls for public voice service and control of the
telecommunications infrastructure to remain in the hands of the
national monopolies, while value-added services are supposed to
be totally deregulated.

Admit It--There are no Domestic Markets Anymore

     One aspect of globalization that all businesses--especially,
I think, American businesses--need to learn very quickly is that
there are no entirely domestic markets anymore--anywhere.  For
any business that means, in effect, that you can run, but you
can't hide, from foreign competitors.
     Since I'm in the business, I'm proud to point out that
telecommunications service.
     Obuchowski said America does not have a "coherent"  national
telecommunications policy "because of the court situation," a
reference to U.S. District Judge Harold Greene's oversight of the
MFJ restrictions.
     Original comments and 7 copies should be sent to: Office of
Policy Analysis and Development, NTIA, U.S. Department of
Commerce, 14th St. and Constitution Ave., NW, Rm. 4725,
Washington, DC 20230. For further information, contact Alfred Lee
or Timothy Sloan, NTIA Office of Policy Analysis and Development,
202/377-1880.
     The notice of inquiry was announced at a press conference
Jan. 9. as a global economic force truly has come of age.
Foreign investments, international banking, cross-border mergers
and acquisitions--all have become commonplace and increasingly
vital elements of the global economy.  And telecommunications
provides the electronic infrastructure that allows it all to
happen.
     Economists recognize telecommunications as a strategic
industry because it meets the 3 basic criteria required to be so
designated.  First, a strategic industry must be important to a
country's national security.  Telecommunications clearly is.
Second, it must be R&D intensive.  Again, telecommunications
clearly is that.  And third, a strategic industry must have--I
love this phrase--positive externalities, meaning that a
strategic industry must produce spill-over economic benefits to
other industries.  It's clear that other industries derive
enormous benefits by using telecommunications.
     I believe the biggest future advantages of information
technology will come in the form of organizational health--
increased productivity, better decisionmaking, improved operating
efficiencies, enhanced responsiveness and reduced bureaucracy.
To compete against global competitors, companies everywhere need
to organize leaner, decide quicker, produce smarter and market
better.
     Recent events in China, in the Soviet Union, in Hungary, in
Czechoslovakia and, most dramatically perhaps, in Berlin, should
be seen as part of the political "whiplash" that occurs when
information is distributed widely and without official
censorship.

Today's Telecommunications Precludes the Rise of a New Stalin

     Glasnost may be a Russian word, but it is fundamentally a
concept born of the Information Age.  During his recent visit to
the United States, Polish Solidarity leader Lech Walesa admitted
as much.  He was asked how all of these reforms in Eastern Europe
came about.
     His reply was insightful.  He said, "That's a result of
civilization--of computers and satellite TV and other innovations
which present alternative solutions...Is it possible for a new
Stalin to appear today who could murder people?  It's
impossible."
     Information technologies are inherently democratic.  They
force decentralization and individualism.  They are designed for
expansion, for interconnection, for networking.  They have no
respect for barriers and roadblocks.
     Nothing as flimsy and porous as a concrete wall stands a
chance against information traveling at the speed of light across
a multitude of media--from radio and television to the
increasingly ubiquitous fax machine.
     Information technologies help people to absorb and put to
effective use vast amounts of information that would otherwise be
wasted.  Because of that, I couldn't think of a more interesting
time to be alive, or a more exciting industry to be a part of.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE LONG-DISTANCE LETTER via NewsNet
January, 1990

TELECOM*USA, ALC SIGN LETTER OF INTENT TO MERGE OPERATIONS

     Telecom*USA Inc. and ALC Communications Corp, the fourth and
the seventh largest long-distance interexchange carriers
respectively, have signed a letter of intent to merge in April,
according to announcements made simultaneously this week by both
companies.  Telecom*USA, based in Atlanta, Ga., and ALC in
Birmingham, Mich., will merge into an unnamed subsidiary of
Telecom*USA, the announcements stated.
     Under terms of the letter, all outstanding capital stock of
ALC would be converted into units of Telecom*USA common stock and
cash.  Holders of ALC common stock and series B and C preferred
stock would receive units valued at $3 for each share.  Holders
of ALC series A preferred stock would receive units valued at $20
per share plus accrued unpaid dividends.
     O. Gene Gabbard, chairman and CEO of Telecom*USA, and John
Zrno, president and CEO for ALC, both expressed optimism about
the merger although Gabbard said he expected the move may have
"some dilutive effect" on Telecom*USA earnings this year.
     "However, we believe that the combination of Telecom*USA and
ALC will enhance our position in a rapidly-growing industry and
provide significant opportunities for network and cost
efficiencies," he said.  "Over the longer term, we expect these
efficiencies to add to earnings and create additional value for
shareholers, as has been the case with past mergers and
acquisitions."
     Zrno said that ALC's "strong presence" in the northeast and
upper midwest "complements Telecom*USA's existing strengths in
the southeast and midwest.
     "Through this combination, we anticipate offering a wide
range of Telecom*USA enhanced products and services to our
customers," he said.
     The proposed merger gives Telecom*USA access to ALC's 900
service, where it has staked a strong market.  Telecom*USA
already markets 700 and 800 services, a spokesman said.

Deal Contingent Upon Amending Previous Agreement

     The merger is contingent upon execution of a definite
agreement, and regulatory and shareholder approvals.  In
addition, the merger requires amending an existing 10-year
telecommunications agreement between ALC and Communications
Transmission Inc. (CTI), of Austin, Texas, which controls 55% of
ALC.  The amendment would permit the purchase of additional
transmission capacity from CTI at a fixed price in exchange for a
payment to CTI of $8.5 million.
     The proposed merger will bring 400,000 new subscribers to
Telecom*USA, more than doubling its subscriber base.  Spokesmen
would not confirm some trade press reports that claimed
Telecom*USA is expected to dissolve ALC and drop the name of its
long-distance company, Allnet, following the merger.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>