
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B27-186</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000320-B032-40</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ad29.html 205.156.212.5 19970114195100 text/html 31954
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 19:48:32 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:45:09 GMT
Content-length: 31767
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ad29.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>-IDG OFFERS GLOBAL MEDIA BOOKING FACILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>-NEW INFORMATION PROFESSIONALS GROUP FORMED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>-SIMD TO ADDRESS DM, ELECTRONIC MEDIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>-DURACELL MOVES FOR HIGH-PROFILE WEB ADS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>-THE BRIEF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(639 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>-FEATURE:BREAKING THE LANGUAGE BARRIER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1025 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>-PUSHING THE BOAT OUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>-ON THE PITCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>-HTM CHRISTMAS CARD AWARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(839 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>-THE BARMAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1379 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-IDG OFFERS GLOBAL MEDIA BOOKING FACILITY

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-IDG OFFERS GLOBAL MEDIA BOOKING
FACILITY
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

International Data Group has introduced a global
media booking facility which lets customers book
media throughout the IDG worldwide empire as well as
giving customers credit according to their level of
advertising spend across IDG's 270 publications in 75
countries around the world.  The credit can be used
against future purchase of any other IDG product or
service anywhere in the world. Kelly Conlin,
president of IDG, says that its Global Passport
programme builds IDG brand loyalty and provides
recognition to customers for their valued ongoing
custom, whether it be in publications, WWW sites,
exhibitions or primary market research on the
consumer computing market from IDC/LINK Resources.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-NEW INFORMATION PROFESSIONALS GROUP FORMED

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-NEW INFORMATION PROFESSIONALS
GROUP FORMED
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

A new association for firms involved with electronic
information distribution has been formed. EIDA
International (Electronic Information Distributors
Association International) is a membership
organisation for electronic media professionals and
specialises in issues relating to the distribution,
publication and supply of electronic media, according
to the organisers, on a global basis. The group hopes
to adapt and evaluate new electronic media
technologies, act as a partner for information
specialists and publishers worldwide as a resource
for their information needs, centralise contacts and
propositions for distribution and publishing
contracts between association members and electronic
media publishers, create a central database of
information, draw up guidelines and standards for the
supply of CD-ROMs and related technology and become
the recognised reference for documentation
professionals worldwide for the quality supply of
electronic media products.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-SIMD TO ADDRESS DM, ELECTRONIC MEDIA

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-SIMD TO ADDRESS DM, ELECTRONIC
MEDIA
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

SIMD 96, one of Europe's pre-eminent marketing trade
fairs, will provide marketing professionals with a
forum to meet together and discover the latest trade
information over the three days of the event. Over
230 exhibitors reflecting the entire range of
specializations within the direct marketing chain.
Direct mail and electronic media are the central
focuses of the event, reflecting the dramatic change
within these industry sectors. SMID runs from 24-26
January at Palais des Congres, Porte Maillot, Paris,
France. For details call +33 1 42 71 06 20. Look out
for HTM at the International Periodicals section.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-DURACELL MOVES FOR HIGH-PROFILE WEB ADS

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-DURACELL MOVES FOR HIGH-PROFILE
WEB ADS
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

Duracell, the worldwide battery brand, has undertaken
a high-profile Internet marketing campaign conducted
through SiteSpecific, a New York-based creative
interactive agency and i-traffic, an online media
planning agency. The companies are working together
on what they claim is the first online advertising
campaign to go beyond the banner, seeing promotions
on a number of high-volume WWW sites including AOL's
Webcrawler and GNN, Yahoo! and Internet Underground
Music Archives. Each advert will invite users to
click on them and see how the site is "Powered by
Duracell" with a range of multimedia-backed
applications.  Funding details were not revealed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-THE BRIEF

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-THE BRIEF
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

BPA INTERNATIONAL has conducted China's fist
advertising audit -- a landmark move into the highly-
secretive country's marketplace, The audit covered
China Computerworld, China's leading consumer
computer publication published jointly by IDG and
China's Ministry of Electronics Industry and
certified it with a circulation of 112,731.

CUSTOMER INSIGHT COMPANY has announced  AnalytiX 2.2,
an enhanced version of its AnalytiX System for
database marketing which runs under Microsoft Windows
and helps companies analyze marketing data by
generating detailed, custom-designed reports compiled
from transaction level customer information.

DRYDEN BROWN PR has introduced an Internet WWW site
designed to help marketing and publicity managers
worldwide pinpoint suitable press event locations in
major cities around the UK and Ireland by providing
details of hotels, restaurants and other venues which
can be used to accommodate press events or seminars.
A pan-European version is already being developed.
Access by http://www.dryden.co.uk/.

EQUIFAX EUROPE (UK) LTD is celebrating the 10th
anniversray of business with Celebration File, an
organisation which mails over 7m individuals on
behalf of nightclubs and venues such as The Dome, The
Hippodrome and Le Palais in London inviting
individuals to a variety of functions including 18th
birthday celebrations using Equifax data which has
been geodemographically sorted to provide reliable
profile data including young, affluent females in the
South West London area.

The US FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION has approved an
agreement with Reuters America Inc and Federal News
Service Group Inc --the two largest producers of
verbatim news transcripts --  to settle charges the
firms had entered into an anti-competitive
arrangement without it constituting an admission of
any violation of law.

MEDIATEL has taken a spot on the Internet's WWW at
http://www.mediatel.co.uk to provide interactive
media advertising information.

MICROSOFT is giving away a CD-ROM with a copy of its
WWW browser each of the 73,000 seats at the 28
January Superbowl event. This unusual marketing
tactic is aimed at Web software  rival Netscape and
targeted at generating enthusiasm for the Internet
among the sports minded. Separately Microsoft has
sponosred the Superbowl WWW site at
http://www.superbowl.com/.

NEWSDESK, the Nottingham, UK-based news distribution
company, is now offering video news release services
in association with IBM and Medialink to provide
online access to 30 second sampler clips.

A marketing show is set to be held in the north-west
of England on 24-25 April. The NORTH WEST MARKETING
EVENT '96 will take place at the Velodrome,
Manchester and is aimed at small and medium-sized
businesses with an exhibition, semiar and marketing
issues clinic. For details call +44 (0) 1744 453366.

Ziff-Davis' PC MAGAZINE has captured the number one
ranking for total 1995 ad pages as reported by the
Publishers Information Bureau in the USA, running
6,314 ad pages for the year, 1,774 pages more tha 
Forbes Magazine with 4,540.

The UK's TAKEOVER PANEL gave a rare savaging to a PR
company in what should serve as a reminder to all
agencies to prime up on the more specialist codes in
place.  AMEC recently parted company with Financial
Dynamics after the Takeover Panel criticised the firm
for serious breaches of the Takeover code -- seeing
the end of a 10 year relationship.  The Panel was
upset about a conversation between an FD director and
a representative of a securities firm unconnected
with either party to the AMEC takeover about 1996
profits -- information which had not been in the
public domain.

Paperstream Ltd, the billing and payment processing
specialist subsidiary of Southern Water plc in the
UK, has acquired TOTAL MAILING SERVICES, a direct
mailing company which has nearly doubled its ovrall
capacity in the process.

Yahoo! Corp and ZIFF-DAVIS have formed a strategic
relationship that establishes a WWW-driven publishing
model delivering content through print, online and
CD-ROM.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-FEATURE:BREAKING THE LANGUAGE BARRIER

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-FEATURE:BREAKING THE LANGUAGE
BARRIER
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

Handling a regional telecommunications company and
getting them local, regional and national coverage in
the specialist and general press alike is no mean
feat.  Alexa Cate of TDM Marketing Associates Ltd
explains how they managed to please -- but not
confuse -- everyone.

Back in 1994 when NORWEB Communications came into the
world it had all the right ingredients for success.
Its parent company had a strong brand name which the
target audience already associated with quality and
good service; it had a state of the art
telecommunications network using the very latest
digital technology and it was in the process of
recruiting a top team from the telecommunications
industry to handle its sales and marketing. 

Some may say that this would be apushover for the PR
agency... 

NORWEB Communications is a public telecommunications
network operator in the north west of England, which
was granted a Public Telecommunications Operator's
(PTO) licence in April 1994 and launched services a 
year later following a period of network expansion
and staff recruitment. NORWEB's network stretches
from Macclesfield in the south to Carlisle in the
north and from the Lancashire and Cumbria coast
across to the Pennines. The company targets the
business sector, offering a range of voice and data
telecommunications services such as ISDN, facilities
management, card services, leased circuits and LAN to
LAN interconnect as well as plain old telephony.
Apart fro m facilities management and the value added
services which are available nationwide, most of
NORWEB Communications' services are targeted only at
north west based companies. The company therefore
prefers not to encourage demand from outside the
north west as it is only in a position to offer
service on its own network in the NORWEB area.  

TDM was officially appointed in March 1994 to handle
PR and provide marketing consultancy as required. Our
key objectives were to establish NORWEB
Communications as a major network operator on the
north west of England, to increase awareness of
NORWEB amongst the north west business community, to
launch NORWEB's portfolio of products and services
and to position NORWEB as the preferred
telecommunications supplier for north west
businesses. 

Our brief was, and still is, to complement other
marketing activities such as direct mail and
advertising in local and regional business press. We
also work closely with NORWEB plc's corporate affairs
department as they need to be kept fully briefed on
our activities. Although our main area of activity
was to be PR with local, regional and trade/technical
press and event management we have found ourselves
getting involved with all manner of projects from
roadside workers' luminous jackets through to
clothing for a clay pigeon shooter! 

Whatever the project however, we soon learned the
NORWEB rule of "No purchase order number, no pay" and
that on average it takes three weeks for a purchase
order to be processed! 

On the PR front, the local and regional press were
already familiar with NORWEB plc -- their local
electricity company. They were however less familiar
with the technicalities of telecommunications and the
challenge for TDM was how to interest them in the 
new services on offer from NORWEB Communications
without turning them off with telecommunications
jargon. The importance of this was amply demonstrated
at the official launch of NORWEB Communications which
we organised in June 1994. There was a press briefing
in the morning attended by a mix of technical and
regional business press. 

Some of the NORWEB spokespeople had a tendency to use
jargon, (especially when under the hot glare of media
flashguns) and in no time the regional press
journalists were asking questions like "So what
exactly is a 2Mb link?"

In the first few months after the official launch we
didn't need to worry too much about bamboozling
journalists with techno jargon -- the challenge was a
little different. NORWEB Communications had not yet
launched their core telephony services and we had to
generate press coverage with stories about the many
new staff appointments and not so many existing
customers for whom NORWEB already provided specialist
telecommunications services. After the tenth new
appointment announcement the regional business press
was probably wondering where it would all end. 

Once the services were launched we had a lot more to
shout about and the press began to call more upon our
spokespeople for comment and interviews. We decided
it was time for some media training so we hired a
well known freelance telecommunications journalist to
give them a going over and she certainly proved value
for money. They came out of it a bit battered around
the edges but ready to face anything the press could
throw at them. 

The next milestone was arranged around the official
launch of NORWEB Communications' new services. It was
decided to hold a three day Communications Expo at
G-MEX Manchester for north west businesses. Whilst
the event was an overwhelming success (over 500
businesses attended) we vowed never again to trust
NORWEB when they said they had "cleaned" their
database of invited guests -- just how did that man
from Cable NorthWest get in the door? 

Our most recent launch has been the Nexus Centre --
also at G-MEX -- this is a showcase of NORWEB
Communications' services which businesses can visit
to see the services in action and talk to the
experts. We had a few experts on hand at the launch
to give talks on various new telecommunications
technologies, once again supposedly in layman's terms
but I did hear the odd "155Mbit/s" and "packet
switching" being bandied about. Next time I think
we'll lay on an interpreter to translate for those
people who can't resist using jargon no matter how
much you ask them not to. 

So what does the future hold? As you're probably
aware NORWEB has recently been taken over by North
West Water and many of the recent press enquiries
have been about the takeover. For once our
spokespeople had no excuse for talking in
telecommunications riddles - all they were allowed to
say was "No comment!"




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-PUSHING THE BOAT OUT

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-PUSHING THE BOAT OUT
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

VNU BUSINESS PUBLICATIONS has launched a 26-issue
partwork home computer guide called Easy PC and
launched a major GBP1.6m nationwide advertising
campaign.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-ON THE PITCH

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-ON THE PITCH
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

On The Pitch is compiled from a number of sources.
Confirmation of activity should be sought before any
professional time is spent pursuing such activities.

Argyll Public Relations has been appointed by BTRIEVE
TECHNOLOGIES INC to handle UK public relations and
infromation office services.

CHEMFREE CORP has appointed Baron, McDonald & Wells
to handle its US PR and marketing for promoting its
non-hazardous parts cleaning system. Fees were not
revealed.

SIEMENS NIXDORF has appointed Anderson & Lembke as
its new pan-Eureopan promotional advertising agency
and hired The Direct Response as its below-the-line
agency.

Bogard Communications has been appointed by
SPECIALIX, a leading datacommunications provider, as
its pan-European corporate and PR.

TELEVISION X, the soft-porn satellite TV channel, has
taken its PR in-house after using Larkspur
Communications in a bid to rationalise costs.

Pro-Action has been appointed to handle the PR and
publicity for new media marketing and communications
company WALSH SIMMONS.

WESTMINSTER CABLE, the BT-owned cable television
company, has appointed Spec Communications as its new
public relations consultancy -- replacing a series of
ad hoc arrangements.  Terms were not revealed. The
campaign also covers other cable TV franchiseso
erated by BT Cable TV Services including Milton
Keynes, Irvine and Washington.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-HTM CHRISTMAS CARD AWARDS

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-HTM CHRISTMAS CARD AWARDS
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

Many PR firms and their clients put a great effort
into choosing the Christmas card they will send to
customers, suppliers and even hacks -- even M2
Communications, publishers of HTM, made its mark with
a picture of Rosie the pig.  HTM has examined the
Christmas cards which came into M2 Communications
along with comments from many other journalists and
PR folk in the field to present the (subjective) best
-- and worst -- of the bunch.

A lot of companies copped out and used charity cards
with the usually-well printed company name in the
centre trick -- so these are mainly excluded from the
judging but DPA/Flying Pig deserves a mention as they
designed a card for the Bramley Area Bosnia Appeal
with another local firm for subsequent resale: a neat
move.

A special mention mist go to Fox Parrack Fox who used
Christmas to announce a new office move -- 1 3/4
miles as the sleigh fiies -- and to prove this
recipients could move Santa and watch his progress
throughout London. Johnson King also derserves credit
for the simple card of a man reading a newspaper
while it is snowing with the caption  Snow coverage
again' -- well done!
The COULD IT BACKFIRE? award goes to MERCURY ONE-2-ONE, 
a PCN operator, for its card headed "Silent
Night..."

The DIFFERENT INNIT award is split to Unipalm Pipex
for its Christmas baubles in the form of the
company's logo, a logo for a major product and a
world map -- presumably showing its Internet
aspirations; 

The MOST COMPANY MENTIONS ON A CHRISTMAS CARD award
goes to Digital Music Express who had the large
corporate X, DMX emlaxoned in the middle, DMX's
everywhere looking like snow and in case you missed
it  The Ultimate Music expreience' strapline sitting
under yet another company logo. DMX also squeezed in
a mention on the inside and back covers too! 
Sentinel Business Services Group tried to get into
the action by a rather ostentatious, tacky card
listing all of the firm's services beneath two logos;
Mathieu Thomas/Herald Communication's card had
letters spelling the different companies falling from
the sky, jumbled up as snow and Quarterdeck Corp made
do with a snow seen and its very large Quarterdeck Q
logo taking up all of the space on the 8x10" card.

The TACKY CARD award went to Bite Communications with
its Reservoir Dogs-type card with various persons in
black and white wearing a superimposed red santa hat
and dark glasses headed: "Are you going to bark all
day, little doggie..." before the inside caption
reads "...or are you going to Bite (with the firm's
logo). This was closely followed by Apple Computer
for its multi-part gee-whizz-sicko American family
Christmas image card showing an all American family
looking at a multimedia Mac; Adobe with its psuedo-trendy 
multimedia type of card which mentioned the
right words but failed to capture the spirit and to
Northern Telecom who made its card a multipage
corporate brochure and sales tool.

The TASTEFUL CARD award goes to Sharp Corp of Japan
with a traditional Japanese Christmas card where the
executives had also clearly taken the time to legibly
sign their name. Germany's Bundesministerium fur Post
und Telekommunikation always wins for its tasteful
cards and German Christmas stamps.

The TO SAVE A FEW CENTS award goes to Odetics Inc who
sent out a pre-printed postcard saying that it had
used a virtual Christmas card on the Internet's WWW
(http://hppyhldz.odetics.com) -- meaning there was no
Christmas cheer for those who are not wired. The
battle was close with Alexander Communications (USA)
incorporating its New Year's greetings with an invite
to a press briefing and Hughes Communications Europe
with its UNICEF card and photocopied insert paper
which was not, well inserted at all but left
separately in the envelope.  Quite a few companies
opted for the postcard Christmas card including Fodor
Wyllie with Santa on one side of the postcard in
front of a computer with the strap  find
all:clients\big budgets."

The WE MEAN IT award goes to Nokia Mobile Phones
(motto: connecting people) for its simple picure of
the world with festive people around the
circumference err, holding hands.  Tektronix CPID's
PR department tried too by printing their own
Christmas card on one of the firm's high-end colour
printers... nice apart from the waxy feeling.

The WHO COULDN'T BE BOTHERED TO SIGN THEIR CARDS
award is jointly awarded to Fairway Marketing,
Insight Marketing, Quadraphic Design, Quarterdeck
Corp, Barclays Merchant Services and Templeton
College.

And finally the TACKY CHRISTMAS GIFT award goes to
Hewlett Packard and NewsDesk for a shiny silver
coloured business card holder which rattled like an
old biscuit tin, became unattractively dirty easily
with fingermarks, barely openable and emblazened with
the logo "Have you seen HP's latest nwes in NEWSdesk
today?" The attached Christmas card was a piece of
rephotocopied A4 paper -- lightweight cheap A4 paper
at that.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HIGH-TECH MARKETING via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

-THE BARMAN

HIGH-TECH MARKETING-THE BARMAN
COPYRIGHT 1995-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTD

Much of the usual features within HTM will return in
February as the CHRISTMAS and NEW YEAR holidays meant
that most people gave up early in December and are
still not functioning at normal speed. While their
output is low, the levels of stupidity and wrongdoing
is at a similar comparable level.

How brave of a certain controlled circulation
publication to take the fine hospitality of
ATTACHMATE for the launch of a new software client
and mention the wine tasing raison d'etre of the
event before pointing out that its representative has
been downing a few glasses of the grape before
peacefully going home at 11.30pm whereby several
police officers insisted that he stayed overnight at
the local nick!

CHILCOTT LE FEVRE, a UK specialist new media agency,
issued what at first glance seemed to yet another
tedious  Father Christmas surfs the net' press
release although it turned out that the calculators
had been working overtime and while a Santa web site
could indeed be found, the boffins had worked out
that Santa's sleigh needs to move at 650 miles per
second -- 3,000 times faster than the speed of sound
to deliver presents everywhere, outrunning the
fastest man-made vehicle -- the Ulysses space probe
-- which moves at a mere 24.4 miles per second with a
paylod four times the weight of the QEII.

PR staffs often wish they could seek retribution
against those nasty hacks who fail to swallow their
words of wisdom and copy suggestions, so they would
probably approve of a court ruling in the IVORY COAST
after two journalists whose newspaper blamed the
president for the country's recent loss to South
Africa in a soccer match were sent to prison for two
years for "offending the chief of state."

HEVACOMP, a British software company, sent out
Christmas cards with a difference recently to around
1,000 clients -- a share of an GBP11m windfall if it
snowed with Christmas day at odds of 110-1.

HEWLETT-PACKARD has given journalists plenty to
chuckle about with it sending chocolate frogs as a
new corporate incentive -- unfortunately most people
associate frogs as slimy, warty creatures that lurk
around cold wet ponds. Hardly the right image for a
multinational firm!

Thanks to Marketing Week for pointing out that
ungrateful hacks attending the J WALTER THOMPSON
Christmas party decided to throw away the
beautifully-wrapped Christmas presents which
contained a JWT showreel on the grass outside the
offices in disgust at falling for such a callous
marketing trick during the season of goodwill.

I hear that several creative agencies and MARKETING 
folk are a tad envious at Club 18-30's new raunchy ad
campaign, wishing that they could incorporate some
double-entendres and smut into the typically-boring
high-tech arena where the odd scantily-clad young
lady causes an outroar from the PC (non-computer)
brigade.  The latest 18-30 ads feature slogans such
as  something deep inside her said she'd come again'
and  Wake up at the crack od Dawn.. Or Lisa, or
Juile."  Advertising the Megaflop 43 doesn't really
habe the same ring does it?

MERCURY COMMUNICATIONS issued a press conference
saying that Takl Radio UK finds it  good to talk to
Mercury' and how listeners use a 0645 local rate
number to call into the station... although The
Barman and many fellow TRUK listeners do not recall
hearing an 0645 Mercury number but remember the 0345
105389 number provided by arch-rivals BT.

MICROSOFT should learn not to over-hype the benefits
of e-mail and the importance of it for modern-day
business if it declines to give out the e-mail
addresses for its senior marketing staff to journos
and other professionals.

MIDLAND BANK does, according to the Sunday Times,
likes to be well informed on the journalists which it
speaks too.  Apparently a financial journalist
recieved a parcel she apparently left at a restaurant
while talking to Midland execs and a PR officer.
Unfortunately she had never seen the package
containing a few of her articles, a biography on her,
a handwritten appraisal of her bank account, salary,
credit card details and monthly spending patterns.
The Barman has heard tales of PR people getting the
technies to check computers returned from loan for
interesting documents and of one e-mail provider who
apparently monitors the incoming and outgoing traffic
on loan accounts -- technically they cannot read the
contents but they can see how the mail flow is taking
place -- but this appears to be the most
comprehensive information sortie.  Confidential
information to prove the contrary is welcomed.

Who says that PR people always want to make the most
of an opportunity. Caraline Brown, principal of high-tech 
agency MIDNIGHT COMMUNICATIONS was spotted
writing to Computer Weekly recently under the slug
 Damsel in Distress.' Brown was publically thank9iing
the MD of Carrera Technology for loaning her a top-of-
the-range colour laptop at 6.30 in the evening so
she could make an urgent important presentation
shortly afterwards. Brown's machine decided to break
down at the last minute and the promised replacement
would not have arrived in time. The only thing is
that Brown's letter wasn't printed with the usual
position/company name stuff..  Surely someone isn't
becoming shy?

How ironic! NETHEAD LTD, a UK Internet service
provider saw its service recntly slated for being
less reliable than other networks in a survey
published in the January issue of Internet magazine
from EMAP while the firm issued a press release
saying that it has cut the cost of its monthly
subscription fees to GBP7.99 making it the cheapest
network and said that all new Nethead subscribers are
to receive a complimentary subscription to the same
magazine as a sign-up incentive.  The survey said
that Nethead's service was available just over 15% of
the time during its continuous test process.

NEXUS BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS in the UK have
something to learn about e-mail. Its Network Europe
magazine shows that staff have to share e-mail
accounts -- this wouldn't be so bad but the staff
work at different locations.  The editor and
assistant editor share a dial-up account even though
they are miles apart. The Berlin correspondent, the
designer, administration and the publisher share a
CompuServe account.  Clearly the photographer is an
important person -- he has his own!

PUBLIC NETWORK EUROPE magazine also sent its
advertisers a curious letter, wishing them seasonal
greetings, informing them that PNE is adding a
further 4,500 readers but then points out that ad
rates have been hiked by a quarter  to reflect this
circulation increase.'

The ORDER OF THE BROWN NOSE is awarded to Mark
Raphael-Lang of System User magazine (based at APT in
London, UK) for a letter printed in the IBM customer
magazine  Software Quarterly' where he writes "I am
very impressed that such a genuinely good magazine
comes out of IBM. SQ makes nonsense of the normal
fluff that emerges from corporate publishing
offices."  It would be most improper to suggest that
Raphael-Lang could ever contemplate joining another
publishing company -- especially one based in sunny
Texas, USA.

The SCOTTISH OFFICE was keen to show that it is ahead
of the times when issuing the Secretary of State's
New Year Message -- embargoed until 0001 on 29
December. Unfortunately it was not posted until late
on 29 December according to the franking machine
mark!

The Barman bet they sat there all day giggling with
the headline they had thought up for a press release
advertising soft-porn adult satellite TV channel
TELEVISION X moving onto the Internet.  Television X
burns rubber on the superhighway' was the outcome of
much creative thinking although seasoned Internet
hacks used to receiving such weak puns soon noted
that Larkspur Communications were no longer keeping a
steady hand on the rudder.

TOSHIBA executives have been on a new PR course
apparently judging by their behaviour at the 10th
birthday celebrations where a Doom competition was
held using laptop computers. The gathered hacks were
being cajouled with a prize for the best Doomster
being a portable... a port-able... a portable
television.  The hacks decided that finishing the
evening in the all-paid bar would cost the firm most
and declined to go shooting.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>