
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B10-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B024-234</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb30.html 205.156.212.5 19970122041331 text/html 28462
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:11:38 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:24 GMT
Content-length: 28275
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/pb30.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet <BR>
January, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>AT&T TO OFFER ELECTRONIC DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(759 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>AMERICAN BUSINESS INFORMATION'S BUSINESS INFOLINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(932 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>U S WEST ON SPECIALTY DIRECTORY PUBLISHING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AMERICAN EXPORT REGISTER DISCOUNT OFFER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(463 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NEW PRESIDENT FOR PACIFIC BELL DIRECTORY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MARKET OVERVIEW: ADOPTION DIRECTORIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(737 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>TMR NEWSNOTES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>INDUSTRY MOVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(169 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>UPCOMING EVENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

AT&T TO OFFER ELECTRONIC DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE

Through its Consumer Communications Services business unit, AT&T has
just filed a proposal with the FCC to offer an "electronic directory
assistance" service. The service, which as of yet has not been
officially named, becomes effective January 18, according to
spokesman Bruce Reid.
 The service targets high-volume directory assistance users (banks,
financial services firms and retailers, for instance). Subscribers
access the service via an identification code and password through
either AT&T's Accunet(R) Packet Service or through the originating
telco packet switch network. The prices vary according to which
method of access subscribers choose. Using Accunet, the price is a
$2500-per- month subscription fee, plus a $22-per-hour holding time
charge, and 35 cents per screen. Using the local telco, the price
would run $500 for the monthly subscription fee, $22 hourly holding,
and 40 cents per screen. (This pricing structure is Southwestern
Bell's; other telcos may vary.) Mr. Reid pointed out that "a nickel
difference between per- screen charges doesn't seem like much, but
with the volume of accesses expected, these fees will most likely
balance out." He also added, "We are offering a promotion for those
who order an installation by February 28. We'll waive the monthly fee
through March (subscribers begin paying it in April), plus we're
offering one free ID and password--a savings of $100."
 What do subscribers get for their investment? Access to the same
screens directory assistance operators call up in response to
customer inquiries. When the EDA service starts up in January, the
Southwestern Bell area listings will be available. AT&T is
negotiating with the other RBOCs and hopes to work out agreements
with all of them for complete national access to directory assistance
listings.
 U S WEST has also agreed to have its directory assistance listings
available on the AT&T service, but not until a pending waiver request
is granted and tariff filed. U S WEST's proposed Electronic White
Pages (EWP) service was originally formulated when AT&T approached U
S WEST about the plans for this electronic directory assistance
product. U S WEST opted to build and maintain the database
themselves, making AT&T a non-exclusive distributor of the
information. As stated in the December, 1989 issue of The Morgan
Report, U S WEST has plans for other vendors to offer the database,
although AT&T is the only one in place at this time. Several sources
intimated that NYNEX would also be entering into an agreement with
AT&T, but this was not confirmed as of press time.
 TMR wonders what impact an electronic (computer-access) directory
assistance service will have on the white pages CD-ROM products on
the market. A number of niche markets for the CD-ROM products would
not be touched, such as smaller companies with local and regional
markets, and those using the CD-ROM white pages for  specialized
searching. But the big-dollar markets, including banks and retailers
with large volume look-up requirements, and for whom up-to- the-
minute accuracy is important, are likely purchasers of this service.
 Several RBOC's and private firms currently offer white page listings
on CD-ROM. None has national coverage. All of these companies have
acknowledged intense customer interest in obtaining national
coverage. TMR sees the potential for this new national electronic
directory assistance service to take business away from the CD-ROM
products. However, since the CD-ROM products offer more developed
searching features, they will probably remain competitive in certain
niche markets, attracting users in areas such as law enforcement,
market research and bill collection. These white page databases,
among the largest in the world, have been sought after by a number of
publishers.  Some have sought to link all seven RBOC's in some
fashion, but none has been successful at it. If AT&T pulls all the
RBOC's together to create what is effectively a gateway into these
seven physically separate databases, it will be a first. TMR expects
mounting activity in this area as the complex legal issues
surrounding ownership of this information continue to be explored.
Ownership and access to this information is of major interest to all
those professionally involved in building information products.
 Editor's Note: At press time, it was reported that AT&T has also
reached agreement with CompuServe to offer its 800 number database on-
 line to CompuServe's over 500,000 subscribers free of connect time
charges. An AT&T spokesperson preferred to characterize the
arrangement as a "unique form of directory assistance" and not a
foray into electronic publishing. TMR will continue to watch with
interest as AT&T continues its slow but seemingly inevitable movement
toward becoming a major player in electronic and possibly print
publishing.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

AMERICAN BUSINESS INFORMATION'S BUSINESS INFOLINE

American Business Information, Inc. (Omaha, NE) has begun a 900-
number directory assistance service based on its business information
database.
 Called "Business Infoline," the service provides live operator-
assisted access to ABI's database of U.S. yellow page listing
information. Operators can conduct searches by category (type of
company), company name, partial name, or area code and phone number.
Geographical searches can be done on the basis of city, three- or
five- digit ZIP code, state, or nationwide. In addition to names,
addresses and phone numbers, operators can give users additional
information on a company based on its yellow page advertising
profile. For instance, one caller wanted to know if a particular
florist also carried balloons. Based on the company's advertising,
the operator was able to determine that yes, the florist did in fact
sell balloons.
 According to Bill Chasse, vice president of online products with
ABI, the most frequent calls so far have been requests for phone
numbers when the whereabouts of a company is unknown. "About half of
the calls from our business clients are consumer-oriented. For
instance, one man had his windshield broken. He called us to find the
nearest windshield repair shop, after he looked in the yellow pages
and found there weren't any suitable shops in the local area it
covered."
 Usage of the service has reportedly been very good. "When we first
launched the service, we estimated calls would last an average of 3
minutes. We have found that calls are actually averaging 6-8
minutes," Mr. Chasse said. "When the first request gets a hit, the
caller gets excited and can generally think of a number of other look-
up requests."
 The cost is $2 for the first minute and $1 for each additional
minute. Mr. Chasse explained that it doesn't take callers long to
figure out the economics: "They know if they have their look-ups
ready to go, our operators can do quite a few searches in that one or
two minutes."
 Business Infoline is intended both for business customers and
consumers. Marketing has been conducted via press releases on a
regular basis to a database of 5,000 media personnel and space
advertising in a number of business-
oriented publications (such as the Wall Street Journal, and The
Washingtonian). "We have primarily been marketing to our existing
customers by including flyers and information sheets in every order
and mailing we send them. Starting the first of the year, we will be
doing a little direct mail, sending out a plastic card people can
keep in a wallet; we realize how important it is that people remember
the number," explained Mr. Chasse. "We will also be stepping up our
consumer-oriented advertising, with TV and space advertising geared
toward them. We see the Infoline as a 60% consumer, 40% business
service."
 The Morgan Report has been watching 900 numbers as a potentially
excellent way to distribute directory information and charge for it
easily. But success in 900 numbers is a pure dollars equation. The
question is, can you afford enough promotion to build adequate call
volume? A company can have the slickest service in the world, but it
cannot prosper if people don't know about it.
 TMR expects to see a lot more directory publishers looking into 900
numbers. The ability to offer live operators assistance on 900 lines
is a fairly recent development, and should make 900 that much more
attractive to many directory publishers.
 Interested TMR subscribers may call the "Business Infoline" at
900/896-6000.
 Editor's Note: As TMR expected, American Business Information, Inc.
will be launching a new CD-ROM product based on its nationwide
database of approximately 8.3 million companies. The information is
not current, published about 4-5 months after the publication of the
yellow page directories from which it is culled, but searching will
be sophisticated. TMR will be watching this product closely. It is
HEAD = ORACLE FORMS
PUBLISHING SUBSIDIARY
 Oracle Corporation (Belmont, CA), reportedly the world's largest
supplier of database software and the third largest software and
services company, has announced the formation of a new publishing
subsidiary. The new company is called Oracle Data Publishing (ODP).
 ODP's charter is to provide its customers access to a variety of
computer-based information services which can assist them in making
critical business decisions. It will acquire and sell, in electronic
format, a broad range of data and information which many Oracle
customers already use in print form. Dick Brass, a pioneer in the
field of electronic publishing, has been named president of the new
subsidiary.
 "Oracle Data Publishing is a natural extension of our proven
expertise in database software and services," said Larry Ellison,
Oracle's president and CEO. "With ODP, we will give customers the
information they need in addition to the software required to access
and manipulate that information."
 According to Mr. Brass, the growing transition from printed to
electronic information distribution, coupled with the proliferation
of database management software, makes Oracle a logical entrant into
the data publishing arena.
 Prior to joining Oracle, Dick Brass was founder of General
Information (Kirkland WA), which publishes The National Directory of
Addresses and Telephone Numbers, and other products in both print and
electronic formats. Before General Information, Mr. Brass acquired
the exclusive electronic rights to a number of important reference
works, including The Random House Dictionary, Roget's Thesaurus, and
Black's Law Dictionary.
 This development is an important one to watch. Oracle is well-known
for its aggressiveness in its markets, one of which is now in the
directory realm. No specifics were available on products planned, but
rollout of its first products are expected within the year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

U S WEST ON SPECIALTY DIRECTORY PUBLISHING

U S WEST is the only Regional Bell to refrain from publishing
directories outside the traditional yellow page arena. The Morgan
Report recently spoke to Philip Unger, director of marketing with U S
WEST Direct, about the company's point of view on specialty directory
publishing, which should be of interest to all directory publishers.
 "We did analyze the possible needs for specialty directory
products," Mr. Unger said. "Our first conclusion was to concentrate
on our 14- state area. Otherwise, outside our region,  we felt we'd
start with two strikes against us" in an unfamiliar publishing
venture in an unfamiliar market.
 "We also scoped out the size of the breadbox, and saw that there is
a lot less money (in specialty publishing) than we're used to in the
traditional yellow page arena. We saw that the margins would be much
lower--with increased costs for distribution, sales, databases--
particularly the distribution database, where we'd be starting from
scratch. The sales cost would be much higher per dollar of revenue,
so we saw publishing specialty directories would be smaller in
revenues and in profit.
 "After we had looked at size, we looked at need. We didn't want to
just throw something out there--it would have to meet a real need.
And there would have to be a high quality editorial effort as well,
to create strong editorial content--
not just a 95% advertising product. We made a list of the top 20
specialty directories that would fit into our region. We prioritized
them, and did a business case on two of them. We found that we
couldn't both meet the need and make a profit. We could do a great
job but lose money, or we could cut corners and make money--and have
it fail the second or third year. We didn't like either of those
options."
 Mr. Unger said that U S WEST Direct continues to look at specialty
publishing, but doesn't want to go into it for the PR value alone.
"We are in business to meet needs and keep shareholders happy."
 It should be a reassuring note to non-yellow page directory
publishers that despite virtually unlimited resources, the RBOC
publishing organizations have such a high cost of doing business that
there are few directory opportunities they can justify pursuing. The
thinking is becoming increasing common among the RBOC's, that few, if
any, start- up directory opportunities are worth the risk.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

AMERICAN EXPORT REGISTER DISCOUNT OFFER

An unusual renewal program instituted by Thomas International
Publishing Company (New York, NY) for its American Export Register
recently came to The Morgan Report's attention. "This program, the
Qualified Lifetime Subscriber Program, allows all overseas buyers who
purchase their first set at the full retail price ($120) an 85%
credit toward all future consecutive editions they purchase,"
explained circulation director Ms. Renate Oechsner.
 The program was first offered to purchasers of the '87-88 edition
when it came time for them to purchase the '88-89 edition of the
Register. Ms. Oechsner said that the response to the offer "has been
very nice. People are even paying by credit card, because the price
is low; it used to be such a hassle for them to get a check in U.S.
funds and send it."
 The reason given for the program, which reduces renewal subscription
rates to shipping costs ($18 surface, $39 air mail), is an effort to
build circulation. "It does our advertisers no good if people buy one
year and not for the next four." As many publishers have suffered, so
the Register has suffered the whims of those who go several years
before updating to a new edition of the directory. Because the
American Export Register is primarily advertising-based, fluctuating
sales are particularly exasperating. "With increased circulation, our
advertisers will be happy, and more will want to get into the
Register--the two things go hand in hand, and hopefully will get
better and better," Ms. Oechsner added.
 According to Ms. Oechsner, the directory is "not quite controlled
circulation (with this program), but we do qualify (subscribers) with
a questionnaire. It helps give us develop information we can then
give to advertisers, such as where subscribers buy materials and how
many companies they have contacted through the directory."
 The American Export Register is an annual guide to U.S. products and
services available for export. It targets "businessmen,
industrialists, and government buyers worldwide." The directory is
comprised of a two-volume set.
 This move by Thomas is interesting because it creates a whole new
relationship with subscribers. It asks them to pay for a directory
the first time around, proving their interest and setting the value
of the directory. From then on, only a small annual maintenance fee
(enough to cover shipping) is required to continue receiving future
editions. This pricing strategy allows Thomas to offer advertisers a
paid subscriber base, and the nominal price allows Thomas to offset
some of its costs--important with the cost of shipping a two-volume
directory overseas. The final benefit to Thomas is that the nominal
invoice it renders each year is a continued check on subscriber
interest and helps keep the circulation file clean and current.
Overall, this strategy may be worth looking into, even for some
domestic buying guides.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

NEW PRESIDENT FOR PACIFIC BELL DIRECTORY

John Gaulding has submitted his resignation as president of Pacific
Bell Directory (San Francisco, CA), effective at the end of January.
Mr. Gaulding will be returning to his consulting business, in which
he was involved before assuming the presidency with PBD. His business
will include management counseling and investor services to the
information industry.
 Beginning February 1, Dick Van Allen will be taking over as
president of PBD. He has most recently held the post of vice
president of external affairs for Pacific Telesis Group, parent of
Pacific Bell Directory. Mr. Van Allen has been with the Bell System
for 28 years in a variety of executive positions, including president
of Nevada Bell from 1984 to 1987. His directory experience includes
having served as general manager for Pacific Northwest Bell's
directory department.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

MARKET OVERVIEW: ADOPTION DIRECTORIES

The Morgan Report has noticed a rise in activity in the field of
adoption information. A variety of first-edition directories covering
this information have appeared in the last 12 months or so, building
on the hodge-podge of directories and directory sections of other
publications already published. Here's the run-down:
 The Adoption Directory (Gale Research, Inc.). Billed as "a guide to
agencies, state laws on adoption, exchanges, support groups, and
professional service in domestic and international adoption,
including foster parenting and biological options." The directory is
arranged alphabetically within subject-oriented chapters, and is
supported by keyword, agency name and geographical indexes.
Approximately 1,500 listings are included. A typical agency listing
covers information on application procedures, prerequisites, fees,
length of waiting time for a child, and a description of the children
placed. It sells for $55.
 CWLA's Guide to Adoption Agencies: A National Directory of Adoption
Agencies and Adoption Resources (Child Welfare League of America).
Editor: Julia L. Posner (with James Guilianelli, contributing
editor). This directory appears to be in direct competition with the
Gale directory. This directory has going for it the prestige of being
associated with the Child Welfare League--no small benefit. The
directory sells for $15.95.
 Adoption: The Guide to Successful Adoptions (Ulick Publishing
Company). Another newcomer to the field, but in a magazine format.
Julia Posner contributed the section on traditional agency adoption;
she is, as noted above, the editor of CWLA's Guide. The magazine
targets adoptive or prospective adoptive parents, and others seeking
to wade through the adoption mire. The National Adoption Directory,
comprises half the magazine's pages and lists "adoption facilitators"
state-by-state, within categories (agencies, case workers,
foundations, lawyers, support groups, etc.). The directory only
includes those who returned questionnaires. The reason given for this
is the desire only to present those "who want to help with your
adoption." A number of adoption facilitators have their hands full
and chose not to list. Listings include name, contact name, address,
phone, local or national operation, and number of years in operation.
A banner at the end of the directory section states that more
listings will appear in the next issue of Adoption magazine. The
cover price for the magazine is $5 an issue, $30 per year
(bimonthly). Revenues are generated by subscription; no advertising
is included.
 Adoption: Parenthood Without Pregnancy (Henry Holt and Company). The
directory content is secondary, with an appendix listing agencies and
support groups. The last edition published was 1986, which sold for
$18.45.
 Adoption Resource Book (Harper & Row Publishers, Inc.). The
directory section is secondary and covers public and private adoption
agencies and support groups. Listings include agency name, address,
phone, and special requirements. The latest edition was published in
November, 1987 and sold for $17.95 (hardbound); $8.85 (softbound).
 Our Child: Preparing for Parenting in Adoption--Instructor's Guide
(Our Child Press). This directory lists as part of its appendixes
audiovisual aids, resources, books, and periodicals available to
those teaching courses on adoptive parenting. The last issue was
published in 1988, with another due out perhaps in 1990. The primary
content of the publication is a curriculum guide for instructors of
new parents.
 SourceList (Committee for Single Adoptive Parents). This is an
annual directory of about 50 agencies and organizations that are
sources of adopted children accepting unmarried applicants. It has
international coverage. The listings are geographically arranged and
sell for $15 including three updates, but the directory is sold only
to unmarried members of the organization.
 Discussion: The activity in this market appears to be an example of
social tide driving the need for (and the provision of) information.
It is unusual for several directories with virtually the same content
and scope to appear at the same time, as is the case with the CWLA
and Gale directories. Gale has a strong hold on the library market,
and the CWLA directory has substantial prestige behind it. How well
these directories fare will depend in large part on how well they
reach their target markets. Other opportunities in this field seem to
lie in areas touched but not yet fully developed. For example,
SourceList covers an important and needed body of information, but is
seriously undermarketed, and has the potential for greater
information development. TMR expects more titles in this field
because the need for information continues to grow, and new user
constituencies are likely to emerge, bringing with them a need for
more timely and detailed information in this field.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

TMR NEWSNOTES

DATABASE OF NURSING HOMES: F1RSTMARK has announced the release of its
latest "Personal Computer Database" product, the Oryx Nursing Home
Database derived from the Directory of Nursing Homes published by The
Oryx Press (Phoenix, AZ). The database includes nursing home address,
phone number, key staff members, admission requirements, licensure,
affiliation, specialized facilities, ownership, and full-and part-
time staffing. The entire database can be licensed, or it can be
licensed by geography, number of beds, or other special criteria.
F1RSTMARK is offering free demo disks and its catalog of 50 other
databases. Contact F1RSTMARK, 34 Juniper Lane, Newton Center, MA
02159; 800/729-
2600. F1RSTMARK had been building its offerings of directory
databases in cooperation with directory publishers for approximately
two years.
 FREE CD-ROM PUBLISHING INFORMATION: Dataware Technologies is
offering its Corporate Guide to Optical Publishing free of charge.
The report appears to be a good quality overview of CD-ROM
publishing. Interested TMR subscribers can call 800/344-5894 for a
copy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

INDUSTRY MOVES

Blue Book Publishers, Inc. is relocating, effective January 8, 1990.
New address: 7807 Girard Avenue, Suite #200, La Jolla, CA 92037.
 YPPA has promoted Larry J. Small to Vice President- Marketing Group.
He will direct internal and external marketing activities including
advertising, public relations, collateral and visual materials, and
statistical research. Mr. Small joined YPPA (then AAYPP) in 1985 as
Director of Marketing Services.
 Todd J. Crandall has been named Director-Audiotex and Interactive
Services for GTE Directories Corporation. He reports to Vice
President-Marketing and Communications Clint E. Pollard. Mr. Crandall
joined GTE Directories in 1983 and previously held the position of
Manager-Business Development.
 Business Research Publications has promoted Barry Lee to the newly
created position of Associate Publisher of the MacRae's Blue Book and
MacRae's State Industrial Directories.
 Gale Research Inc. named Rod E. Gauvin to the newly created position
of Vice President, Sales & Special Markets. Mr. Gauvin was most
recently Vice President and Director of Sales and Marketing for W.H.
Freeman & Co., a scientific book publisher.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MORGAN REPORT ON DIRECTORY PUBLISHING via NewsNet
January, 1990

UPCOMING EVENTS

INTERNATIONAL CD-ROM CONFERENCE AND EXPOSITION: Sponsored by
Microsoft Corporation; produced and managed by Cahners Exposition
Group. February 27-
March 1, 1990 at the San Francisco Hilton. Registration $995. For
more information, contact Kerry Gumas, Cahners Exposition Group, 999
Summer Street, Stamford, CT 06905-0833; 203/964- 0000.
 32ND ANNUAL NFAIS CONFERENCE: The National Federation of Abstracting
& Information Services. February 26-March 1, 1990; Four Seasons
Hotel, Philadelphia. Conference will focus on the European Community
'92. Registration before February 1 is $395 for members, $575 non-
members. Daily rates also available. For more information, contact
NFAIS, 1429 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19102.
 AUDIOTEX: MEETING THE CHALLENGES: A STRATEGIC CONFERENCE ON 976,
900, AND TALKING YELLOW PAGE SERVICES. February 26-27, 1990, Ritz
Carlton Hotel, Phoenix. Sponsored by the Telecom Publishing Group.
Registration is $695 per person, $635 if register by January 26.
Teams of two or more, $635 per person any time. For more information,
contact Conference Registrar, Suzanne Wood, 800/327-7206 or 703/683-
4100 in VA.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>