
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B31-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B008-200</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ed11.html 205.156.212.5 19970114213149 text/html 49320
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 21:29:31 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:17 GMT
Content-length: 49133
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ed11.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet <BR>
May 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>IBM AND APPLE HEAT UP THE K-12 HARDWARE MARKET/Apple to Support&nbsp;Mac-based ILS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1183 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>VANDERBILT'S PEABODY COLLEGE DEVELOPS "JASPER" VIDEODISCS/Seeks&nbsp;School Market Distributor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>SURVEY: $1.3 MILLION COMPUTING BUDGET YEARLY AVERAGE FOR HIGHER&nbsp;ED SCHOOLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(848 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>US DOE'S TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER OFFICE IN FORMATIVE STAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(546 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>RURAL ELECTRICAL AND TELEPHONE COOPERATIVES ASSISTING SCHOOLS&nbsp;WITH DISTANCE LEARNING AND TELECOM MATERIAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(626 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>VITA TO USE LOW-ALTITUDE SATELLITE AND RADIO MODEMS FOR AFRICA&nbsp;PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(540 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>IBM, NY STATE TEAM UP FOR $5 MIL PILOT TECHNOLOGY PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(550 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>RR DONNELLEY/GTE TELEMESSENGER LAUNCH AUDIOTEX "IN-TOUCH"&nbsp;LITERACY AID</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>HOWTEK PRINTER TRANSLATES TO BRAILLE; EDUCATION RESELLER SOUGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>NORTH DAKOTA HOPES TO BEGIN CONSTRUCTION  OF $15 MIL ED NETWORK&nbsp;NEXT YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(380 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>LEIDS CORP. INTRODUCING SINet TO K-12 SCHOOLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(543 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>NIEU's EDUCATION UTILITY SLATED FOR SITES IN AZ, NY AND FL BY&nbsp;JUNE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(489 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*HELLER REPORT CALENDAR*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>INTERACTIVE LEARNING '90, JUNE 29-JULY 1, 1990</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(53 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>INDONESIAN CONFERENCE ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, JULY 2-5&nbsp;AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY FOR EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, JULY 3-6</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(47 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>ITTE TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP MEETING, AUGUST 1-3, '90</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

IBM AND APPLE HEAT UP THE K-12 HARDWARE MARKET/Apple to Support
Mac-based ILS

IBM has announced a powerful addition to its PS/2 Model 25 line
of educational personal computers, targeting teachers and
administrators. Apple also had important news for the K-12
market: in a videocassette mailed to thousands of educators,
Apple Chairman John Sculley made official what has been widely
rumored--it will introduce an inexpensive, color Macintosh,
during the 1990-91 school year, which will also be able to run
Apple II software (via an Apple IIe emulation board).

Education market discounts for existing Mac products have been
increased "significantly" over the current discount structure,
effective immediately. (While Apple does not publish its discount
schedule, a spokesperson suggested that, for example, some K-12
buyers will be able to get the Mac Plus for under $700). Apple
also announced the System 7.0 operating system for the Mac, which
it has released in a Beta test version to selected software
developers.

The new IBM machine, called the PS/2 Model 25 286 is the first of
the educational series to be able to run Windows and Presentation
Manager, the object-oriented multitasking operating environments
which are the hallmark of the PS/2 line's models 30 and higher.
With it, IBM hopes to extend its reach beyond student instruction
to powerful but user-friendly and affordable work stations for
school staff. Like all MS DOS PCs, the Model 25 286 will be
easily connected to high speed local area networks, able to link
teacher's units to school office or district resources.

The new Mac will correct some glaring weaknesses in Apple's K-12
line which have given IBM the opportunity to mount a far more
serious challenge to Apple's K-12 dominance than most industry
observers had believed possible only a few years ago. During the
period from the 1985-86 school year to the 1988-89 school year,
IBM's share of new machines going into the K-12 market has risen
from 5% to 30% while Apple's has fallen from 70% to 54%. IBM
Chairman John Akers recently suggested that IBM may move ahead of
Apple in K-12 market share as soon as the end of the current
school year.

Apple built its position in the K-12 market on the Apple II
platform, a technology increasingly seen by educators and others
as a dead end. Apple's own focus on Macintosh technology for the
business market over the past several years, has left its Apple
II line exposed in networking capabilities, on-board mass storage
and processing speed -- all areas of strength for IBM. Although
the Mac is competitive in these regards, they've been too
expensive for the K-12 market and, at the low end, have lacked
the color monitor considered essential for effective educational
software.

Because of these weaknesses, integrated learning system (ILS) and
administrative software developers have largely shunned the Apple
II platform in favor of MS DOS, giving IBM a significant edge in
increased K-12 penetration. Now, assuming Apple delivers on its
promise, it has a chance to again become a serious competitor in
these critical market segments. Software publishers seeking more
information about Apple's support program for education market
products should contact Don Fields, Apple manager for education
solutions, at 408/974-8595 (Cupertino, CA).

HELLER REPORT News Analysis

If the three most important factors in the success of a retail
establishment are "location, location and location," are the
equivalent factors for winning the school market "installed base,
installed base and installed base?" If so, Apple may feel it can
take some comfort in its new strategy despite IBM's PR to the
contrary. While IBM is creeping up on Apple in terms of new
machines going into the market, it still faces at least a 2-to-1
disadvantage relative to Apple in terms of total installed base
(all Apple products vs. all brands of MS DOS PCs).

Until recently, Apple's predominant market share and the
consequent attention of most educational software developers,
gave Apple a solid lock on the K-12 market. The new Mac, by
preserving schools' investment in Apple II software and by
supporting networking technology and computing power competitive
with MS DOS, will help Apple to position itself as the best of
both worlds.

It won't be that simple. While Apple is playing catch-up in
networking and ILS, IBM has been significantly altering the rules
of the game -- radically expanding the expectations of K-12
decision makers -- in ways that still leave Apple at a
disadvantage. From IBM's perspective, the educational PC is no
longer just a free-standing educational appliance; now it is one
piece of a seamless web of interconnected data processing power
extending from the classroom to the school office and on to
district, regional and state headquarters, as well as into the
homes of students, teachers and administrators.

IBM doesn't see "educational software" as what it used to be
either. The traditional instructional drill and practice,
tutorials, simulations and productivity tools are only a piece of
it -- now there must also be a comprehensive suite of
administrative and management systems ranging from instructional
management, student attendance and grade reporting to food
service management, bus scheduling and salary administration.

In other words, IBM is changing the unit of competition from the
desktop PC, and its attendant floppy- or hard disk-based
software, to networks of computers spanning the range from PC
through mainframe, and to software systems ranging from
instructional floppies to mainframe packages able to manage
information from all the schools in a state. In this type of a
face off, IBM is coming at Apple from a position of considerable
and unequally matched strength.

If this were just IBM's world view, Apple could treat it as
speculation. But IBM has come to these conclusions "the old-
fashioned way," by listening to teachers, administrators,
superintendents and state agency executives who are throwing up
their hands over piecemeal solutions to school computing needs.
After years of grass-roots support for computers in schools by
students and parents, it is as if the superintendents and
principals are saying "I give up; you win! Okay, we'll have
computers in our schools. But (1) the educational software's
going to be comprehensive and curricularly relevant, (2) the
systems are going to support teachers in accomplishing their
daily classroom objectives, and (3) the technology will encompass
everything from the classroom to the office and on to state
headquarters."

Is the game worth the candle? No matter how one looks at the
data, the upside potential for PC hardware and software in the
K-12 market is still enormous. Current penetration is less than
five percent in terms of PCs for students and far less in terms
of PCs for teachers and administrators. Add in the market for
minicomputer- and mainframe-based management systems, and its
clear that the stakes in K-12 are extremely high.

IBM has committed at least $30 million in grants for K-12 market
development, and, according to industry sources, has almost 1,200
people in K-12 marketing support (i.e., not counting sales reps).
Apple's new strategy should put it back in the game, but what it
takes to play will never be the same.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

VANDERBILT'S PEABODY COLLEGE DEVELOPS "JASPER" VIDEODISCS/Seeks
School Market Distributor

A group of educators from Vanderbilt University's Peabody College
of Education (Nashville, TN) is developing interactive video
products to teach multi-step problem solving to 5th and 6th grade
students. The first two videodiscs of the Jasper Project (named
after the protagonist of the storyline, Jasper Woodbury) are
being testing in schools in Nashville and a few other areas
around the country. About 50 discs have been sent out for testing
to date, said Dr. Bob Sherwood, associate director of Peabody's
Learning Technology Center. The program is being simultaneously
produced on videotape as well as disc, so that it can be used by
a wider number of schools, according to project director Dr. John
Brandsford.

The goal is to produce at least six Jasper discs. The third and
fourth discs are in production; Dr. Brandsford said the
University is hoping to get Federal funds to help it complete
discs five and six. The vice-chancellor's office is currently
talking to several distributors of educational software in hopes
of striking an agreement to market Jasper to schools. Dr.
Sherwood said that the University is hoping the Jasper discs will
go at "a reasonable price", which he put at under $300. Dr.
Bransford noted that Vanderbilt would put any profit it makes
from the project directly back into research.

The Jasper discs are appropriate for teaching "math-impaired" and
at-risk students, as well as adult remedial education, Dr.
Brandsford said. Students watching the program for the first time
see a linear, 17-minute version, and then go back for clues to
solve Jasper's problems using mathematics. With videodisc
technology, there is the advantage of random access; in the
videotaped versions, students watch the entire tape again and
raise their hands when they feel the tape should be stopped to
discuss a clue, Dr. Bransford said.

Each Jasper episode is costing close to $100,000 to produce, Dr.
Sherwood said, noting that programs demand high quality video
because children are accustomed to TV's high production values.
In addition to the videotape versions, the Learning Technology
Center is developing training tapes and workbooks for teachers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

SURVEY: $1.3 MILLION COMPUTING BUDGET YEARLY AVERAGE FOR HIGHER
ED SCHOOLS

With many areas of the economy sagging, technology providers may
take comfort to know that the market for computers--and
particularly microcomputers--in the nation's colleges and
universities is robust. According to a recent study by Globe
Research Corp. on behalf of The Chronicle of Higher Education,
institutes of higher education budget a yearly average of $1.3
million each for computing purposes, a figure that includes fees
for hardware, software, support staff and courseware. The budgets
ranged from an average low of $482,000 per year for two-year
colleges, up to $3.37 million annually for large institutions.

The study, Computers in Higher Education: The 1990s, Current
Usage, Responsibilities and Purchasing Trends, is based on data
from 2,426 responses out of a mailing of 4,000 questionnaires,
representing a return rate of 60.9%.

Nearly every college and university already owns microcomputers
(the survey placed the number at 96.5%), with an average of 101
microcomputers per institution. Small institutions averaged the
lowest number of units, at 58 each, while large institutions
averaged 308 microcomputers. The survey found that colleges and
universities averaged 3.6 computer centers each, and that the
majority of microcomputers were located in the computer centers,
administrative offices, individual departments and libraries.

About 16.7% of campus computers were located in dormitories. The
survey found that between 18% and 24% of the responding
institutions recommended brands or types of hardware to students;
however, only 1.1% of respondents required students to purchase
computers. Nearly half (48.6%) made some sort of microcomputer
hardware recommendation to students, faculty and/or
administrative staff.

According to the study's findings, IBM retains a wide margin over
its nearest competitor, Apple, in the competition for market
share. The brands or models most recommended by respondents were
of the IBM PC family, including the IBM PC, PC/XT, PC/AT, PC/RT
and OS/2 (a combined total of 70.2%), followed by the Apple
Macintosh (31.3%). IBM-compatible clones were assessed at 27.6%
of the market, ahead of Zenith (24.7%), Apple II (20.3), AT&T
(9.7%), Hewlett-Packard (6.4%) and DEC (5.7%). Other familiar
names, including Leading Edge, Epson, Compaq and Tandy, were all
placed at under 5% of the market.

Globe's results confirmed the heavy use of computer networks in
higher ed. Seven out of ten schools reported that their micros
were networked to other computers. Of schools using networks, 78%
had their micros connected to a mainframe; 54.1% were using
micro-to-micro networks.

Software Centrally Pooled on Campus

One significant finding of the report revealed that a very large
number of institutions--averaged to 43% in the survey--had a
central pool of microcomputer software. Nearly all had word
processing and spreadsheet software available from the pool
(98.1% and 93.4%, respectively), and most had database management
software as well as programs in graphics and statistics. Of those
institutions, WordPerfect was the dominant word processing
product (66.9%), while Lotus 1-2-3 remained the top spreadsheet
package (81.9% of schools). dBase topped the list of database
management software (81.2% of schools) and SPSS was the top
statistical product (45.2%).

Almost half of all institutions --48.1%--said they "would be more
interested in software if site licensing were offered," the
report states. The potential number of microcomputers that would
come under site licensing averaged out to 195.5 units per
institution. That figure rose to 233.4 micros at four-year
colleges and universities and leaped to 437.1 units for large
institutions. The potential number of individual users in site
licensing came to an average of 850 individuals, while the number
of potential concurrent users averaged to 295. The majority of
schools also said they preferred a one-time payment for site
licensing rights, as opposed to an annual fee.

Purchasing trends for peripherals were also looked at in the
study. Among higher ed officials using microcomputers as part of
their jobs, 39.9% said they planned to add a laser printer to
their system within the next two years. Modems were on the
shopping list for 25.1% of the officials, while 31.7% said they
planned to add a scanner.

The Role of Purchasing Committees

A 1989 survey published by Globe Research Corp. focusing on
higher ed purchasing patterns found that, in the majority of
schools, purchasing committees were involved in the purchases of
computer products, software and telecommunications systems. The
responses were taken from people who had served on institutional
purchasing committees in the 12 months prior to the survey. The
study, The Purchasing Process in Higher Education, determined
that purchasing committees were involved in the decision to buy
computer equipment, products and systems in over 80% of
institutions surveyed (83.2%).

Purchasing committees were involved in the acquisition of
audio/video equipment and products in 55.9% of all institutions,
while such committees were active in the buying of
telecommunications equipment in 33.2% of all schools. Of
institutions surveyed, 32.2% of senior administrative officials
were involved in purchasing telephone equipment, and 30% of those
senior officials were involved in the purchase of long-distance
services.

Copies of both higher ed surveys can be obtained from The
Chronicle of Higher Education, Inc., 1255 23rd St. NW,
Washington, D.C. 20037.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

US DOE'S TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER OFFICE IN FORMATIVE STAGE

The US Dept. of Ed's Office of Training Technology Transfer
(OTTT), established two years ago under a Federal Trade Act, has
yet to hire personnel and create an agenda to carry out its
mission -- but recent activity suggests both may happen soon. If
so, publishers may find some product opportunities involving
government-funded training materials. The goal of the OTTT,
according to DOE's Dr. Lucille Reifman, is to "facilitate
transfer of education and training technology, with educational
and Federal support, to technology and training institutes."
Although startup of the OTTT was approved in 1988, funding has
yet to be sent to the unit.

Dr. Reifman feels that Federal money will be arriving soon;
Congressional legislation had proposed $3 million for the first
year of operation, with subsequent years funded "as needed," Dr.
Reifman said. The $3 million was supposed to come out of a larger
technology training initiative that has yet to gain official
approval, she added. During the Spring of 1990, Dr. Reifman and
other officials will be meeting to explore issues central to the
unit, and to formulate how policy will be conducted.

Once the Office takes shape, the plan is to establish a network
of OTTT training technology centers in every government office
that uses such technology. Then the OTTT would seek to take an
inventory of training technology programs used by the U.S.
government, analyze them, and disseminate information. Of course,
a portion of this work will have to be contracted out; after a
budget in place, the OTTT will have the ability to award grants
and contracts, Dr. Reifman said.

The OTTT has the potential to become an important source of new
information and training programs, handling everything from
language courses originally used by the State Dept. to the Job
Skills Education Program (JSEP), a computerized job training
program developed by the U.S. Army, Florida State University and
Ford Aerospace (see related article in HR April '90 issue).

One of the main issues facing OTTT officials will be that of
proprietary rights, said Dr. Reifman, touching on ownership of
courseware developed on behalf of the government, or by a branch
of government itself.

The OTTT would probably rely on terms found in the original
agreements between individual contractors and the government
regarding intellectual property rights, she said. Dr. Reifman
added that the OTTT, as it is currently being proposed, would
have the power to turn over certain proprietary rights to the
original manufacturer if it were found to be in the public
interest. She added that some of the powers proposed for the OTTT
"may not be practical for this office to exercise," requiring a
cohesive, legislated policy instead.

One concern she raised was the future of material found in the
public domain--would a private company really push a product, or
seek to modernize it, if it were public material? Or if a product
were developed to work on a mainframe or very powerful PC
platforms, like JSEP, how could the OTTT facilitate JSEP's
reincarnation into a less expensive PC product, so that colleges
could use it?

The Heller Report will be following the formation of the Office
of Training Technology Transfer and will bring our readers
periodic updates as to its progress.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

RURAL ELECTRICAL AND TELEPHONE COOPERATIVES ASSISTING SCHOOLS
WITH DISTANCE LEARNING AND TELECOM MATERIAL

If the latest developments in Arkansas are indicative of a trend,
local energy cooperatives are playing an increasingly important
role helping to bring rural school districts into the
technological 20th century.

The Arkansas Electric Cooperative Corporation (AECC), the
umbrella unit to which 17 of the state's 18 energy co-ops belong,
is using some of its profits to purchase satellite transmission
and reception equipment for each district in the state. Jim
Davis, a spokesperson for the AECC, said buying and installing
the satellite equipment--transmission and reception for each of
AR's 389 districts--will cost at least $500,000, probably much
more.

To date, 300 Bentley 8 dishes (supplied by Western Manufacturing
Co. of Cabot, AR) have been purchased; receivers will be bought
from Satellite Technology Services (St. Louis, MO). The purchases
are being made centrally by AECC, but each district is overseeing
the transport of the equipment to its locality. The dishes are
expected to be placed in district high schools, Davis said.
Although there is one rural electrical cooperative that is not a
member of AECC, Davis said the AECC will donate equipment to the
district falling within the non-member's area. One district has
already installed its equipment; the rest of the districts are
expected to begin in mid-May, he said.

The Role of Rural Co-ops

Rural electrical cooperatives, established to provide electricity
in remote and rural areas, began to flourish in the 1930s-40s.
Owned by its customers, the co-ops are run by boards elected by
the community. According to Richard Larochelle of the National
Rural Electrical Co-op Association (Washington, D.C.), the
nation's 1,000 rural electrical co-ops serve 25-30 million
people, representing 70% of the land mass in the U.S. Each co-op,
on average, serves three or four counties.

Rural telephone cooperatives are patterned much the same way. The
telephone cooperatives have also been active in helping schools
get up-to-date technology; in several states, the rural telephone
cooperatives will fund and oversee installation of a fiber optic
infrastructure so that a district can have phone, data and
distance learning communications in its schools. In Oklahoma,
rural phone co-ops have been coordinating the introduction of
fiber optics in some districts, while in others it has been
helping schools get grants for satellite dishes, according to
Shirley Bloomfield of the National Telephone Co-op Association
(Washington, D.C.).

In many cases the U.S. government's Rural Electrification Agency
will lend money to the rural co-op to pay for the infrastructure,
Bloomfield said. If the money to retool takes the form of a loan,
districts will "lend out" the school's distance learning or
computer network after hours and gradually recoup the costs in
this manner.

Interestingly, rural telephone cooperatives are not hampered by
the same restrictions as the RBOCs. Many of the rural co-ops have
established separate subsidiaries through which they participate
in cable TV ventures--a precaution taken so that the basic phone
bill does not wind up subsidizing cable or other units,
Bloomfield said. While RBOCs are presently prevented by Judge
Greene's MFJ from becoming for-profit information providers,
Bloomfield does not see that situation lasting for more than a
year or two. "Our only concern is that when restrictions are
lifted on the RBOCs, that there are safeguards for the rural
co-ops," she said, adding that the rural organizations would want
assurance "that we would have access to the technology" to
continue its own ventures.  Some industry observers contend that
RBOC support for pending rural distance learning legislation,
such as the Rural Partnership Act of 1989 ("Rural Star Schools;"
see the related story in the Sept. 1989 HR), which would provide
$110 million for telecommunications and computer equipment and
programming for rural schools, is part of the RBOC lobbying
effort to chip away at MFJ.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

VITA TO USE LOW-ALTITUDE SATELLITE AND RADIO MODEMS FOR AFRICA
PROJECT

To help foster communications between schools of higher education
in Africa, Volunteers in Technical Assistance (VITA)--a
non-profit volunteer organization in Boston, MA--plans to supply
universities in Nigeria with computers, radio modems and packet
radios to help deliver voice and data communications. This effort
will be aided by a low-altitude satellite launched earlier this
year, called PACSAT, that will provide store-and-forward
communications on an experimental radio band. Moreover, the
computer and radio components will be powered by solar panels,
VITA president Henry Norman told The Heller Report.

Funding for the project came from a variety of sources, including
The Hoover Foundation and the U.S. Department of Energy, the
latter granting funds for the solar equipment. Funds for the
PACSAT satellite came from VITA ($350,000) as well as
organizations such as TERC (Technical Education Resource
Centers), which purchased transponder space in advance of the
launch.

The low-altitude satellite was built at the University of
Surrey's Spacecraft Research Institute in the United Kingdom,
while the American-made radio modems (actually, terminal node
controllers) are from Applied Electronic Associates, located in
Washington state. The packet radios are of Japanese origin,
Norman said. The terminal node controllers (TNCs) break
information into small "packets" that can be transmitted via
radio to the receiving computer; another TNC at the reception
site decodes the information "packets" for display on the PC
screen. The system can be powered either by solar cells or by
conventional lead-acid battery.

PACSAT is designed to act as an "orbiting mailbox," because in
its low orbit (700km), it will pass over most points on earth at
least twice daily. Depending on a query's point of origin, a
message can be uploaded and then unloaded at its destination in a
maximum of 12 hours' time. When PACSAT is over a ground station,
it will signal the station to turn itself on to transmit or
receive messages. Based on this timed orbit, the longest
query-response cycle will be no longer than 24 hours,
considerably speeding up communications in areas where there are
no telephone or electrical lines.

The PACSAT initiative is expected to act as a testing ground for
a more expanded project, called VITASAT. It is anticipated that
the VITASAT satellite will cost roughly $1.2 million. VITASAT is
expected to serve a minimum of 35 ground stations, although a
VITA-distributed brochure on the project states that the goal is
to have "an internal network of 50 stations," which will serve up
to 500 remote locations. About half of those will be in Africa,
with the rest in other third world spots.

TERC's "Global Laboratory" Program

TERC bought transponder space on PACSAT for the TERC-coordinated
Global Laboratory Project. The project, begun this Spring, would
have used PACSAT and radio so that high schools in Brazil could
communicate with schools in the U.S., Australia, the U.S.S.R. and
Canada to compile information on global warming. However, a
source at TERC said it has been unable to secure funding to
continue with the PACSAT part of Global Laboratory. The project
is going ahead with countries that already have conventional
phone lines (the U.S., Australia, Canada and the U.S.S.R.).
TERC's future involvement with PACSAT will be decided in about
one month, the source said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

IBM, NY STATE TEAM UP FOR $5 MIL PILOT TECHNOLOGY PROJECT

IBM and the New York State Dept. of Education announced they will
jointly enter the pilot phase of a plan to bring technology to
all schools in the state.

The pilot will serve to help validate the DOE's Long Range Plan
for Technology in Elementary and Secondary Schools in New York
State, an initiative long promoted by the DOE and expected to be
approved by the NY state Board of Regents this month. To help
initiate the two-year pilot phase, IBM will be donating about $5
million to 12 elementary schools and 12 teacher colleges. The
project illustrates IBM's substantial commitment to increasing
its penetration of the K-12 market (see related story, and
analysis, of the IBM/Apple K-12 face off on page 1).

Donations of equipment will be made to schools on a competitive
grant basis; proposals from schools are due June 1.  Most
proposals will be prejudged by the 41 Boards of Cooperative
Educational Services (BOCES) around the state; the five largest
cities, including New York City, can submit proposals directly to
the capitol. The top five plans selected by the BOCES will be
forwarded to the state DOE for final selection. Winners should be
announced by June 19, said Dr. Peter Stoll, an associate for
educational television in the Bureau of Technical Applications at
the DOE.

The selected schools will receive approximately $250,000 to
$300,000 worth of IBM equipment, including four or five PS/2
model 25 workstations per classroom, with color monitors and
voice adaptor cards. Every school will get an IBM PS/2 model 80
file server, while teachers and school principals will receive
PS/2 model 30 workstations. Additionally, each school will
receive an IBM laser printer. According to Dr. Stoll, each
winning school will also receive a "teacher presentation system,"
consisting of large screen projection hardware, a computer-driven
videodisc drive and a CD-ROM drive.

The state's plan calls for networking each workstation to the
file server, linking them to the other microcomputers in the
classroom and in the building, and to other classrooms in the
state connected to NY's Technical Network Ties (TNT), a
state-wide computer network.

An "Overview for Superintendents" issued by the DOE describing
the IBM/NY venture states that schools having prior involvement
with IBM, such as those that have used Writing to Read or other
IBM courseware, will be given preference in the selection
process, as will schools currently networked to TNT.

Winning schools will be required to assume the costs for any
additional wiring necessary to network workstations in the
classrooms; networking between classrooms within the building
must be paid for by the district.

As the Long Range Plan currently stands, the goal is to have
computers in every NY state school and school library, with
students having daily access to "technology-rich learning
environments within their classrooms and in separate learning
labs outside the classroom, in the school library media center,
or from home when needed."

The objective is to have the plan at least partly implemented by
1995.

While no firm price tag has been put on such a plan (should it be
approved by the Board of Regents), Dr. Stoll noted that NY state
makes between $18 million and $20 million available each year for
hardware and software purchases by schools.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

RR DONNELLEY/GTE TELEMESSENGER LAUNCH AUDIOTEX "IN-TOUCH"
LITERACY AID

One of the country's largest printing firms, Chicago-based R.R.
Donnelley and Sons, has teamed with GTE Telemessenger (Irving,
TX) to offer a telephone-accessed literacy service called "The
In-Touch Reading Aid." In association with Literacy Volunteers of
America (LVA), Donnelley and GTE are planning to launch a pilot
with 100 students in early June. If the results are positive, the
service may expand its offerings and/or become a "900" number.
The fledgling "In-Touch Reading Aid" currently has a vocabulary
of about 800 words; callers to the temporary "800" number are
asked to spell out a troublesome word using the keypads of a
touch-tone phone. A prerecorded voice spells the entered word,
and gives the correct pronunciation.

Robert Chainski, technical director for advanced communications
applications at R.R. Donnelley, told The Heller Report that the
company originated the "In-Touch" idea out of concern over the
high rate of illiteracy in the U.S. Through this service, adult
illiterates, the disabled, children or non-English speaking
people would be able to learn pronunciation and spelling if they
become "stuck" on a word, Chainski said. He noted that the LVA
identified this as a major problem among adult illiterates who
practice reading skills at home--getting "stuck" with no one to
turn to for help.

Chainski said that through Donnelley's contacts with textbook and
children's publishers, the company is seeking to create a joint
project that would include using the "In-Touch" line. If, for
example, an agreement was reached with a children's publisher,
Donnelley could add words into the online dictionary specifically
related to a publisher's text. An English-Spanish vocabulary
service is one of the forms the "In Touch" line may eventually
take, he said.

Prior to Donnelley's partnership with GTE Telemessenger, most of
the telecommunications firms contacted by R.R. Donnelley were
reluctant to join the project, mainly because it was unclear how
or when the system would bring in profits, Chainski said. The
100-student pilot slated to begin in June is scheduled to last
three months, after which Donnelley and GTE Telemessenger will
determine the future direction of the service.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

HOWTEK PRINTER TRANSLATES TO BRAILLE; EDUCATION RESELLER SOUGHT

Howtek, Inc., headquartered in Hudson, VT, has introduced
Braillemaster, a line of computer printers that will interpret
ASCII into Braille, and are capable of printing alphanumeric
symbols as well as Braille on the same page. Using proprietary
software and a plastic-based ink, the printers shoot out four
layers of ink dots that dry instantly on the paper, creating the
raised Braille symbols, according to Howtek business manager Jack
Dolan. The initial sales thrust for Braillemaster printers will
be the corporate market, Dolan said, although the company is
looking for "resellers" who will bring the product to the
education/special ed market.

This technology, designed to facilitate communication between
blind and sighted employees in the workplace, may enable blind
and sighted students to learn together as well. The Braillemaster
(really a Pixelmaster printer will specialized software, ink and
Braille drive) uses a solid ink capsule resembling a crayon, said
Dolan, which melts when inserted in the printer. Inside the
printer, the liquefied ink is kept at 240 degrees Fahrenheit, so
the sudden temperature change that occurs when the ink hits the
paper causes it to solidify immediately, Dolan said.

Howtek designed the printer to be used by the sighted as well; it
is designed to remember 256,000 shades of color, and can print
graphs, charts, maps or images.

Developed in cooperation with the National Federation of the
Blind, the Braillemaster is built to accommodate Grade 2 Braille
software produced by Duxbury (Littleton, MA), which contracts
often-used prefixes and suffixes for faster reading by the blind.
Braillemaster I, with 512K of memory, lists at $5,995, while
Braillemaster II, with 2-1/2 megabytes, lists at $7,900. Those
interested in further information can contact Dolan in Howtek's
west coast office (Dublin, CA) at 415-828-4604.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

NORTH DAKOTA HOPES TO BEGIN CONSTRUCTION  OF $15 MIL ED NETWORK
NEXT YEAR

The state of North Dakota is planning construction of a
state-wide educational telecommunications network, a system that
will cost an estimated $15 million to build and approximately $5
million per year to maintain and operate.

The network is being designed under the auspices of the North
Dakota Computer Education Committee, part of the Dept. of Public
Instruction in Bismark, ND. Two years ago, the state legislature
revamped what had been ND's Educational Broadcasting Council into
the Educational Telecommunications Council; the new council
commissioned Federal Engineering, a Fairfax, VA-based consulting
firm, to develop a plan for the installation of a state-wide
network. However, since ND's state legislature meets every other
year, the study will not be taken up by the lawmakers until its
next session in Jan. 1991 (the previous session ended May 1989).

The state's fiscal year begins on July 1st, so that if the
recommendations (or any subsequent bids) were approved, funds
would not be forthcoming until July 1991 (the start of ND's
fiscal 1992), at the earliest. The plan, as it currently stands,
its to build the network over a five-year period, according to
Joel Linnertz, director of administrative services for ND's Dept.
of Public Instruction. The scheduling of any RFP will most likely
be tied to the fiscal cycle, although no timetable for RFPs have
been set.

The network is expected to be funded entirely by state money.
However, the state has been under great financial pressure due to
three consecutive years of drought, as well as a depressed oil
market, affecting two important areas of commerce for North
Dakota. The decision to spread construction over a five-year
period may, in part, soften the financial pinch of the project.

Ultimately, the network's backbone will be a "fiber optics
corridor circling the state," Linnertz said. He also indicated
that the first aim of the project will be to establish a computer
network for educators and students in K-12 schools. The network
would also be used for administrative tasks. In progressive
stages, the network would also be used to link colleges and
libraries around the state, and perhaps add to the state's
distance learning efforts. So far, most distance learning
projects in ND have been carried out by local consortium,
independent of one another.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

LEIDS CORP. INTRODUCING SINet TO K-12 SCHOOLS

In the past four months, Leids Corp. of Fargo, ND, has wired over
150 schools in five states to its SINet proprietary database and
information retrieval system. It plans to introduce systems in
Portland, OR and Washington, D.C. in the near future.
SINet--Secondary Informational Network--is designed to retrieve a
host of topic-specific information by accessing large numbers of
databases and bulletin boards, searching for data pertaining to a
particular category.

For example, if the topic is ecology, SINet might scan National
Geographic's database, as well as ECONET and other databases and
newswires to gather and present a body of information for the
user. Leids is also talking to FrEdMail and other bulletin board
providers in order to add more of those services under SINet's
umbrella, according to Leids CEO Dr. Theodore Rosenbaum.

Dr. Rosenbaum described SINet as "a distributed system" that will
act as a gateway to other bulletin boards, as well as support
conferencing and e-mail (public domain databases, but no active
online services, are accessed via SINet). Schools can access
SINet either remotely or by leasing or buying the complete
system. The system can be cost-effective for schools with limited
resources; Dr. Rosenbaum noted that Catholic schools in Minnesota
log into SINet via a remote site designated for them, at a total
cost of $80 per year. The SINet system consists of Leids'
proprietary UNIX-based software running on an NCR Tower computer,
which can be used as a file server for a local area network
linking user stations. There are currently two multiuser NCR
Tower setups in Minnesota, serving 50 schools, while two NCR
Towers in AZ serve SINet to about 100 schools, Dr. Rosenbaum
said.

Schools can also lease or buy the system (line charges for online
accesses are paid separately). NCR acts as sales and marketing
agent for the SINet package, and will send teams to schools to
instruct users and keep track of the system's performance. In
either a lease or buy situation, Leids provides ongoing support
and troubleshooting for SINet. There is a certain amount of
customizing involved for each school or district. Using KERMIT
telecommunications software, a public-domain product, Leids
tailors SINet for IBM or Apple systems.

To date, schools in Minnesota, North Dakota, Nebraska and Arizona
(Phoenix) as well as one Texas school have become SINet users. A
system tied into Novell Netware capable of serving up to 150
users can cost from $10,000 to $16,000 to purchase, Dr. Rosenbaum
said. He noted that the system bought by the Phoenix, AZ schools
can serve up to 78 users. K-12 schools are not Leids' only market
for the product; the Kansas judiciary system is considering
installing the software for its own use, said Dr. Rosenbaum.

Leids' current efforts in the higher ed market include a project
to link universities in Nigeria to SINet. The team effort
involves Leids, NCR, Nigeria's Education Ministry, and possibly
some volunteer organizations. Business representatives went to
Nigeria to meet with education officials about one year ago, and
followed up with a proposal to connect with SINet via satellite.
The first test of the system is expected in two months.

Prior to changing its name six months ago, Leids Corp. was known
as Barrister International.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

NIEU's EDUCATION UTILITY SLATED FOR SITES IN AZ, NY AND FL BY
JUNE

After some false starts dating back to the early 1980s, National
Information and Education Utilities Corp. (NIEU) is beginning to
find customers for its Education Utility program. Technologically
enhanced since its first introduction, EU is now a satellite
delivered service offering schools downloaded educational
software, data and video on demand for a per-use fee.

NIEU vice-chairman Henry Schwartz said the Education Utility (EU)
system has been installed in two high schools in Arizona, with
installation for four others to begin next month. NIEU has also
signed on the C.W. Post College of Long Island University and
three more schools in Suffolk County, NY. Further, two sites in
Florida have signed on to receive the EU system: Nova
University's South Florida Education Center, and a second
Education Center run by a consortium made up of Broward County
Community College, Nova University and the Broward, Dade and
Monroe Counties public schools. NIEU executives are currently
talking with education officials in Illinois and California to
explore business opportunities in those states.

The basic EU structure is as follows: using a schools's own
computer hardware and an NIEU-supplied receiver dish, schools
receive encrypted database and video information that is stored
on hard disc, CD-ROM and/or VHS video recorder. The system can
also be amended to accommodate interactive optical discs, said
Schwartz. The data is decoded by a Scientific Atlanta B-Mac
device placed on-site. The Education Utility currently has
between 350 and 400 software programs available from about 50
suppliers, including Scholastic and MicroSoft, although Schwartz
said the number of programs "will shortly top 1,000."

Schools are charged a fee for use of the third-party software
delivered to the desktop, as well as 50 cents per hour for each
workstation using the system; software publishers are paid a
royalty for each use. The leasing charge for the EU system is
$1,750 per month ($21,000 annually); Schwartz estimates the
additional, per-use fees, based on a 190-day school year, will
run about $6,000.

When used to deliver computer data, the system can handle up to
250 concurrent users without any loss of speed, Schwartz said.
When delivering full-motion video, the system acts "like cable
TV" and can be seen by any number of users, he added.

Financial Incentive in Leasing

To help recoup the costs of the system, NIEU allows client
schools to lease out the EU for non-school business, such as
adult literacy classes or other community use. Recently, NIEU has
added dial-up capabilities to the EU system, allowing users to
access data from home using individual passwords. Aside from the
phone line and program fees, NIEU charges $1.50 per hour for
dial-up service, and will credit one-third (50 cents) of that
revenue to the client school, Schwartz said.

Further, NIEU has concluded an agreement with ERIC (Education
Resource Information Center) for use of its databases for K-12
teachers and administrators. Those databases are public-domain,
Schwartz said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

INTERACTIVE LEARNING '90, JUNE 29-JULY 1, 1990

Interactive Learning '90, June 29-July 1, 1990 at the
Herriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland. Organized by the
Interactive Learning Foundation (ILF). Themes to include
multimedia and intelligent interfaces, advances in optical disc
technologies and design for effective learning. For more
information, contact Jackie Pells, Interactive Learning Services,
Church Street, Wicksworth, Derby DE4 4EY, England.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

INDONESIAN CONFERENCE ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, JULY 2-5
AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY FOR EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, JULY 3-6

Indonesian Conference on Educational Technology, July 2-5, and
Australian Society for Educational Technology, July 3-6.
International conferences on education technology, at which the
Agency for Instructional Technology will be represented. For
further information, contact AIT at Box A, Bloomington, IN
47402-0120 or (812) 339-2203 or (800) 457-4509.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HELLER REPORT ON EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
May 1990

ITTE TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP MEETING, AUGUST 1-3, '90

ITTE Technology Leadership Meeting, August 1-3, '90, Atlanta, GA,
sponsored by the National School Boards Association's Institute
for Transfer of Technology to Education. Programs will cover
telecommunications and what a wired world means for K-12
education. Topics include next-generation satellites coming in
1992, possible futures for the telephone industry, and revisiting
the concept of the online "education utility." For more
information, call ITTE at (703) 838-NSBA.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>