
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B12-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B037-57</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045836 text/html 25646
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:00 GMT
Content-length: 25459
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te46.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
OCTOBER 9, 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>BELLCORE REFINES VIDEOCONFERENCING TOOLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(419 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>VIDEOCONFERENCING INTEGRATOR DESIGNS FOR WIDE RANGE OF USERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(887 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>VIDEOCONFERENCING APPLICATIONS CREATE VERTICAL MARKET SEGMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>INSURER'S VIDEOCONFERENCING CUTS TRAVEL TIME, BOOSTS TRAINING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(526 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>MID-SIZED OFFICE BUILDINGS NEXT STEP IN BELL CANADA FIBER ROLL-&nbsp;OUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>NTT DEBUTS 3-D TV AT TELECOM '91 -- SANS GLASSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(371 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet
OCTOBER 9, 1991

BELLCORE REFINES VIDEOCONFERENCING TOOLS

CHICAGO -- Bellcore, the research arm of the Bell companies, last
week revealed two technologies under development in its labs that
will enhance videoconferencing.

One, called the "Video Window," is a special video room with
lifelike audio and a curved wide screen, for displaying life-size
images of groups of from six to 12 people.

The other is a computer program called Rendezvous, designed to
create the "conversational props" that Bellcore believes
videoconferees must have in order to exchange graphic
information.

The two technologies, demonstrated here at the National
Communications Forum earlier this month, both arise from what
Bellcore researchers say is a psychological assessment of
videoconferencing user needs.

Referring to the Video Window, Eric Addeo, Bellcore's district
manager for visual services research, said researchers found that
videoconferees "want to be able to see the person and have a
sense of eye contact."

The Bellcore researchers emphasized that neither technology is
far from commercialization.  According to Addeo, the Video Window
can run at speeds from 45 megabits per second to 384 kilobit per
second, a quarter of a T1 line.  Video Window, he added, is based
on the CCITT H.261 standard, codecs for which will be available
by late next year.

Video Window's 64 Kbps voice channel, meanwhile, offers full-
duplex audio that is unaffected by increases in volume, he added.

In his presentation on Rendezvous, Bellcore's Louis Gomez
demonstrated the software in a application where two children in
separate homes connected their computers over phone lines and
played the card game "fish."  Rendezvous allowed each player to
have a personalized display that showed only the faces of their
own cards, while also giving them a view of the common "pool,"
where they discarded cards.

In business videoconferencing, Gomez elaborated, Rendezvous could
be used to create a conversational prop such as a shared "white
board," a part of each party's viewing screen where they could
make real-time drawings or notes.

The use of conversational props will lengthen telephone calls and
increase demand for broadband service, predicted Gomez, a manager
in human-computer systems research.

Addeo, meanwhile, emphasized the user friendliness of a Video
Window room, which automatically connects with its remote
counterpart the minute its door is opened.

Bellcore tests, he elaborated, showed users pleased with Video
Window -- and willing to buy it.  Since Bellcore cannot
manufacture products, Addeo said the organization hopes it can
induce a telecommunications company to bring the technology to
market.  To that end, Bellcore will hold a seminar on Video
Window Oct. 10.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet
OCTOBER 9, 1991

VIDEOCONFERENCING INTEGRATOR DESIGNS FOR WIDE RANGE OF USERS

While TV news crews in Kuwait broadcast live reports on the Iraqi
invasion, General Norman Schwarzkopf was using satellite-based
video to ready American armed forces for the coming war.

Schwarzkopf was using the live video link -- essentially, a
videoconference -- to command American military forces during a
computerized war game, in which generals fought against a
software "enemy" and no troops were deployed.

The war game -- done strictly on computers to keep costs and
personal risks low -- involved commanders at three U.S. Air Force
bases in northern Florida, one of them Schwarzkopf's command
post.

When Iraq invaded, the general ordered his personal staff of
commanders, located "behind the lines" at a Tampa, Fla., airbase,
to give him the "real stuff," according to Kenneth Lucas, senior
program manager at CAE Link, a designer of military training
systems.  A secure satellite link was set up between Tampa and
the general's field headquarters to feed maps and other graphic
information to Schwarzkopf.

CAE Link, whose name is more frequently associated with flight
simulators, designed that videoconferencing system -- the first,
Lucas believes, to be used in a combat simulation.

In the aftermath of the war game, Col. Dennis Foggy, chief of the
support division of the Joint Warfare Center, which organized the
event, said he found "videoconferencing works well conjunction
with war game simulation because exercize participants can see
and share data and information in real time, in color and without
delay."

The videoconferenced portion of the war game was carried at 384
kilobits per second and ran non-stop for 10 days with no
problems, the Joint Warfare Center said.  More recently, the
system was run at a low 256 Kbps for a second simulated war game
"with only minimum sacrifice to video quality," Foggy says.

The American subsidiary of a Canadian aerospace firm, CAE Link
designs training systems, mainly for the military, and assembles
custom videoconferencing systems, largely for use in "distance
learning."  Distance learning uses videoconferencing technology
to link a teacher in one classroom with students in remote
classrooms, often in areas too sparsely settled to have such
instruction.

Schools Via Satellite

Among its distance learning clients are the Western Kentucky
Educational Consortium, universities in Alabama, Tennessee and
Florida and the Nebraska State Telecommunications and Education
Commission, whose 11-site system is the largest the company has
installed to date and involves satellite broadcasts to some
remote areas of the state.

Another system put together by Binghamton, N.Y.-based CAE Link
lets anyone anywhere in the United States study for a masters
degree in instructional technology at Boise State University --
without relocating to Idaho.  Students attend classes in their
homes via computer conferencing.

Systems integration is especially important in distance learning
because off-the-shelf videoconferencing products usually are
designed for corporate meetings, Lucas says.

The equipment is often built into a roll-about cart and cannot
provide coverage to an entire classroom, where anyone may
suddenly ask a question, Lucas said.  A particularly thorny
problem in those settings is audio, since some students may
speak-out too quietly or be located too far from a microphone,
adds Operations Manager Rich Grace.

CAE Link's distance learning systems are composed of equipment
from various suppliers, including PictureTel and VideoTelecom.
The hardware is in turn matched with the right telecommunications
medium for the job, from T1 to switched 56 kilobit lines, or
whatever the customer already has in place.

While educational institutions can design distance learning
systems themselves, Lucas said "the problem [for customers] is
knowing what to buy -- we've been through that via trial and
error."

Because of its training systems business, CAE Link employs
instructional designers, who can advise first-time distance
learning buyers on how to teach remotely, Lucas said.  One tip:
have instructors teaching a classroom of students at the
broadcast site.

To assist the activities of the company's training side,
meanwhile, it hosts a videoconferencing room on the Sprint
Meeting Channel at the Alexandria, Va., headquarters of its
Training Systems Division.

In another intra-company synergy, CAE Link's national network of
flight simulator support centers also support its
videoconferencing systems.

A typical distance learning network put together by the company
is its first installation, which which links a Navy classroom in
Newport News, Va., with seven other classrooms in the East from
Rhode Island to Florida.

Switched Video Signals

Using a "video PBX," which switches the signal to the appropriate
sites, an instructor in one classroom can simultaneously teach at
other sites, with cameras at each site giving him visual contact
with his students once a minute.  The satellite-based network
itself is encrypted and can link up to three classes
simultaneously, Lucas noted.

The network, which provides instruction to sailors and
videoconferencing for officers, last year made its first
broadcast to a Navy ship, albeit one in port at the Norfolk, Va.,
naval base.  There the signal went, via cable, from a dish on the
dock to a classroom three stories below deck.

In its final stages of preparation, though, is a new system that
will take the company from the education into the medical sector.
That system, which is expected to make headlines late this month,
will use videoconferencing technology to let doctors to do a
"remote diagnosis," a benefit to rural areas and other locales
where there are few physicians.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet
OCTOBER 9, 1991

VIDEOCONFERENCING APPLICATIONS CREATE VERTICAL MARKET SEGMENTS

As it matures, the videoconferencing market has become more
segmented, with vendors targetting specific industries from
education and government to pharmaceuticals.

Market segmentation is "just starting to happen in
videoconferencing, where different vendors' strengths in
different market areas are becoming apparent..." observes Jim
Posko, marketing manager at AT&T Business Video.

One supplier, Compression Labs Inc. (CLI), says in its latest
annual report that its "base business has benefitted
substantially from major thrusts made by CLI into selected
vertical markets such as government and education."

What are the hot vertical markets?  Henry Grove III, vice
president of the audio/video systems division of Peirce-Phelps
Inc., a well-known systems integrator, cites pharmaceuticals,
defense, finance, insurance and aerospace.

Greg Cline, an analyst with Information Strategies Group in
Vienna, Va., sees vertical markets in government, executive
communications, project management, distance learning, strategic
defense, comand and control, emergency management and law
enforcement.  And Dataquest Inc., the San Jose, Calif., market
research firm, cites retailing, transportation, electronics and
communications.

The university and distance learning markets are hot, and state
government is about to heat up, says Gail Cisel, a product
manager in charge of the state government, university and
correctional facility markets for US Sprint.

Sprint is about to announce videoconferencing support over the
State Interconnected Government Network (SIGN), a program of
discounts on customer premise equipment and usage time, and guest
speakers with applications background that targets government.

Market-Watching From Afar

Within a vertical market, videoconferencing is often used to
maintain contact with branch offices and across time zones.
AT&T's Posko, for instance, notes that one investment house makes
"morning video calls to London, where it gets updated on how the
Far Eastern and European stock exchanges fared during the night.
That analysis allows it to determine how to react as the Wall
Street exchanges open."

Insurance companies "being decentralized ... saw the usefulness
of videoconferencing to introduce new products and policies to
take them to the field [offices]," Grove elaborates.  American
General and Aetna, he says, have videoconferencing in over 40
locations.

Segmenting the market is not only done by industry, Grove
explains.  "There are applications that cross industries, such as
legal applications," he observes.  "You can find these
applications in corporate legal departments, in law firms and in
courts."

Another way the market is segmented is by bandwidth.  Kathleen
Flaherty, vice president of large accounts at MCI Communications
Corp., says PictureTel's products and MCI's Switched 56 service
are positioned to support the fastest growing market segment:
meetings using videoconferencing speeds of 384 kilobits per
second and slower.

Factors Of Size, Speed

AT&T's Posko also sees the market as segmented by bandwidth.
"There's group conferencing with a single screen used for small
groups of one to four people that are highly interactive and
spontaneous meetings, but use 112 Kbps.  Next is the departmental
level with three to six people at each end.  It's more formal,
used for project overviews, staff meetings and this type of
meeting would be a bit higher bandwidth and probably include a
dual-screen setup.

"Corporate conferencing is next.  It's more expensive, uses dual
or triple screens, is for up to 12 people and uses higher
bandwidths too," he says.

Other suppliers are pointing to a different advantage:
application-specific public video rooms.  "A unique network has
sprung up," says Todd Clayton, vice president of marketing for
VideoTelecom.

"Depositions are usually taken by lawyers getting on planes with
court reporters to visit witnesses in person for testimonies.
But court reporter firms have set up a network called LINC [Legal
Image Network Communications] to take video depositions," says
Clayton, who envisions similar networks serving personnel
recruiters or real-estate brokers.

(The Miami-based LINC network uses VideoTelecom codecs and
consists of rooms installed in the offices of about 20 different
independent court reporters.)

Another product differentiator, high resolution graphics, cuts
across markets horizontally, says Grove.  High-resolution
graphics, he elaborates, are important to any industry "that
conducts meetings with a lot of spreadsheets, wants to display
hard copies, or looks at documentation of any sort ... ."  This
includes the Defense Department, insurance industry, and even
NASA, which has been using high-resolution graphics systems
before any launch, he says.

NASA has had "interactive sign-offs with any top officials since
the Challenger disaster," he adds.

Tim McElgunn, an analyst at market researcher Datapro, says
videoconferencing suppliers are increasingly making other
companies partners in their vertical market strategy, seeking out
those with compatible corporate cultures.  "VideoTelecom, for
instance, is PC LAN- [and] data communications-oriented and
therefore goes after firms with the same mindset of technology
implementation -- smaller firms with a PC orientation," he
observes.

One set of partners with a key role are resellers, some of whom
are doing the actual vertical marketing themselves.  "None of the
vendors are huge," explains McElgunn, "so they rely on their Bell
[company] contacts who jointly market their products to Bell
accounts.  Feedback from these resellers will tell vendors what
specific features an individual industry wants."

System Matches Application

VideoTelecom's Clayton, meanwhile, credits resellers with his
firm's success in the education market.  "We have designed a user
interface that's tailored to instructor training," he explains.
"We were able to create a solution for their particular needs."

One systems integrator Videoconferencing Systems, Inc. (VSI), of
Norcross, Ga., says it is targeting markets by exhibiting at
trade shows, including the Computer and Office Systems Show in
Atlanta.  According to Marketing Coordinator Norah Sowa, the
company is aiming for the legal, state governments,
pharmaceutical, medical and education vertical markets.

Another partner in vertical marketing can be a helpful trade
association.  For instance, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Association, "helped the industry embrace [videoconferencing]
technology several years ago," says Peirce-Phelps' Grove.
"Merck, Ciba-Geigy and a few others saw videoconferencing relate
to the product development cycle [by] shortening it.  And if that
cycle is cut by even a week, these firms save a million dollars."

For the future, Dataquest sees an expanded vertical market for
videoconferencing among more small and midsize organizations, who
will be attracted as the prices of these products decline and
lower  speed transmission becomes more available.

Reduced transmission costs can only expand the market said a
spokesman for PictureTel, which is based in Peabody, Mass.  "When
you can sell videoconferencing to customers using two telephone
lines that cost only $20 an hour from coast to coast at 112 Kbps,
then you can sell lower down the line to [departmental]
managers," the spokesman says.

"And distance learning applies here as well," he adds.  "We're
finding that 112 Kbps is great for educational systems that don't
have a whole lot of money to burn."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet
OCTOBER 9, 1991

INSURER'S VIDEOCONFERENCING CUTS TRAVEL TIME, BOOSTS TRAINING

In the last three years, John Hancock Financial Services of
Boston has relied on first one, then two business television
(BTV) networks to bring its 17,000 employees closer together.

This company -- whose insurance business alone has $32 billion in
assets -- has used an in-house television studio for more than 20
years.  Yet by upgrading its equipment to handle live
transmissions, John Hancock's group and retail insurance
companies and some of its other businesses have realized BTV's
advantages -- savings in travel costs, reaching 30 times as many
people for each class, and a decreasing need to take seminars on
the road to regional locations for weeks at a time.

With its point-to-multipoint system, the company uses two
satellite networks for product update meetings, field sales
training, sales contest updates, recruiting and a wide variety of
corporate communications events.  The company has held about 70
broadcasts since 1988.

This one-way video, two-way audio system can delivery full-motion
video from corporate headquarters to 42 field offices.  Several
hundred people watching a broadcast can ask questions, even
though they can't be seen on screen.

John Hancock rents satellites by the hour or the half-day only
when needed.  The company owns neither a satellite or an uplink
transmitter.  Field offices have been equipped with satellite
dishes on the roof or in a parking lot and electronics that
descramble the picture and allow them to select the right
channel.

Usually 25 or 30 people at each office can watch a live
presentation on a 25-inch color TV, or tape it off the satellite
on a VCR.

"The typical format is about 80 percent live material, which
usually means [having] people in our studio talking," said Frank
King, John Hancock's general director of corporate
communications, who manages the two satellite networks.

"People in the field can talk via a special telephone hookup from
their offices," he said.  "We also have pre-taped news segments
or information about a new computer application, for example.
Almost every broadcast has a live question and answer period at
the end."

The company invested in BTV network equipment rather than two-way
interactive videoconferencing because it was more economical, and
it was a natural fit for linking its distant locations.  The
company is also adding about 100 new satellites in the
continental United States to the system.

"We have a single headquarters in Boston and our 17,000 employees
and retail sales organizations are spread over great distances,
which dictated a point-to-multipoint set up," King said.  "In the
vast majority of cases, we don't need to see the field people; we
just need to hear them."

John Hancock management currently is weighing the pros and cons
of having videoconferencing rooms that could accommodate two-way
video as well.

"Since we do not have regional headquarters organizations,
there's no crying need for an interactive video system.  Even if
we decide to do it, we wouldn't do away with BTV," King said.
"The difference would still be the ability to hold two-way
meetings with fewer people as opposed to bringing a broadcast to
several hundred in more than 100 locations."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet
OCTOBER 9, 1991

MID-SIZED OFFICE BUILDINGS NEXT STEP IN BELL CANADA FIBER ROLL-
OUT

CHICAGO -- If a telco has deployed fiber to large office
buildings -- a typical first step -- its next step should be to
focus on medium-sized office buildings, rather than homes.  At
least, that is the conclusion of Bell Canada, which expects to
begin deploying fiber to mid-sized office buildings in major
Canadian cities later this year.

In the long term, Bell Canada wants to bring fiber to homes,
rather than just to the curb, even though it expects this to be
the more costly strategy, said Bernard Chenevert, the company's
associate director of network systems research.

Bell Canada, however, lacks a major incentive that could promote
the deployment of fiber to homes.  For instance, it cannot
broadcast video, said Chenevert, who spoke at a panel
presentation on fiber implementation at the National
Communications Forum here last week.

Were telcos not constrained by such regulation, Chenevert said it
might make technical and economic sense for a telco to use its
fiber network to distribute a cable TV operator's signals to
homes.

Last year the company put its fiber-to-the-home plans on
indefinite hold, aiming instead for mid-sized buildings having
1,500 to 3,000 lines.  Tests have since shown the company can
bring fiber to a mid-sized building for nearly the cost of using
copper wire, he said.

Besides supplying telephone service, the fiber Bell Canada is
running to office buildings will be used to support
videoconferencing, DS-1 services and data services, Chenevert
said.  After it brings fiber to mid-sized office buildings, the
next step in Bell Canada's fiber deployment plan is to aim for
large and medium-sized apartment buildings, he said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet
OCTOBER 9, 1991

NTT DEBUTS 3-D TV AT TELECOM '91 -- SANS GLASSES

GENEVA -- I have seen the future and it nearly hit me in the
face.  Well, it seemed to.

Dancers writhed, flower arrangements twirled, swordsmen menaced
me with their weapons.  All on television -- jumping out of the
screen.

Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) is showing off three-
dimensional television here at Telecom '91, the world's largest
telecom trade show.

In two small booths, reminiscent of  the alcoves where AT&T's
Picturephone was demonstrated at the 1964 New York World's Fair,
NTT displayed a three-dimensional, full-color, full-motion
television picture that can be viewed without special glasses.

The screen is roughly the size of a 14-inch personal computer
monitor turned on end, 15 inches diagonally to be exact.  The
whole package, minus the electronics hidden behind the display,
is about the size of a large carry-on airline bag.

Don't look for this television in stores.  "This is only a
prototype.  We think we can do much better," said Nobuji
Tetsutani, senior research engineer in NTT's Visual Media
Laboratory in Kanagawa, Japan.  The required 4 megaHertz analog
signal, received by the TV via cable, requires too much bandwidth
and has other limitations that now make it impractical as a
consumer product.

The viewer must stand about three feet to four feet from the
screen.  Outside that range, the 3-D effect is lost.  The
television's picture is bright and clear with approximately the
resolution of a fair-quality home TV.

Separate sets of pixels -- one for each eye -- and an unusual,
full-length lenticular lens appear to release the dancers,
flowers and swordsmen from the screen's bounds.  The lens
surfaces bend the light from the pixels so that each eye sees a
different set of pixels.

NTT says an infrared sensor detects head movements and adjusts
the images left  or right to compensate for head movement.  In
practice, this works poorly.  When I moved, portions of the
screen dimmed momentarily.  When I moved two feet to the right of
the screen, still sitting about three feet in front of it, the
mirage collapsed into a flat picture.

The picture need not be viewed in darkness.  NTT said the device
produces  "compelling images in a bright room," although the
booths were dimly lit.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>