
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000621-B041-16</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ts01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122053949 text/html 55395
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:37:34 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:54 GMT
Content-length: 55208
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ts01.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* THIS WEEK'S LEAD STORIES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>DOT TO PUSH ITS DEPLOYMENT&nbsp;IN 75 LARGEST U.S. METRO AREAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(981 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SNOW RAINS ON TRB'S&nbsp;75TH ANNUAL MEETING&nbsp;IN BLIZZARD-BOUND D.C.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(827 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* TRAFFIC MGMT *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NEW OPEN PROTOCOL&nbsp;DEMONSTRATED FOR&nbsp;ITS COMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(968 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* ELECTRONIC PAYMENT *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>RAYTHEON PROMOTES&nbsp;STAMP-SIZED RF TAG&nbsp;FOR ITS APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(842 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>CONGESTION PRICING&nbsp;MAKES ITS DEBUT&nbsp;IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1029 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* NAVIGATION *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>VOICE-BASED SYSTEM&nbsp;FOR ROUTE GUIDANCE&nbsp;REACHES THE MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1265 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* GOVERNMENT WATCH *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>FUNDING EMERGENCIES,&nbsp;NEED FOR INNOVATION&nbsp;CHALLENGED ITS IN '95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1476 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* AUTO PARTS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>  * Delco Electronics in Kokomo, Ind. has named Trimble </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>  * Trimble also has secured three new fleet customers for </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>  * Delco Electronics staged a press event on Jan. 4 at the </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(117 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>  * Rockwell International has signed an agreement with </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>  * Qualcomm in San Diego has signed a contract to provide </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* CALENDAR *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>National Technical Meeting</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

DOT TO PUSH ITS DEPLOYMENT
IN 75 LARGEST U.S. METRO AREAS

  Transportation Secretary Federico Pena announced a new 
initiative last week to build an "intelligent transportation 
infrastructure" (ITI) across the United States. "I want 75 
of our largest metropolitan areas outfitted with a complete 
intelligent transportation infrastructure in ten years," 
Pena said, echoing John Kennedy's call to put an American on 
the moon within a decade. Pena discussed the new ITS goal at 
the annual meeting of the Transportation Research Board 
(TRB) last Wednesday.

  Pena was scheduled to unveil the new plan on Monday, but 
the blizzard that dumped on the mid-Atlantic forced him to 
postpone his address to the TRB. In the meantime, word of 
the new initiative, dubbed "Operation TimeSaver," had 
already started trickling out. The Associated Press carried 
an item about it on Monday, and National Public Radio 
mentioned it briefly on Tuesday, although neither report 
carried much detail.

  Pena said the goal of Operation TimeSaver is to reduce 
travel time in the U.S. by at least 15 percent. To achieve 
that aim, metropolitan areas will be encouraged to implement 
an infrastructure that integrates nine component systems 
for: traffic signal control; freeway management; transit 
management; incident management; electronic toll collection 
(ETC); electronic fare payment; warnings at railroad grade 
crossings; emergency response; and multimodal traveler 
information systems.

  "There isn't a community in the country that has all 
nine," Pena said. "Atlanta comes closest, as it prepares for 
the Olympics. Many cities have some components, but the 
components aren't linked."

  In connection with Operation TimeSaver, the U.S. 
Department of Transportation (DOT) expects later this month 
to open its solicitation for two or three metropolitan areas 
to serve as model deployment sites. Plans for the 
solicitation are not new. Officials with the federal ITS 
program have been talking about it for months, though lack 
of support from Congress has forced them to vastly reduce 
the scope of that program. (see Inside ITS, Nov. 6, 1995).

  It's clear that the DOT is not looking to Congress for the 
type of dedicated funding for Operation TimeSaver that it 
hoped to win for last year's attempt at a model deployment 
program, the Trailblazer Initiative. The DOT asked for $100 
million for Trailblazer; instead, it received $10 million to 
support model deployments at the two or three sites it 
expects to choose this year.

  "There are federal dollars to help pay for this strategic 
investment," Pena said of Operation TimeSaver in his speech 
at the TRB. But these funds will not consist of new monies 
devoted to ITS initiatives. Rather, ITS is moving into the 
mainstream. "The federal aid that states receive can be used 
to build 100 percent of the infrastructure," he said. Also, 
"we must be more creative by inviting the private sector to 
play a role."

  A major task ahead of proponents of the ITI will be to 
convince state and local officials, and the public at large, 
that there are long term benefits to purchasing an ITI with 
money they might otherwise spend on concrete and steel or 
pothole repair. To that end, the DOT has formed a 
partnership with a variety of organizations to help drum up 
grass roots support. The organizations include Public 
Technologies Inc. (PTI); Public Transit; the American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO); the National Association of Counties; ITS America; 
the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE); the International 
Bridge, Tunnel and Turnpike Association (IBTTA); the Surface 
Transportation Policy Project; the American Trucking 
Associations (ATA); the Highway Users Federation; and the 
National League of Cities.

  Regional offices of the Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA) also are being recruited for this effort, and 
regional employees will undergo training so that they can 
act as "missionaries," for ITS technology in the words of 
one DOT official at the TRB meeting. On Jan. 23, FHWA 
offices throughout the country will hold an "open house" to 
help introduce the program to stakeholders.

  Speaking at a Monday session, William Jones, coordinator 
of the advanced public transit systems program at the ITS 
Joint Program Office, described Operation TimeSaver 
primarily as an outreach program to deliver the message on 
the local and regional levels that ITS technology is 
available and worthy of investment. One could speculate that 
local efforts might also have a second target: legislators 
in Washington. Last year, ITS proponents scrambled to 
convince Congress that ITS is neither "corporate welfare" 
nor "science fiction." As a new round of Congressional 
appropriations begins this spring, Operation TimeSaver could 
serve as an effort to change the language of the debate. 
Pena's speech, along with brochures and a video promoting 
the program at the TRB, focused on the human benefits of 
ITS. Instead of talking about radar systems, proponents are 
trying to push the discussions back in the direction of 
systems that, for example, give parents more time to spend 
with their children.

  Although state and local transportation officials will 
need to rely on their general highway funds to build the 
ITI, the U.S. DOT has set aside money for other efforts 
meant to encourage ITS deployment. Pena used his TRB address 
to announce the award of five contracts to standards-setting 
organizations "to begin fast tracking the development" of 
ITS standards. These are AASHTO, the Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), ITE, the American Society 
for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE). The money will pay for technical 
support for standards-making activities (see Inside ITS, 
Sept. 25, 1995). Pena did not mention the value of the 
contracts.

  Pena also said the DOT will make "a significant 
investment" in training DOT field personnel to deal with ITS 
technologies. Without naming the size of the investment, he 
said it will be "on the order made when we built the 
Interstate system." The training effort will be aimed at 
"expanding their technical capacity so civil engineers can 
become electronic and communication experts."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

SNOW RAINS ON TRB'S
75TH ANNUAL MEETING
IN BLIZZARD-BOUND D.C.

  The Blizzard of '96 proved to be a spoiler for the 75th 
annual meeting of the Transportation Research Board (TRB) in 
Washington, D.C. last week. Over 17 inches of snow and winds 
gusting up to 35 mph closed airports, roads and above-ground 
sections of the Metro. After attendance last year of about 
7,100 people and pre-registration this year of 5,000, the 
TRB was expecting a banner year. But at the end of the first 
full day of the meeting, only 2,733 intrepid souls had been 
able to get to the event.

  Rodney Slater, head of the Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA), drove a four wheel drive vehicle through the drifts 
to help deliver an annual report on ITS on Monday morning. 
Hundreds of people attended this session last year; just 
over 50 people, looking lost in a cavernous ballroom, took 
seats this year.

  But the administrator drew positive parallels with the 
first meeting, 75 years ago, of what eventually became the 
TRB. About the same number of people attended that first 
meeting, which also was held in a blizzard. Drawing a 
parallel with ITS, he said the TRB started with just a few 
people and a big idea, and it has blossomed into something 
grand.

  While Slater was talking about pathways to the future, 
Christine Johnson, the director of the ITS Joint Program 
Office (JPO) at the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), 
was doing some back-breaking path work of her own -- 
shoveling her way out of her home for five and a half hours. 
"We could have used an intelligent transportation system 
here!" she said.

  Once the blizzard hit, getting into Washington was as 
difficult for residents of nearby suburbs as for delegates 
from overseas. Early in a Monday afternoon session on 
international developments in ITS, 40 people listened to two 
speakers in the same large ballroom used for the morning's 
domestic ITS report. Six presenters and a moderator had been 
scheduled. At many sessions, the presenters who showed up 
actually were pinch-hitters. Speakers introduced both 
themselves and "who they were supposed to be." At a meeting 
of the TRB's committee on ITS on Monday evening, 26 people 
were in attendance. Jim Scott, the TRB's staff person for 
the committee, said this meeting typically draws 200-250 
people.

  Foot traffic to the exhibit hall in the Sheraton 
Washington had to be diverted because two skylights had 
broken over the main entrance to the hall. Unfortunately, 
not many visitors were able to stroll through a special "ITS 
Pavilion" festooned with banners promoting "Operation 
TimeSaver" (see story on page 1) or exhibits devoted to 
federal and state departments of transportation. Those who 
took the alternate route to the exhibit hall could relax and 
monitor outside highway conditions through feeds from the 
Montgomery County, Md. advanced transportation management 
system (ATMS). Watching the video images of roadways was 
like watching fish in an aquarium on cable TV. Highways that 
are usually filled bumper-to-bumper with cars were serenely 
empty. An occasional vehicle would slowly float across the 
screen as a gentle snow continued to fall over the 
Washington area.

  But the task of trekking among meeting venues at the 
meeting was not serene. The TRB meeting took place in three 
hotels -- the Sheraton, the Omni Shoreham and the Washington 
Hilton -- that were to be connected by a shuttle service. 
The shuttle did not run on Monday; signs posted that evening 
said the service would "resume" on the second day. The buses 
began operating Tuesday morning, but as a fresh snowfall 
made the streets even more slippery, the shuttle service was 
abandoned by midday. That left transportation choices of 
taxis, which had doubled their rates and could get stuck; 
the Metro, which was "experiencing delays"; or bundling up 
and going by foot -- usually a wet foot.

  Amidst the adversity, perhaps not surprisingly, spirits 
seemed high among the attendees. Robert Jaffe, who works for 
the Loral Federal Systems team on the national ITS 
architecture, began one session by recounting how a group of 
people waiting for an elevator in a Metro station where the 
escalator was broken learned that most of them were headed 
for the TRB meeting. The group "decided it was an object 
lesson in transportation," he said. But, he added, "I'm not 
exactly sure what the object was."

  Despite the small audiences at many presentations, it was 
possible to see the future flowing into the hall at a 
session called "Information Superhighway: Transportation 
Applications of the World Wide Web and the Emerging National 
Information Infrastructure." Over 140 people squeezed into a 
small conference room, extending through the doorway and 
lining up two deep in the hall to hear this presentation. 
One of the things they learned is that a home page 
dispensing information on travel in Seattle is receiving 
11,000 hits a day. If the home page had been for Washington, 
D.C., the message last week would have been, "Stay home."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NEW OPEN PROTOCOL
DEMONSTRATED FOR
ITS COMMUNICATIONS

  A new protocol in the public domain that allows data 
communications among different types of traffic management 
devices from different manufacturers made its public debut 
at the annual meeting of the Transportation Research Board 
(TRB) last week. Called the National Transportation 
Communications ITS Protocol (NTCIP), it is "the backbone of 
ITS" and will enable its widespread deployment, says Alberto 
Santiago, chief of the Traffic Systems Branch at the Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA). 

  One of the first states to lay the groundwork for that 
deployment will be California. The state has passed a law 
that makes conformance with the NTCIP mandatory for any 
traffic control systems sold there after the first of this 
year.

  People involved in the effort to develop the NTCIP are not 
cautious in assessing its value. It is "probably one of the 
most significant events in 20 years in transportation 
history," says Kenneth Vaughn, task manager for the NTCIP 
effort at PB Farradyne of Rockville, Md., which served as 
systems integrator in the final push to create the standard. 
The FHWA and the National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association (NEMA) have been working cooperatively on an 
open standard for several years. Last year, in an effort to 
accelerate the process, an NTCIP steering group was formed, 
composed of government agencies, systems integrators and 
consultants.

  The work began originally as an effort to develop an open 
standard for communication between different traffic signal 
controllers and traffic management centers (TMCs). But a 
broader vision of possibilities developed. The NTCIP now 
will work "like an Internet to communication devices in the 
field," says Don McWilliams, senior systems analyst at PB 
Farradyne. Besides traffic signal controllers, potential 
devices that the NTCIP will support include variable message 
signs (VMS), controls for video surveillance systems, ramp 
meters, highway advisory radio (HAR) systems, automatic 
vehicle identification (AVI) readers, environmental or 
weather sensors and other vehicle detection systems. Traffic 
management centers can also use it to communicate with one 
another. The work is resulting in "a suite of protocols 
rather than just one protocol," says Vaughn.

  The NTCIP protocol is based on International Standards 
Organization/Open Systems Interconnect (ISO/OSI) procedures. 
It uses existing standards and technology, works with high-
speed and low-speed communications links and supports legacy 
systems.

  The NTCIP will be one of many protocols to come under the 
umbrella of the national ITS system architecture. In one 
session on ITS at the TRB, agencies were urged to include 
the NTCIP in their specifications when they purchase 
equipment. The advice came from Robert Jaffe of the Loral 
Federal Systems team that is working on the national 
architecture. The keys to successful implementation of the 
ITS architecture are "open systems, open systems, open 
systems," he said.

  A new catch phrase that appeared on the lips of many ITS 
officials at this year's TRB is "buy smart." Proponents of 
the NTCIP say that to purchase systems that use the new 
protocol is to buy smart, because it they will prove cost 
effective in the long run.

  The NTCIP steering group is actively soliciting 
suggestions on how to spread the NTCIP gospel to local 
engineers and decision-makers. At the TRB they passed out 
"Surf'n NTCIP" buttons that displayed the address of the 
NTCIP World Wide Web home page: http://www.atms.volpe. 
dot.gov/ntcip/. They also distributed questionnaires asking 
if people had heard of the NTCIP and if they would 
participate in further work on it, plus a "reality check" 
question: "Would you use the protocol as it currently stands 
in a new system? If not, specify why not." Further 
information on the protocol can be obtained by faxing a 
request to Santiago at 703-285-2264.

  As pressure to deploy ITS systems has built up, so has the 
work on the NCTIP. Participants referred to the "lightning 
speed" at which it was finally put together. A year ago 
there was not even a good draft specification, says 
Santiago. PB Farradyne did not charge any fee for work 
specifically on the NTCIP, says Vaughn. The firm is working 
with the FHWA, under a contract worth about $5 million, on 
the development of real time traffic adaptive control 
systems (RT-TRACS). The NTCIP is integral to this work. If 
an additional contract for the NTCIP had been necessary, 
this could have delayed the standard for about a year and a 
half.

  A demonstration of the new protocol at the TRB went from 
idea to reality in four months, Vaughn says. For the 
demonstration, eight different signal controllers and three 
VMS from different manufacturers were linked to one computer 
over one telephone line. Another computer was linked to the 
first computer to show the ability of TMCs to talk to one 
another. Small colored lights representing traffic signals 
on a miniature roadway cycled through green, yellow and red 
either simultaneously or sequentially, depending on how they 
were programmed.

  The first three standards of the NTCIP are currently under 
legal review at NEMA. The FHWA expects to stage field 
demonstrations this summer at various locations. What is 
called the Caltrans version of the NTCIP -- which is already 
mandated -- is now, and will continue to be, in conformity 
with the NTCIP, says McWilliams.

  The NTCIP steering group consists of: the FHWA; the I-95 
Corridor Coalition; the California Department of 
Transportation (Caltrans); the states of Florida and 
Washington; the City of Los Angeles; the Texas 
Transportation Institute; Rockwell/Allen-Bradley Co.; 
Barton-Aschman Associates; DKS Associates; Intersection 
Development Corp.; Loral Federal Systems; and PB Farradyne. 
Other participants include ANSTEC, ARINC, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratories, and Opus One.

  Organizations planning to deploy the NTCIP include the 
public agencies on the steering group and Irvine, Calif.; La 
Mesa, Calif.; Las Vegas Area Computer Traffic System; 
Richardson, Texas; Santa Clara, Calif.; and Dade County, 
Fla., according to a Department of Transportation handout.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

RAYTHEON PROMOTES
STAMP-SIZED RF TAG
FOR ITS APPLICATIONS

  Raytheon Co. in Tewksbury, Mass. is touting a new 35 GHz 
radio frequency (RF) tag the size of a postage stamp that 
can be read by a standard police radar gun. The tag can be 
used in applications involving electronic toll collection 
(ETC), smart parking, smart license plates, automobile 
identification and vehicle registration, the company says.

  In mass production, its cost would be competitive with 
other RF tags, says William McDonald, manager of ITS 
Programs at Raytheon. It's "fair to say that the retail cost 
of the tag would be less than $20," he says. The 35 GHz tag 
comes in two versions. A passive, read-only tag without a 
battery is the one that is the size of a postage stamp. An 
active tag with a battery is a little smaller than a half 
dollar. The communications range of the active tag is more 
than 1,000 feet, depending on where it is placed and on the 
weather, McDonald says.

  A police radar gun would have to be modified to include a 
small flat panel display to convey the information it 
receives from the tag. But since that part of the technology 
is available more or less off the shelf, it would help keep 
the cost of systems integration and deployment low, McDonald 
says. The technology for the system was developed by 
Raytheon's E-Systems Group under government contract. E-
Systems was acquired by Raytheon in the spring of last year.

  "It will be interesting to see if they can penetrate the 
electronic toll market," says Don Davis, associate program 
leader for transportation at the Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, who has done extensive work on automatic vehicle 
identification (AVI) standards at the state and local 
levels. No standard currently exists for ETC, but many of 
the big players, both users and manufacturers, have made 
some choices, he says. In North America, nearly all 
electronic toll collection (ETC) systems use technology 
licensed at 915 MHz; in Europe most systems operate at 5.8 
GHz.

  "At this point in time I think it may be more confusing 
than anything to add yet another option to the menu," says 
Davis. McDonald says he hopes future architectural standards 
will permit a higher frequency range than what is envisioned 
at this point. The situation is fluid and options are 
flexible, he says.

  Unlike transmissions at lower frequencies, transmissions 
at 35 GHz are highly directional and make it possible to 
reduce cross-talk interference between lanes, says McDonald. 
The high frequency also provides a much higher rate of data 
exchange than tags currently used, he says.

  At the top of the microwave or Ka band, where the 35 GHz 
band is located, there are few existing applications, 
reducing the chance of interference, McDonald says. The 902-
928 MHz band, where North American AVI systems generally 
reside, is also used by other services, creating the 
potential for in-band interference. McDonald says he is not 
sure if commercial applications in the 35 GHz range require 
licensing but Raytheon "frequency people" are looking into 
that now.

  The tag could prove appealing to auto manufacturers 
because it is small enough to be placed almost anywhere on 
the vehicle for different uses, he says. "I believe that 
there are a number of car companies at this moment that are 
investigating the use of RF tags for industry use." Tags 
could assist car makers in the assembly process and could 
allow the electronic retrieval of data when a vehicle comes 
in for servicing, he says.

  Communications at higher frequencies could also find their 
way into automobiles through intelligent cruise control 
(ICC) systems, says McDonald. Within a few years, devices 
operating above 60 GHz will be produced and placed in cars 
in production volumes, he says. Another large potential 
market for high frequency tags is in applications involving 
license plates and vehicle registrations. If the tag is 
encrypted with a vehicle identification number (VIN) and the 
owner's ID, police could get an automatic read on the 
vehicle under zero light conditions, he says.

  All of these non-ETC applications could possibly have an 
effect on ETC standards. If a major car manufacturer rolled 
out a significant number of cars with factory-installed 
tags, that could in effect set a standard for future "smart 
cars" and electronic toll payment technology.

  "The industry has seen a lot of wild claims in the past. I 
wonder how real their product is," says Davis. But Raytheon 
has a track record of delivering components of radar 
technology. It has been involved in transponder technology 
for over two decades, McDonald says. It currently makes both 
silicon chips, used in 915 MHz systems, and gallium arsenate 
(GaAs) chips, used in higher frequency systems. Applications 
for its GaAs chips include high frequency intelligent cruise 
control (ICC) for a number of automotive tier one 
manufacturers, he says.

  The Raytheon chip used in the 35 GHz tag has been 
patented. McDonald says he is not permitted to discuss the 
internal technology, which he says is "compatible with 
industry manufacturing techniques."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CONGESTION PRICING
MAKES ITS DEBUT
IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA

  Congestion pricing -- enabled by ITS -- gained a toehold 
last month in southern California with the opening of the 
privately-owned SR 91 Express Lanes. In fact, that section 
of California currently is the only part of North America 
where congestion pricing projects are emerging from the 
planning stage. Public outcry recently halted an ambitious 
collection of congestion pricing programs in the state of 
Washington (see Inside ITS, Aug. 14, 1995). But in addition 
to the new commercial roadway in Orange County, a variably-
priced "HOV buy-in" project in San Diego is moving toward 
initial implementation this spring.

  The SR 91 Express Lanes, developed by the California 
Private Transportation Company (CPTC) in the median strip of 
state-owned SR 91, opened for business Dec. 27. The ten mile 
road is the first in the world to collect tolls entirely 
through electronic means. MFS Network Technologies in Omaha, 
Neb. supplies the electronic toll collection (ETC) system, 
with automatic vehicle identification (AVI) technology 
supplied by Texas Instruments in Attleboro, Mass.

  Patrons pay a variable toll, ranging from 25 cents to 
$2.50, to travel the Express Lanes. The toll varies 
according to a fixed schedule, so that the highest fee 
applies during peak travel periods and the lowest during 
hours when traffic is lightest. Vehicles with three or more 
occupants may use the lanes free of charge at all hours, 
though they must have transponders to validate their status. 
Drivers who do not wish to pay, or who do not have 
transponders, remain on the parallel freeway.

  CPTC is not disclosing either the number of transponders 
it is distributing or the volume of traffic the Express 
Lanes have seen so far -- a privilege it is allowed because 
it is not a public entity. The firm is "very pleased" with 
the response it has received from the public so far, says 
Greg Hulsizer, general manager at CPTC in Anaheim Hills, 
Calif. "We're literally working 'round the clock to fulfill 
all the orders, all the applications for transponders," he 
says, adding that traffic volume on the road has been 
building since the day it opened.

  As CPTC officials expected, the road is used most heavily 
during peak travel hours -- the westbound lanes in the 
morning and the eastbound lanes in the evening, Hulsizer 
says. This is in spite of the fact that the toll is highest 
at those times.

  Patrons who establish toll accounts with credit cards pay 
no deposit for their transponders but must put at least $40 
into a pre-paid toll account. Patrons who use cash or check 
must pay a $30 deposit and start their toll accounts with at 
least $50.

  CPTC officials at one point in their planning had talked 
about using actual traffic levels, as determined by traffic 
surveillance systems, to determine tolls. Under this system, 
the cost of using the lanes at the same hour on Thursday and 
Friday, for example, could have been different if actual 
traffic volumes were different.

  "We do have the capability to do that," Hulsizer says. But 
market research showed that customers "prefer some 
stability," he says. "They would prefer to know what the 
toll is when they wake up in the morning, and when they 
leave work. And so at least for the time being, we've 
decided to try and stick to our schedule."

  A little to the south of Orange County, however, real time 
traffic conditions eventually will determine what drivers of 
single occupancy vehicles (SOVs) pay for the privilege of 
using a high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lane under San Diego's 
planned buy-in program. The price will begin at $2.60 and 
rise as demand increases. "It's going to be run by the 
computer, and it's going to go as high as it needs to go to 
maintain a level of service B," says John Duve, project 
manager, advanced transportation at the San Diego 
Association of Governments (SANDAG).

  A consortium led by SANDAG is conducting the three year 
buy-in project under the federal Congestion Pricing Pilot 
Program, run by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). 
The federal agency is contributing 80 percent of the cost of 
the $16.1 million project, which focuses on an 8.5 mile, two 
lane reversible HOV lane in northeastern San Diego (see 
Inside IVHS, April 10, 1995).

  Participants had hoped to start operating an interim 
version of the system in the fall, but the target is now 
this spring. Among other things, the need to comply with 
regulations springing from an "executive order on 
environmental justice" has delayed the six month planning 
process, Duve says.

  The interim system will operate for six months to a year 
while participants are installing an electronic toll 
collection system. Under the interim system, variable fees 
will not be in effect. Rather, motorists will pay $100 per 
month for a transponder that will allow them to use the HOV 
lane. California Highway Patrol (CHP) officers will use 
portable readers to interrogate the transponders for 
information indicating whether the motorist's account is up 
to date. Single occupancy vehicles with unpaid accounts, or 
without transponders, will be pulled over.

  Participants still have not chosen a vendor to supply the 
ETC system. The California Department of Transportation 
(Caltrans) is responsible for that part of the project, Duve 
says. It's still not clear if the state agency will treat 
the HOV project as an extension to its contract with MFS 
Network Technologies to supply ETC for toll bridges in the 
state, or if it will open a new procurement, he says. Any 
system chosen would have to conform to the Caltrans 
specifications for non-stop ETC.

  It's also not clear yet how many transponders the project 
will require at the outset, but the number is likely to be 
small -- probably 3,000-5,000, Duve says. This is based on 
an estimate of 1,000 cars per hour paying to use the lanes 
during a three hour period when the HOV lane is open. Unlike 
most toll authorities, which distribute transponders through 
special customer service facilities, officials with the San 
Diego project plan to distribute tags through electronics 
retailers such as Radio Shack and Circuit City, he says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

VOICE-BASED SYSTEM
FOR ROUTE GUIDANCE
REACHES THE MARKET

  Two years after it announced it had developed a voice-
based route guidance system, Amerigon in Monrovia, Calif. 
has started shipping production units. Four manufacturers of 
audio compact disc players -- Alpine, Clarion, Eclipse and 
Kenwood -- are selling the "Interactive Voice System" (IVS) 
under their own labels.

  The IVS provides route guidance without the use of a 
vehicle location system. Instead, the user tells the system 
the location of the trip's starting point as well as the 
destination. Once the system generates a route, it provides 
a list of driving instructions, offering them one at a time, 
as prompted by the user. In addition to giving directions to 
addresses the user specifies, it can locate and direct him 
to restaurants, hotels, cash machines, tourist attractions 
and other points of interest stored in its database.

  The system does not include a screen or a set of buttons. 
Instead, it uses a voice recognition system to accept 
commands from the user, and voice output to provide 
directions, prompts and other messages. Amerigon claims the 
system can understand the full range of North American 
dialects and accents.

  Map databases and other software are stored on CDs. To 
operate, the IVS must be connected to a compatible car 
stereo CD system.

  Amerigon's product has undergone several changes since the 
company displayed a prototype at the Consumer Electronics 
Show (CES) in Las Vegas two years ago (see Inside IVHS, Jan. 
31, 1994). The company has abandoned its earlier name for 
the system, AudioNav, in favor of IVS. Each of the CD player 
manufacturers has given the product its own name, but the 
term IVS also appears on their packaging and in the 
software. The term is used to describe the product category; 
"it's sort of like VHS or GPS," says Paula Finnegan, 
Amerigon's sales and marketing manager for navigation 
systems.

  More significantly, the production unit relies on a 
different navigation database than the prototype. Amerigon 
has displayed versions of the system using data from Etak in 
Menlo Park, Calif., and the prototype system has been 
displayed in Etak's booth at trade shows such as the 
exposition at ITS America's annual meeting.

  The unit Amerigon currently is shipping, however, uses 
data from Navigation Technologies (NavTech) in Sunnyvale, 
Calif. Finnegan declines to explain the reason for the 
change. "We have license agreements with both and are still 
working with both," she says. The company could employ data 
from either firm, or both, in the future, she adds.

  Etak's understanding is that "Amerigon has always intended 
to use NavTech for their introductory product, and us for 
later products," says Pamela Crowley, an Etak spokesperson. 
Crowley speculates that when Amerigon decided on this 
course, probably two years ago, "at that point probably 
NavTech had better turn-by-turn data than we did." She would 
not draw direct comparisons between the quality of the turn-
by-turn navigation data available today from the two 
competing firms.

  Other changes include improvements to the speech 
recognition system, provided by Lernout and Hauspie Speech 
Products of Belgium, and the addition of non-volatile random 
access memory (RAM). The latter allows the system to store 
the vehicle's location (as indicated by the driver) when the 
car is shut off. Upon returning to the car, if the user 
immediately wants directions, the system will already know 
its starting point.

  The non-volatile RAM also allows the system to store up to 
ten frequently-used landmarks -- "like a speed dial 
feature," Finnegan says. The stored locations can be used as 
either starting points or destinations. To indicate a stored 
location the user says, for example, "number one," rather 
than following the usual procedure, which is to spell out 
the location letter by letter.

  The four manufacturers are selling the IVS for prices in 
the $600-$700 range. But unless the user already has a 
compatible CD player installed, the real cost of using IVS 
also includes the price tag for the audio system. Kenwood is 
selling the IVS and a CD player in a package as well as 
selling them separately; the other three treat the IVS only 
as a separate product, Finnegan says. Pricing varies among 
the manufacturers and depends on the features of the CD 
system, but the total cost of an IVS and a compatible CD 
player begins at about $1,000, she says.

  The IVS as sold by Kenwood and Eclipse can be linked to 
in-dash CD players manufactured by those companies, 
including systems the user may already have installed. The 
units sold by Alpine and Clarion connect to CD changers that 
are installed as add-ons to a car's existing stereo system. 
Customers buying the system from those companies must buy 
both the IVS and the changer, Finnegan says. Clarion 
customers also have the option of buying a "CD changer 
controller" to link the IVS to a previously-installed CD 
changer and in-dash stereo, she says.

  Whatever price the user pays for the hardware, it does not 
include access to the map databases. The IVS comes with a 
package of CDs containing data for all the metropolitan 
areas currently available. The customer, however, must call 
a toll free number to obtain an 11 digit pass code which 
activates the software. Amerigon charges $80 to activate one 
metropolitan area. Customers who activate more than one 
metro at once receive a ten percent discount on the second 
and subsequent databases.

  Amerigon chose to give away the discs but charge for 
activation, rather than simply sell the discs, largely for 
three reasons, Finnegan says. The first is that this saves 
the company money by allowing it to pack data for several 
metro areas on one disc. The metro database Amerigon uses 
requires less disc space than the corresponding database 
used in a screen-based navigation system because Amerigon 
doesn't need the code necessary to draw maps on screen.

  The second reason has to do with security, Finnegan says. 
The pass code a user obtains is keyed to a particular 
hardware unit. The customer cannot use the disc in a system 
installed in another car. The third reason is that this 
distribution method doesn't require retailers to stock discs 
for all available metro areas as a separate product line, 
she says.

  Databases currently available are: New York/New Jersey; 
Washington D.C./Baltimore; Los Angeles/Orange counties; Los 
Angeles five county extended coverage; San Francisco; San 
Diego; Las Vegas; Chicago; Detroit; and Indianapolis. 
Amerigon says ten additional databases will be available 
this spring. Material NavTech distributed at the ITS World 
Congress in Yokohama, Japan this fall indicates the company 
also has finished mapping Seattle/Tacoma; Sacramento; Santa 
Barbara, Calif.; San Bernadino and Riverside counties, 
Calif.; Phoenix; Denver/Boulder; Houston; Dallas/Fort Worth; 
Atlanta; Miami; Grand Rapids, Mich; and Philadelphia. It 
expects to complete Albuquerque, Austin/San Antonio, 
Minneapolis/St. Paul and Tampa/St. Petersburg this year.

  As new databases become available, Amerigon will market 
them directly to existing customers, Finnegan says. The 
company also will offer annual updates to the databases; 
pricing for those has not been determined, she says.

  Although the system's main function is to help drivers 
navigate, Amerigon had its eye on something more when it 
changed the product's name from AudioNav. "We're calling it 
IVS, Interactive Voice System, and getting away from just 
pure navigation, because there is the possibility of 
additional software titles in the future," Finnegan says. 
These might include guided tours, educational materials and 
children's games, all conducted through voice interaction. 
At the Winter CES in Las Vegas earlier this month, Amerigon 
demonstrated a voice-based game of blackjack "as a proof of 
concept," she says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FUNDING EMERGENCIES,
NEED FOR INNOVATION
CHALLENGED ITS IN '95

  Last year was marked by both ITS funding crises and 
innovative attempts to fund ITS projects. Even as the 
Clinton Administration called for big cuts in spending on 
highways and other transportation infrastructure, the 
President began 1995 by asking the new Congress for close to 
$356 million for ITS programs in fiscal year 1996 -- $66.5 
million more than he requested the previous year.

  Of the new request, $100 million was for a new initiative 
called Trailblazer, which would fund model deployments of 
integrated suites of ITS technology for traffic management 
and travel information. Trailblazer was to be the first 
major foray beyond ITS research, testing and planning into 
the realm of real deployment. Besides this request for a new 
program, the budget was also complicated by the fact that 
the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) proposed a 
reorganization that would consolidate 10 agencies into three 
and restructure its funding mechanisms.

  With budget hearings still in progress, ITS proponents 
were alarmed to learn that the House version of last 
spring's balanced budget resolution called for eliminating 
the federal ITS program entirely. The Senate version of the 
resolution did not mention ITS, but the program took a hit 
over the summer when Clinton signed into law a compromise 
version of a rescission bill that took back, among other 
things, $40.03 million in FY95 funds that the ITS program 
had not yet spent.

  In the transportation appropriation for FY96, the ITS 
program came out with $222.78 million, showing that Congress 
wished to see the program survive, even though it declined 
to expand its funding. Trailblazer received no funding, but 
Congress set aside $10 million to fund operational tests 
whose focus would coincide with the objectives of that 
initiative.

   The tough fight for funding in 1995 could be just a 
prelude to more of the same in 1996. "At this juncture, the 
jury is still out on the question of whether the program is 
a sound investment of federal dollars. Some projects appear 
to be yielding useful results; others are floundering," says 
a report on the federal ITS program released by the U.S. 
Congressional Budget Office at the end of the year.

  As a high-ticket effort that involves years of development 
and a new mode of transportation, the automated highway 
system (AHS) program made an easy target for critics who 
spoke of ITS as "science fiction." The program did obtain 
funding, although at a reduced level, which will extend the 
number of years the effort requires. In November, a year 
after it was selected to lead this effort, the National 
Automated Highway System Consortium (NAHSC) achieved its 
first milestone when it delivered a systems objectives and 
characteristics document. Another long-term effort of the 
DOT, to define a national ITS architecture, moved into its 
second phase when teams led by Rockwell International and 
Loral Federal Systems were chosen from a field of four 
competitors to work cooperatively with the DOT.

  The DOT selected only four ITS operational tests for 
funding in 1995, down from 17 the previous year. The smaller 
scope reflected both the tighter funding situation and the 
DOT's assertion that it is time to move beyond testing and 
focus on deployment. Anticipating higher volumes of 
international traffic due to the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), two of the tests picked in 1995 will 
examine automated border crossing systems for commercial 
vehicle operations (CVO) in California and Arizona.

  A much anticipated CVO test focused on Interstate 75 in 
the U.S. and Highway 401 in Canada officially began its two-
year test period late in the year. Advantage I-75 is testing 
the use of weigh-in-motion (WIM) and vehicle-to-roadside 
communications (VRC) technologies to allow pre-cleared 
commercial vehicles to bypass weigh stations.

  Another operational test was scaled back dramatically in 
1995. The Chicagoland Advanced Driver and Vehicle Advisory 
Navigation Concept (Advance) project, once touted as the 
world's largest ITS operational test, slashed the size of 
its route guidance test from 3,000 to 75 units. Among the 
reasons given by officials was the need to show results and 
the slow development of markets for route guidance systems.

  Cost was a factor in the decision by Greyhound Bus lines 
to remove the radar-based collision warning system it 
purchased from Vorad Safety Systems in 1992. The reported 
success of the system -- that accident rates decreased over 
20 percent in the year after the system was installed -- had 
become a staple of speeches in support of ITS. But Greyhound 
officials said the benefits gained from the technology 
didn't outweigh the cost of keeping them running. Eaton 
Vorad, the Cleveland-based company formed when Vorad joined 
forces with Eaton Corp. in 1993, scored a success last year, 
nevertheless. Freightliner in Portland, Ore. began offering 
the firm's collision warning system as an option on a new 
model truck it introduced this year. Freightliner became the 
first truck manufacturer to offer such a system on a new 
vehicle.

  The past year also saw several efforts to develop 
innovative funding arrangements for transportation projects 
in the U.S. The privately-financed SR 91 Express Lanes 
opened in southern California in December (see story on page 
8). In the Puget Sound region of Washington, the idea of 
congestion pricing has not taken on as well. Public outcry 
put a stop to a cluster of transportation improvements that 
were to be financed through congestion pricing mechanisms, 
using electronic toll collection (ETC) technology to collect 
revenues.

  On the East Coast, the Dulles Greenway, the first 
privately-owned toll road in the U.S. this century, was 
completed in September, six months ahead of schedule. So 
far, however, traffic on the road, which uses an ETC system, 
has been reported far below expectations. The adjoining 
Dulles Toll Road, operated by the Virginia Department of 
Transportation (VDOT), continued its rocky path toward the 
development of its own ETC system, an effort it has had in 
progress since 1990. Last year's events included the 
purchase and delivery of ETC hardware from Combitech Traffic 
Systems in Sweden, which VDOT ultimately decided not to use, 
and the firing of its prime contractor, Cubic Toll Systems. 
Late in the year, Syntonic Technology was appointed the new 
prime contractor.

  Helping to clarify some issues related to standards, the 
Federal Communications Commissions (FCC) issued a long-
awaited ruling on location and monitoring services in the 
902-928 MHz band. This put an end to speculation that the 
FCC planned to move vehicle-to-roadside communications (VRC) 
systems off the band entirely and assign them to higher 
frequencies. The ruling provided relief to many owners and 
vendors of ETC systems in the U.S., which all currently use 
that bandwidth, although it came as bad news to Combitech, 
which opened a U.S. office this year to help promote its own 
ETC systems, which operate at 2.45 GHz and 5.8 GHz.

  Elsewhere in the ETC arena, the president and CEO of 
AT/Comm in Marblehead, Mass. apologized in a letter to the 
chairman of the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority (MassPike) 
for an "overheated" and "offensive" campaign to win an ETC 
contract. The letter blamed the offenses on John Hassett, 
who had recently resigned as president of AT/Comm. MassPike 
awarded the contract to MFS Network Technologies in Omaha, 
Neb. Specifications for the system were based on a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) signed by several 
Massachusetts agencies to provide for interoperable 
electronic toll and traffic management (ETTM) standards 
within the state.

  No fewer than 15 manufacturers displayed navigation 
systems at the Tokyo Motor Show, and more rental cars in 
America added them as options in more markets. But sales of 
the first factory-installed units of Oldsmobile's Guidestar 
reportedly have been slow. The market for navigation systems 
in the U.S. was complicated by a patent dispute involving 
the two major suppliers of map data and navigation software 
for that market -- Etak in Menlo Park, Calif. and Navigation 
Technologies in Sunnyvale, Calif. -- and Zexel USA, a 
NavTech ally whose technology underlies several of the 
onboard route guidance systems currently for sale.

  While funding for ITS was in question through much of the 
year, laborers in the ITS field found the money to attend 
meetings in ever larger numbers. More than 4,500 attended 
ITS America's annual meeting in Washington, D.C. in March, 
and the 156 exhibitors there represented a 60 percent 
increase over the year before. The second ITS World Congress 
in Yokohama, Japan drew 3,400 participants with 
approximately 300 attendees coming from North America and 
just over 300 from Europe. The annual meeting of the 
International Bridge, Tunnel and Turnpike Association 
(IBTTA), combined with the third International Electronic 
Toll and Traffic Management (ETTM) Symposium, drew a record 
crowd of more than 1,100 to New York. The combined Vehicle 
Navigation and Information Systems (VNIS) '95 and Pacific 
Rim TransTech conferences, held in Seattle in July, drew 
about 900 registrants.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

  * Delco Electronics in Kokomo, Ind. has named Trimble 

  * Delco Electronics in Kokomo, Ind. has named Trimble 
Navigation in Sunnyvale, Calif. its exclusive supplier of 
global positioning system (GPS) technology. Under a 
memorandum of understanding recently signed by the two 
firms, they will work together to develop consumer 
automotive products that incorporate vehicle positioning. 
Delco's current offering in this arena is Telepath 100, an 
as-the-crow-flies route guidance system.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

  * Trimble also has secured three new fleet customers for 

  * Trimble also has secured three new fleet customers for 
its automatic vehicle location (AVL) system, which includes 
GPS, a mobile data terminal and base station software. 
American Medical Response in Aurora, Colo. is installing the 
system on 60 vehicles. Peninsula Paramedics in Monterey, 
Calif. is installing it on 22 vehicles. Outreach, a 
paratransit operator based in San Jose, Calif., will install 
it on 40 vehicles.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

  * Delco Electronics staged a press event on Jan. 4 at the 

  * Delco Electronics staged a press event on Jan. 4 at the 
North American International Auto Show in Detroit to 
introduce the "SSC," a concept vehicle integrating much of 
the ITS and other technology the Kokomo, Ind. firm has been 
developing in the past several years. Among other features, 
the car on display in Detroit included: forward, side and 
rear collision warning systems; adaptive cruise control 
linked to the braking system; night vision; emergency 
communications; an anti-carjack system combining vehicle 
tracking and automatic emergency alert; the Telepath 
navigation system; a vehicle to roadside communications 
(VRC) system that provides internal display of messages 
broadcast by roadside transmitters; one-way alphanumeric 
paging and information services; and a head up display.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

  * Rockwell International has signed an agreement with 

  * Rockwell International has signed an agreement with 
Directional Technologies in Troy, Mich. to market and 
distribute Rockwell's Pathmaster navigation system to retail 
dealers and commercial and corporate accounts. Rockwell has 
also signed on Entronix International of Minneapolis to 
provide repair, remanufacture and installation services for 
the route guidance system, which Rockwell is initially 
targeting at fleet customers (see Inside ITS, Nov. 20, 
1995).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

  * Qualcomm in San Diego has signed a contract to provide 

  * Qualcomm in San Diego has signed a contract to provide 
500 of its Omnitracs vehicle location and mobile data units 
to SilverEagle Transport in Jacksonville, Fla. The company 
has begun an initial installation of 300 of the onboard 
units.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
INSIDE ITS via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

National Technical Meeting

National Technical Meeting
Institute of Navigation
Jan. 22-24 
Santa Monica, Calif. 
703-683-7101
Fax: 703-683-7105

1996 Radionavigation User Meeting
U.S. Department of Transportation
Feb. 6
Cambridge, Mass.
617-494-2686
Fax: 617-494-2569

Fourth Annual Wireless Symposium & Exhibition
Penton Publishing
Feb. 12-16
Santa Clara, Calif.
201-393-6289
Fax: 201-393-6297

1986 Radionavigation User Meeting
U.S. Department of Transportation
Feb. 15
Boulder, Colo.
617-494-2686
Fax: 617-494-2569

Moving Forward in a Scaled Back World
Institute of Transportation Engineers
March 3-6 
Dana Point, Calif. 
202-554-8050
Fax: 202-863-5486

ITS Exhibition & Seminar
Commercial Service, U.S. Embassy
March 14-15
Tokyo, Japan
+81-3-3224-5318
Fax: +81-3-3589-4235

GIS '96
GIS World
March 18-21
Vancouver, B.C.
800-447-9753 or 970-223-4848
Fax: 970-223-5700
e-mail: event-info@gisworld.com

Geographic Information Systems for Transportation Symposium
American Association of State Highway 
  and Transportation Officials
March 31-April 4
Kansas City, Mo.
314-751-4641 (Keith McGowan)
Fax: 314-536-2819

1996 SAE Government/Industry Meeting
Society of Automotive Engineers
April 1-3
Washington, D.C.
412-772-7157
Fax: 412-776-0243

Intertraffic 96
RAI
April 1-4
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
+31-20-549-1212
Fax: +31-20-646-4469

6th Annual Meeting
ITS America
April 15-18
Houston, Texas
202-484-4847
Fax: 202-484-3483

8th Road Traffic Monitoring and Control
IEE
April 23-25
London, U.K.
+44-171-344-5477
Fax: +44-171-240-8830

Vehicular Technology Conference
IEEE
April 28-May 1
Atlanta, Ga.
908-562-3878
Fax: 908-981-1769



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>