
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000621-B040-230</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122053745 text/html 26422
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:35:44 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:06 GMT
Content-length: 26235
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te19.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
WORLDWIDE TELECOM via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>GLOBAL ACCESS LAUNCHES SINGAPORE OFFICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(524 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CABLE INDUSTRY NETWORK COMPETENCY CENTER CREATED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(614 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA AGREE TO OFFER&nbsp;DEVELOPMENT SOLUTION FOR APPLICATIONS&nbsp;DEPLOYED ON INTERACTIVE NETWORKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(969 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>TECHNO-THEFT IS COSTING MANUFACTURERS AND CONSUMERS MILLIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1577 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WORLDWIDE TELECOM via NewsNet
January 1996

GLOBAL ACCESS LAUNCHES SINGAPORE OFFICE

As part of its continuing commitment to international
expansion, Global Access Telecommunications Services, Inc., a
leading provider of worldwide satellite and fiber transmission
services for the television and video industry, has opened its
Singapore office.  Global Access' Singapore subsidiary, Global
Satellite and Video Services (Asia) Pte Ltd., headed by Simon
Patch, director of brainess development, Asia Pacific, will
coordinate business for the entire Asia Pacific region.

The newest Global Access office, headquartered in Singapore's
New Tech Park, will be providing broadcast services for a
number of significant customers in the Asia Pacific region,
including ESPN in SingVore, STAR-TV in Hong Kong, and Fuji
Television and Nippon Television in Tokyo. In delivering
satellite transmission services to the Asia Pacific market,
Global Access draws upon 13 years of experience in providing
satellite and fiber broadcast services worldwide.

"As the Asia Pacific broadcast television market explodes,
Global Access is poised to build on the satellite services we
have been providing the region for years," said Jack Morse,
president and CEO of Global Access. "We have experienced staff
with intimate knowledge of the local broadcast market and
issues, and our multilingual Singapore operations center is
seamlessly integrated into our U.S. and U.K. offices. With the
leadership of Simon Patch, we can provide our Asia Pacific
clients with around-the-clock, around-the-world services."

Patch, who brings more than 26 years of experience in the
telecommunications industry to the position of business
development director, has also served as a vice president at
Keystone Communications and business director for Visnews.
Global Access' Singapore-based staff also includes Denise
Lekowski, international services coordinator. Lekowski, most
recently international liaison for Keystone Communications,
brings to the new operation years of expertise in the local
and international market. In addition to its local staff,
Global Access' Boston-based Keith Buckley, vice president,
sales, and Robert McNamara, director, international
operations, will put their combined industry and market
expertise to work for the Singapore operation.

Global Access' expansion into the Asia Pacific arena coincides
with the company's fast-paced European growth. Earlier this
year, Global Access acquired Business Television Services Ltd.
(BTS), a U.K.-based provider of business television and
special event services. BTS, now known as Global Access
Telecommunications Services Ltd., has been fully integrated
into Global Access' European operation, which offers both
business services to major corporations and broadcast services
for news, sports, and special events.

About Global Access

Global Satellite and Video Services (Asia) Pte Ltd. is the
Singapore-based,subsidiary and Asia Pacific headquarters of
Global Access Telecommunications Services, Inc. Global Access
is a leading provider of worldwide satellite and fiber
transmission services for the television and video industry.
In addition to international satellite transponder space
capacity, the company provides television transmission
services via satellite and fiber networks; syndication
distribution services; fixed and transportable satellite
uplinks and downlinks; and coordination and transmission
services for news, sports, business and special events.

Global Access is headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts, USA,
and maintains operations centers in London and Singapore as
well as U.S. regional sales offices in Atlanta, Denver, Kansas
City, Los Angeles, Minneapolis/St. Paul, Pittsburgh and
Washington, D.C.

For more information, call Global Access 617-624-7431



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WORLDWIDE TELECOM via NewsNet
January 1996

CABLE INDUSTRY NETWORK COMPETENCY CENTER CREATED

With the announcement of the Cable Industry Network Competency
Center, Digital Equipment Corporation has positioned itself to
become a driving force in the high-speed data communications
network industry. The Cable Industry Center offers network
consulting, integration, and management services to cable and
telecommunications companies around the world that are adding
high-speed data communications and Internet access to their
existing hybrid fiber/coax networks.

The Cable Industry Center, located in Littleton,
Massachusetts, is a logical outgrowth of the unique technical
and market experience Digital has gained over the past three
years. During that time, 60 high-speed data networks for cable
operators worldwide were installed to provide services to
local governments, schools and colleges, manufacturers,
healthcare institutions and telecommuters.

"We found that customers require both products and multivendor
integration services," said Larry Walker, vice president and
general manager of the Network Product Business Unit,
"therefore we have moved the Cable Industry Center from the
Network Product Business Unit to Digital's Network Services
group where its vast resources can be leveraged."

Graeme Shorter, vice president, Digital Network Services said:
"with this team of individuals we now have the experience,
skills, and knowledge to play a critical role as a partner in
the design, development, and deployment of complex, high-speed
data communications networks in the cable industry. This
market focus is an ideal complement to our existing network
business."

These networks provide users with high-speed access to the
"Information Superhighway," including Internet and on-line
services, as well as the ability to work at home, using
network connections that are 1,000 times faster than
conventional telephone modems.

In one of the initial projects for the Center, Digital
Equipment Corporation, MCI and Colorado Springs Cablevision
collaborated on a successful trial of the nation's first large
scale advanced telecommuting pilot during this past summer.
The Cable Industry Center is also currently working with
several other industry leading cable companies on their plans
to deploy new services.

Center Meets Urgent Need for Timely Network Implementation

Digital has created the Center at a crucial time in the
development of the high-speed data communications market. Many
service providers are now ready to move from the trial phase
to investment in full-scale full-service networks.

At the same time, changes in the regulatory environment are
opening up competition between telecommunications and cable
companies. Through the efforts of the IEEE 802.14 Committee,
the standardization and interoperability of technology for
multiple services over hybrid fiber/coax is fast approaching,
which will meet the needs of the cable industry.

"Multiple Systems Operators feel a great sense of urgency to
deploy networks," said Art Zins, managing director of the
Cable Industry Network Competency Center. "However, they worry
about making short-sighted decisions now that will preclude
other choices later. Our technical and business services can
help our customers implement flexible, modular, and economical
networks that meet their strategic business needs now and in
the future."

Leveraging Network Services and Multivendor Capabilities

The Cable Industry Network Competency Center staff bring with
them the skill and knowledge that was gained through
introducing and deploying Digital's ChannelWorks products
enabling high-speed data transmission over the existing cable
infrastructure.

As part of Network Services, the Cable Industry Center can
meet its customers' needs with cable data solutions that
employ products from multiple vendors. The Cable Industry
Center is establishing alliances with targeted cable modem
manufacturers and will continue to partner with cable
operators and systems integrators, as appropriate, to provide
the best-in-class solution. In addition, the Cable Industry
Center will be able to leverage the expertise of Network
Services' 1,300 network professionals and 40 Network Centers.
Network Services is part of Digital's Multivendor Customer
Services Division.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WORLDWIDE TELECOM via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA AGREE TO OFFER
DEVELOPMENT SOLUTION FOR APPLICATIONS
DEPLOYED ON INTERACTIVE NETWORKS

Mediaplex Application Development System Offers Best Of Class
Cross-Platform Authoring Environment

Digital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (San
Francisco) have forged an agreement to create a development
solution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,
the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.
Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will be
bundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, and
Macromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimedia
applications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximum
revenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part of
their agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in joint
technical development and marketing, and provide technical
support to developers.

"We've already achieved critical mass with the number of
telecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in their
trials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director of
worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and Interactive
Information Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoring
technology with Digital's Mediaplex Application Development
System, we can offer both the platform and middleware strength
of Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoring
capabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkey
content creation solution."

"Because we already have the Director Player running on a
variety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position to
bring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the device
they have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,
Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With their
cost-effective architecture and strong understanding of what
broadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is an
ideal partner."

Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, Sasha
Magee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,
said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already using
Director, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with a
smooth and continuous path to move our business to the
broadband marketplace, particularly because both companies are
committed to delivery on multiple computing and set-top box
platforms."

Complete Authoring Resources

The Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporate
several Macromedia authoring solutions, including Macromedia
Director 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creating
multimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution image
editing and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering and
animation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge by
Sonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content for
the World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an application
for compressing and playing Director files on the World Wide
Web -- is included.

These products will enable developers to create client
applications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fully
integrated with the streaming capabilities of the media
server. For custom client/server applications such as
interactive home shopping, distance learning, and home
banking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit
(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes of
application services on the server.

Robust Content Design and Testing Platform

The Mediaplex Application Development System also includes
complete hardware resources for creating applications,
including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and a
Pentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using this
configuration, developers can design content on the PC and
test their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.
Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia network
extensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, the
World Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments from
Apple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).

The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equipped
with a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of hard
disk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,
and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. A
dual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIX
for testing interactive broadband applications, or Microsoft
Windows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating point
processor capabilities for graphics rendering and video
editing. The Mediaplex Application Development System comes
with Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.

The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentium
processor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB of
hard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,
16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, and
Ethernet connectivity.

Pricing and Availability

The Mediaplex Application Development System, with this full
complement of hardware and software resources, is priced
starting at $33,900, with significant discounts available for
qualified developers, and will be available from Digital in
the first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one year
membership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access to
support forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital's
SDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced as
separate options.

About Macromedia

Macromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts software
tools, offers a full range of products for the Windows and
Macintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include
Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design and
illustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standard
animation and authoring tool for multimedia production;
Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoring
environment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the most
powerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,
the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;
Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design and
editing; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentation
application.

About Digital

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, and
Westminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunications
companies using Digital technology include US West's trial in
Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in the
Northeast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's servers
are also being used in production environments to insert
advertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TV
headends served by Adlink in California, and to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WORLDWIDE TELECOM via NewsNet
January 1996

TECHNO-THEFT IS COSTING MANUFACTURERS AND CONSUMERS MILLIONS

A dozen well-dressed men walk calmly into the front lobby of a
large corporation. Noting the visitors, corporate attire,
employees figure these are legitimate businessmen on their way
to a company meeting. They couldn't be more wrong. Surprising
everyone, the suit and tie executives suddenly pull out
automatic weapons and order employees to lie on the floor. In
a few terrifying minutes, they pillage the company's
computers, remove valuable memory chips and flee with
components having an estimated value of $5 to $12 million!

This latest chapter in an ongoing story of international
intrigue is not a scene from a James Bond movie. California
and is merely a small part of the disturbing trend of rising
computer theft and other "Techno-Crime."

In California's Silicon Valley alone, it is estimated that $1
million in components are lost to Techno-Thievery each week.
Worldwide, overall costs to electronics and insurance firms
are approaching a staggering $8 billion a year and are
expected to soar to $200 billion by the year 2000, according
to the Technology Theft Prevention Foundation in Clinton, New
Jersey.

The Foundation was started by insurance companies who, after
paying out millions in computer theft claims, wanted to
develop ways to curtail the rising Techno-Crime Wave.

According to FBI and other law enforcement agencies who are
working with the Foundation, Techno-Crime can come in many
forms that may or may not be considered thievery. But as far
as theft is concerned, although everything from motherboards
to modems and disk drives are targeted by Techno-Thieves, CPUs
(Central Processing Units) and SIMs (Single In-Line Memory
Modules) represent the crown jewels of computer theft.

"Basically, these parts are non-traceable, said Keith Lowry,
sergeant for the San Jose Police Department. "They are very
liquid just like gold, and the market for resale is fantastic
because there aren't enough products to go around;

It's big business and it's opportunistic," Lowry noted.
Manufacturers and consumers alike are being short changed
because Techno-Crime is having a substantial effect on the
quality of available memory products on both the wholesale and
retail markets.

Although electronic and computer buyers believe they are
getting a good deal, they are frequently getting ripped-off.
And the Techno-Crime Crime itself is sometimes not an obvious
one, such as that mentioned in the beginning of this story;
often the crime is difficult to identify and the price paid
can't be quantified--but consumers are paying the price. For
example, consumers are often attracted to flashy packaging,
which shows a product in its best light. Upon closer
inspection, however, the product within may not live up to the
advance billing given on the box. It is not uncommon for the
module inside not to have been manufactured or assembled by
the company shown. It is important that the consumer knows who
the real manufacturer of the product is and that it is a
reputable company--one that is respected throughout the
industry, no t just at the store on the corner.

"Everybody and their brother is slapping together cheap little
memory products," explained Jim Wong, president of Micro
Solutions, Inc., in Corvallis, Ore., designer of systems for
highly demanding users with specialized applications. "You
have to be very careful about who you buy from and what you
buy." cautioned Wong. "I've heard horror stories from people
who haven't been, but are now our customers because they can
constantly rely upon the quality we provide," Wong said.

With SIMMs comprising up to 50% of a computer system's cost,
and providing much of the computing power, the quality of
memory has become paramount, which has been a boon to
manufacturers putting emphasis on quality.

One such firm is Century Microelectronics, Inc., in Santa
Clara, California. Century, an industry leader in the
manufacture of computer memory, has implemented extra measures
to ensure its memory modules maintain the highest quality
standards.

One way Century does this is by dealing directly with only the
largest, most reputable DRAM manufacturers who have strict
internal controls. Century then adds its own quality
protective measures. For example, each assembled module bears
the Century name to insure strict accountability. The consumer
can clearly identify that the module has been assembled by
Century and not another third party manufacturer with lower
standards. Unless the circuit board manufacturer puts their
name on the board as Century does, there is virtually no way
to trace the product back to the manufacturer when troubles
arise.

Companies like Century use the highest quality components not
just in the DRAM, but in the design and manufacture of the PC
board as well. This philosophy has so far served companies
like Century well in the marketplace where wholesalers,
retailers and consumers have voiced concern over the affect of
Techno-Crime on overall product quality. "A big part of my
business is the ability to give my customers the reliability
that they are getting a first rate part," said Gary Barlow,
owner of RAMTECH in Boulder, Colo., the computer memory
supplier to a majority of users in that area.

"Most of the time price is not the issue as long as you're
reasonable," Barlow explained citing his reason for relying on
Century as his prime memory supplier. "I've been in this
business a long time and I believe Century has the highest
quality parts available," he said. Micro Solutions' Wong who
often utilizes Century products because of their inherent
reliability, agreed with Barlow on stressing quality. "We're
just a small company so what's really important is who our
clients are and the type of machines that we configure," Wong
explained. "We have some pretty major clients like Hewlett
Packard who buy our memory products for insertion into their
own machines so quality is very important to us."

To less scrupulous suppliers, however, price, not quality, is
the primary motivator. Because of competition from makers of
cheap "clone" systems, keeping costs down has become paramount
to both supplier and manufacturer. In this market climate,
even well known original equipment manufacturers (OEMS)
sometimes offer to buy back old memory chips as credit towards
new memory purchases. These suppliers then reuse the memory,
which, since it is used, has a shorter life cycle.

While this might not appear to be an obvious Techno-Crime to
the consumer, such as armed theft or the like, it is, in fact
Techno-Crime in its worst form because while the monetary cost
is just as severe, the crime itself is all but impossible to
detect.

Another factor in the link is when OEMs put pressure on chip
suppliers to step-up production so that increasing market
demand can be met. To please their OEM customers, memory
brokers with limited resources are often tempted to purchase
substandard parts in the "gray market" because they are being
offered a deal that is too good to pass up.

Of particular concern to manufacturers is that substandard
parts within the gray market have often failed to test to
"grade All specification and instead of ending up as scrap or
in a lower performance non-computer application as intended,
the y often end up in machines where they are not up to the
task.

A chip that shows a 60 nanosecond (60ns) rating, for instance,
could really only be able to perform up to a 70ns level.
Pressed for time, unscrupulous suppliers can't be bothered
with checking for quality so substandard memory batches are
either mixed with those having passed inspection, or are
simply remarked with the higher rating that OEMs require.

To remark a product, third party manufacturers will actually
sand the identifying marks off of chips, remark them so that
they appear to be higher performance chips than they actually
are, and resell them to unsuspecting buyers. The
manufacturers, then, end up installing the lower quality
components in their machines because many trust their memory
distributors to bench test the chips. But unfortunately, many
distributors in need of quick revenue unload the components
without testing them. Installed in machines they weren't
intended for, these parts fail immediately, or after a few
months of use.

And while a substandard chip may only cause a computerized toy
to go haywire, it could just as well put a glitch into the
navigational system of a commercial airliner or cause a
surgical device to malfunction, putting patients at risk. Even
if only a small percentage of available computer chips are
faulty, but are resold as acceptable, the implications are
frightening.

Because popular new software programs require more memory than
ever to operate efficiently, technology market analysts say
the demand for memory modules is likely to remain higher than
the supply. Manufacturers will probably continue to experience
periodic chip shortages which will drive up the value of
memory modules, and drive more OEMs into the gray market.
Consumers should understand that they can easily fall victim
to Techno-Thievery without realizing it because Techno-Crimes
are not always obvious. Unless buyers take extra precautions
to ensure the quality of the product they are buying, they run
the risk of purchasing substandard components that could not
be able to perform up to advertised specifications, or could
fail altogether causing disastrous results.

In light of all this, consumer awareness is increasing and the
demand for superior computer components from the highest
quality manufacturers is expected to be greater than ever.

For further information, call John W. Elliott/Robert Basile
(310)374-1940 or Fax (310)374-1440.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>