
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-110</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh73.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015153 text/html 145597
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:49:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:35 GMT
Content-length: 145409
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh73.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Data Management Briefs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Assessing the role of drug companies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(816 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Working for the Common Good</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2612 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>The Scientific Method</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(689 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Newsline</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(773 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>The Big Get Bigger in Latest Clearinghouse Consolidations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(772 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Idaho CHIN Wins Big in New Round of Federal Grants</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1065 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Digest</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(673 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Earning the Public Trust</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1493 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>"What Role Will Speech Recognition Play in Health Care?"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2499 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>The market leader sticks with today's technology</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(228 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>The next generation of software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(776 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>A Healthy Year For Electronic Claims Growth</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1977 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Facing the Outpatient Coding Challenge</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2146 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Putting the Pieces Together</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3351 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Information technology essential to HMO's disease management strategy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(535 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Data Management Briefs


* Columbia Pharmacy Solutions, the Greensburg, Pa.-based pharmacy benefits
manager for Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., has entered a preliminary agreement
with MedE America Corp., Mitchel Field, N.Y., to roll out an electronic
prescription program.  Columbia/HCA, the nation's largest investor-owned
hospital chain, plans to market the program to other providers nationally.

* The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, The Mayo Foundation, The Midwest Rural
Telemedicine Consortium and Texas Children's Hospital have contributed $5,000
each to create The Center for Telemedicine Law.  The Washington, D.C.-based
resource center was designed to explore legal issues that could present
barriers to the increased use of telemedicine nationwide.  Providers, vendors
and others interested in telemedicine issues are invited to join the center
for annual membership fees ranging from $3,500 to $7,000.

* IDX Systems Corp., a Burlington, Vt.-based practice management software
company, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange
Commission to offer more than four million shares of stock at $15 to $17 per
share.  The company is expanding into the clinical information services area
and is testing its Clinical Information System, which automates information
gathering related to treatment.

* The Visible Woman-a three-dimensional, computer-generated female
"cadaver"-has joined her male counterpart on the Internet as part of the
ongoing Visible Human Project by the National Library of Medicine.  Created
from thousands of images collected with radiographic and photographic
techniques, the Visible Woman will enable scientists and medical professionals
to view and study female anatomy in detail.  Information on the project is
available at the National Library of Medicine's World Wide Web page
(http:\\www.nlm.nih.gov).

* Donald Simborg, M.D., a pioneer in electronic health information software,
has joined with two partners to form KnowMed Systems, a Berkeley, Calif.-based
company that will create a data entry and display product that physicians can
use as a replacement for paper charts.

* CIS Technologies, Tulsa, Okla., is the third claims clearinghouse to obtain
national accreditation of its EDI services from the Electronic Healthcare
Network Accreditation Commission.  Since the program began in early 1995, The
Halley Exchange, Bartlett, Ill., and Synaptek, Oklahoma City, also have been
accredited.

* Systems Plus Inc., the Mountain View, Calif.-based publisher of The Medical
Manager physician practice management software, and PCS Health Systems Inc., a
Scottsdale, Ariz.-based pharmacy benefit manager, have agreed to jointly
develop PCS Link.  The software package will give physician users of The
Medical Manager access to two PCS services, Rx Inquiry and Rx Authorization,
for electronically filing prescriptions.

* Visteon Corp.  is the new name for EMed Systems Corp.  The Orlando,
Fla.-based company has introduced BigVision, an ambulatory care software
system for large medical groups that covers clinical, financial and
operational information.  Visteon also closed a $4 million venture capital
financing arrangement with InterWest Partners and Canaan Partners.

* James Pickering, formerly vice president of managed care at National
Electronic Information Corp., Secaucus, N.J., has been named president of
Med-Link, Kendall Park, N.J.  He succeeds Anil Kapoor, who remains with the
company as vice president of administration.

* Managed Care On-Line, a Modesto, Calif.-based on-line service for health
care professionals involved with managed care, has introduced a comprehensive
database of almost 200 managed care and health care-related World Wide Web
sites.  The web site for the service is located at http:\\www.mcol.com.

* HPR Inc., Boston, and Resource Information Management Systems, Naperville,
Ill., have formed an alliance to broaden the market for HPR's Episode Profiler
and Patterns Review software to include RIMS' third-party administrator and
self-insured employer clients.  The HPR software tracks services physicians
provide during the course of care for specific illnesses, as well as general
physician practice patterns.

* Fred Rothenberg & Associates Inc., developers of EZ-Cap managed care
software, has merged with Resource Health Partners, an Exton, Pa.-based health
care software company.  Rothenberg will operate as a unit of Resource Health
Partners.

n PeopleSoft Inc., Pleasanton, Calif., and Shared Medical Systems Corp.,
Malvern, Pa., have entered an agreement under which SMS will market, sell,
install and support PeopleSoft's client/server general accounting, materials
management and human resources/payroll software to SMS' customers and
prospects.

* Phamis Inc., Seattle, developer of the Lastword health care information
system, will distribute a point-of-care critical care information system from
Picis S.A.

* Advanta Systems Inc., a Rockville, Md.-based managed care company, has
changed its name to Amisys Managed Care Systems Inc.  The move is in reaction
to a challenge to the Advanta trademark.  The renamed company planned an
initial public stock offering for December.

* 3M Health Information Systems, Murray, Utah, has introduced a pre-release
version of 3M Coding Reference Software, which will be available early this
year for use with the company's new 3M Coding and Reimbursement System for
Windows.  The software provides on-line coding reference materials linked to
coding pro-cesses in the Windows-based system.  The company also has
introduced 3M All Patient Refined Diagnosis-Related Groups Software, Version
12.0.

* The American Medical Association, Chicago, has endorsed PulseCard, Overland
Park, Kan., as its preferred vendor for card processing services.  PulseCard
will offer electronic credit card processing services to all 475,000 AMA
members as well as 125,000 affiliated members.

* Dynamic Healthcare Technologies Inc., Maitland, Fla., has announced
DynamicVision, a multimedia, client/server electronic health records system,
will be available in June.  The cornerstone of the system is International
Business Machines Corp.'s document imaging software, Medical RecordsPlus/400.

* Lawson Software, Minneapolis, has signed an agreement to integrate and
resell Dallas-based Sterling Software's Gentran EDI software for AS/400 and
Unix platforms with Lawson's enterprisewide business applications.

* Emtek Health Care Systems Inc., Tempe, Ariz., has signed a cooperative
marketing agreement with Medasys Digital Systems Corp., Norcross, Ga., to
market Dx Multimodality, Medasys' medical imaging product, as part of Emtek's
Continuum 2000 clinically based hospital information system.

* Intelus, a Rockville, Md.-based health information management systems
vendor, has been acquired by SunGard Data Systems Inc., a Wayne, Pa.-based
computer service and application software company.  Intelus has introduced
ChartFlo 2000 Clinical Data Management, a client/server, Windows-based system
with modules for medical records abstracting, utilization review, quality
assurance, risk management, infection control and other clinically related
departments.

* Clinitec International Inc., Horsham, Pa., has formed an alliance with
NYNEX, New York, as part of the NYNEX Telemedicine Solutions program.
Clinitec produces NextGen, a pen-based electronic medical records system for
medical practices and provider networks.

* HealthVision Corp., Santa Rosa, Calif., has signed an agreement with
Software Technologies Corp., Braintree, Mass., to remarket STC's DataGate
interface engine as part of its Care Vision Patient Focused Management System,
a computerized patient record/clinical information system.

* Context Software Systems Inc., Burr Ridge, Ill., has introduced CodeLink for
Windows.  The program provides a complete listing of ICD-9-CM, CPT and HCPCS
codes with specialty-specific links between procedure and diagnosis codes.

* Dairyland Computer and Consulting, Glenwood, Minn., has signed an agreement
with Pace Health Management Systems Inc., West Des Moines, Iowa, to market
Pace's Clinical Information System.  The system will enable Dairyland to offer
a clinical pathway/managed care system that captures and reports patient
information from the point of care.

* Micro Healthsystems Inc., West Orange, N.J., has changed its name to US
Servis Inc.  The new name is intended to reflect the company's strategy to
provide comprehensive management services to physician delivery systems and
outpatient networks affiliated with integrated delivery systems.  Also, the
company has transferred stock and warrants in exchange for the Chicago-based
Frontenac Co.'s investment of $6 million.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Assessing the role of drug companies


Health care provider and payer organizations offer mixed reviews about the
entrance of pharmaceutical companies into the disease management market.

Some hail the companies' decisions to provide disease management services,
saying the corporate backing gives credence to the movement and brings the
drug companies' strong information systems and research capabilities to the
field.  Others complain that pharmaceutical companies' so-called disease
management initiatives are only thinly veiled sales and marketing strategies
to sell more of their products and, because of that, their efforts can't be
trusted.

While it remains to be seen whether these hopes or fears are exaggerated, it's
clear that consolidation and the growth of managed care are affecting
pharmaceutical companies' strategies.

Diversification effort

Many drug companies have merged in recent years to form pharmaceutical giants.
These include Glaxo Wellcome Inc., formed in early 1995 by the merger of Glaxo
Inc.  and Burroughs Wellcome; Bristol-Myers Squibb, the result of the merger
of Bristol-Myers and Squibb; and the acquisition of Upjohn Co.  by Pharmacia
AB.

In addition to this horizontal integration, the companies are seeking to
vertically integrate to lessen their dependence on drug sales and to evolve
into health services companies.

As purchasers increasingly question drug costs and seek lower prices, the
pharmaceutical companies are diversifying into many new areas to find new
sources of revenue.  Many have started disease management initiatives to meet
payers' business demands.

For example, Glaxo is seeking to fashion its disease management initiative so
that it encompasses care management, delivering services "beyond just the
period of illness," says Pieter Muntendam, M.D., director of healthcare
management for the Glaxo Research Institute, Research Triangle Park, N.C.  In
that way, Glaxo can play a role in integrating care delivery for specific
diseases, such as asthma and cancer, and provide valuable coordination between
providers and patients, even those recuperating at home, he says.

Pharmaceutical companies are initiating disease management programs so they
can play a role sooner in the care delivery process.  In that way, they're
more likely to share in capitated managed care payments as a value-added
service provider, rather than just supplying the drugs and being dependent on
providers for payment.

Drug makers have expertise in developing treatment plans and in educating
physicians and patients on the proper prescribing and utilization of drugs.
Also, they have experience conducting large-scale studies, and data from those
efforts is often large enough to support outcomes research.

Although some of the companies' diversification efforts hold the promise of
further bolstering disease management research, they're raising red flags
about the drug makers' motives.

Several pharmaceutical companies have acquired pharmacy benefits managers in
recent months, both to vertically integrate and to gain access to the millions
of covered lives the pharmacy benefits managers represent.  Eli Lilly and Co.
has acquired PCS Health Systems, Merck & Co.  purchased Medco Containment
Services, and Smith Kline Beecham acquired Diversified Health Care Services.

With data on millions of people from the benefits managers, pharmaceutical
companies believe they will have huge amounts of information, both clinical
and financial, from which to build evidence-based disease management programs.
Also, pharmaceutical companies plan to use the existing electronic networks of
pharmacy benefits managers when building their disease management programs.

Some managed care organizations are turning to pharmaceutical companies for
disease management services, or they may enter joint ventures to develop
studies on disease management.  For example, Avon, Conn.-based Value Health
Inc., a provider of specialty care management programs, is working on disease
management initiatives with Pfizer Inc.  and Johnson & Johnson.  Value Health
executives say they see the ventures as ways of diversifying into new areas of
medical services.

Limiting factors

Many large HMOs and integrated delivery systems will use their own information
systems to develop disease management programs, rather than turn to the
pharmaceutical giants, says Richard Kipp, senior consulting actuary for
Millman & Robertson, a Radnor, Pa.-based consulting firm.

The market for large-scale disease management may be limited for at least two
reasons.  First, many providers contend that treatment protocols, a basic
building block of disease management programs must be developed by those who
will use them, namely the doctors.  Second, as programs are developed for
diseases that are common targets of disease management, such as asthma and
chronic heart failure, the approaches could be standardizing, reducing the
need for outside organizations to develop and implement them.

Pharmaceutical companies' disease management efforts may be tainted by fears
surrounding their acquisition of pharmacy benefits managers.  Providers now
are leery because they say pharmaceutical makers' hidden agenda is to sell
more of their own products.

Julie Bonello, CIO at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, doesn't believe
pharmaceutical companies should or will play a large role in disease
management.  "I think pharmaceutical companies could augment disease
management, but it should be driven by physicians," she says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Working for the Common Good


Friends and colleagues of Larry Blevins delight in teasing him about his
passion for technology.  "They tell me that if I have a garage sale, they want
to know because I've always got so many gadgets," says Blevins, senior vice
president of information technology at Harris Methodist Health System, an
integrated health care delivery system based in Arlington, Texas.  "I love to
take things apart to see how they work."

That's just the nature of Blevins, a man with an insatiable curiosity-"when I
cease to learn, I'm ceasing to live"-and an intense desire to use his
knowledge to help others.

Information technology is fascinating, he says, but its value lies in its
ability to solve problems and improve the common good.  That's the bottom line
for Blevins, who emphasizes the need to give something back to his community.

Community focus

Altruistic or not, sensitivity to a community need is vital to the success of
many ventures, particularly community health information networks that enable
the on-line, real-time exchange of a variety of data, he says.

Without a common focus on an unmet community need, CHIN initiatives won't
survive the political or economic squabbles that are almost certain to erupt
among would-be participants, Blevins says.

"Look at all of the CHINs that have been started," he says.  "They've all had
wonderful intentions but then often lose focus.  Why are they doing a CHIN?
Is it because of a community need or a desire to gain competitive advantage
and increase profitability?  If it's the latter, then it's extremely difficult
to bring about anything that will really work because everyone is viewing it
as a competitive tool."

CHIN developers would have more success, Blevins says, if they first
identified a community need affecting all participants and then built a
network to meet that need.  "If you bring it from a community need, from a
social need, you have a common bond."

Blevins says that approach is working in Tarrant County, where he is heading
an effort by 40 social service agencies to build a CHIN.  A desire to increase
the immunization rate of children is one major reason behind the networking
initiative.

The electronic exchange of information via the network will enable social
workers and providers to develop methods to ensure that more children receive
immunizations.

"This is a good example of meeting a community need," Blevins says.  "Believe
me, serving the community is not a competitive or political issue if you're
serving from the heart."

Community service has long been a guiding light for Blevins, who initially
selected a career in law enforcement because he thought it represented a way
for him to repay his community for providing Little League and other
activities in which he had participated as a boy.

Fate intervened, arresting his career with the Arkansas State Police about a
year after it began.

During a trip to visit his brother in Wichita, Kan., Blevins, on a lark, took
a computer aptitude test.  Seventy-two people took the test, administered by a
local aerospace company.  Only Blevins got a job offer.

"I thought it was interesting, and I've always been curious about things,"
says Blevins, who began learning the intricacies of International Business
Machines Corp.'s models 1620 and 1130 as well as other leading mainframe
computers of the mid-1960s.

"I took advantage of an opportunity that was very unusual at the time," he
says.  "It wasn't like I thought all my life I'd want to be a computer person.
In fact, I never had a computer class in school.  But once I started reading
about it, my curiosity became piqued, and I continued down the road."

That road led two years later to a job at Sperry Univac Corp.  (now known as
Unisys Corp.), which provided a different exposure to computers.  While
Blevins had seen computers used in highly focused applications, such as
testing parts for aircraft, his new role gave him a business perspective on
computers.

"I loved solving problems and interacting with customers so much that I moved
to the world trade division, which would dispatch me anywhere they had a
particular problem, whether it was customer dissatisfaction or a machine that
wouldn't work.  It was my job to work through that and get it back on track."

Recognizing a need

Blevins worked with customers in a variety of industries.  But, in health care
in particular, he recognized a need for far more computerization than existed
at the time.

"I thought the computer could serve health care in a much broader manner than
just financials," he says.  "I could see the movement of a tremendous amount
of paper and the need to be able to share information pertinent to care."

In 1972, Blevins got his chance to bring more computerization to health care.
He joined 442-bed Sparks Regional Medical Center in Fort Smith, Ark., as vice
president of information services.

For the next 10 years, he guided the development, operation and maintenance of
the medical center's information systems.  In the evenings, he taught computer
science and management classes at College of the Ozarks, a local community
college.

"I like to interact with our young people because they have inquisitive
minds," he says.  "They're not necessarily polluted with ideas that have
already been established.  They're curious, and they keep the older generation
young with their questions."

Blevins enjoyed his job, his teaching and his circle of friends, but, in 1982,
he couldn't resist an opportunity to have an even greater impact by shaping
the automation initiatives of Harris Methodist, a much larger health care
organization with aspirations of becoming an integrated health care delivery
system.

"In visiting with Harris Methodist President Ron Smith and listening to his
vision of where he felt that health care was going and where he wanted to lead
Harris Methodist Health System, I knew that I would like to be a part of
that," he says.

"To do what we wanted to do, we needed to see significant, measurable change
in information technology areas," Smith says.  "We saw in Larry the ability to
lead us in the development of technology that would allow us to meet our
market objectives."

Automation strides

Blevins believed he could make a major contribution by building an electronic
infrastructure that would link the various providers that Smith envisioned
adding to Harris Methodist.  Such an infrastructure would support the on-line,
real-time collection, storage and exchange of administrative, financial and
clinical information necessary to achieve efficiencies, reduce costs and
improve the quality of patient care.

But that would be a big job.  Like many other health care organizations,
Harris Meth-odist had not pushed automation much beyond administrative and
financial transactions, with information exchanges typically occurring in
batches.

"We needed to develop a clinical direction, so we mapped out a master patient
index and a repository with data related to treatment or any other interaction
with the system," Blevins says.  "We didn't know we were building the basics
of what is being defined today.  We were just defining the information we
needed, how we needed to move it and how it could benefit the community and
the organization."

Today, Harris Methodist operates eight hospitals with 1,297 beds, a managed
care plan with 200,000 enrollees, a physician hospital organization and a
number of other provider sites.  All are linked electronically by a local area
network that provides on-line, real-time access not only to computer-based
patient records but also data bases built exclusively for clinical analysis
and outcomes research.

Although it was one of the first integrated health care delivery systems to
build an enterprisewide network and to begin work on computer-based patient
records, Harris Methodist "still has a long way to go," Blevins says.  "In
fact, I don't think we'll ever be done.  It's not like a house where you put a
roof on and you're done.  The end point is not definable because the
environment in today's business world and tomorrow's business world is not
definable."

Blevins, who is part of Harris Methodist's senior management team, is credited
with the development of information technology that has contributed to his
organization's growth.  "We value him highly," Smith says.  "The effectiveness
of his leadership is one of our strategic enablers."

Fellow CIOs also speak highly of Blevins.  "Larry has been a valued friend and
colleague for a number of years," says Larry Grandia, vice president of
information systems at Intermountain Health Care, an integrated health care
delivery system based in Salt Lake City.  "He has done some impressive things,
applying technology in very important ways.  There is no question that he has
made significant contributions to the industry and to the professional
organizations to which he has donated his time."

Grandia and Blevins are members of many of the same professional
organizations, including Health Information System Executive Association, a
30-member organization open only to the nation's top CIOs.

With change being a constant both in health care and technology, Blevins is
wary of designing obsolescence into an information system.

"Know that whatever you install today in 90 days won't represent the
technology of tomorrow and, therefore, probably won't represent the solution
of tomorrow," he says.

Health care organizations can help guard against obsolescence by selecting
information technologies that provide flexibility.  Blevins is a big fan of
object-oriented programming, for example, because its modular nature enables
computer programmers to change codes easily.

"We incorporated it in our interface engine design," he says.  "It saves us a
lot of time and trouble in rewriting communication structures for different
information systems."

Open systems

Flexibility also makes open systems the logical choice for health care
organizations that want to be able to use the products and services of
multiple vendors.

"Proprietary systems lock you into a particular type of company and the way it
is employing the technology," Blevins says.  "We didn't allow that to happen.
We still don't today."

Health care organizations must be careful, though, when shopping for open
systems.

"Many vendors say they are Health Level Seven-compliant, for example, and a
look at the basics may indicate that, yes, they are.  However, because of the
way in which they have interpreted HL7, their products may not be plug and
play," he says.

That does not mean, however, that Harris Methodist believes it must program
everything itself.  That's expensive and time-consuming, says Blevins, who
prefers to build long-term relationships with vendors that are willing to work
closely with Harris Methodist to meet its needs.

Among the companies with which Harris Methodist has long-term relationships
are Compaq Computer Corp., IBM Corp., Microsoft Corp.  and Ungermann-Bass Inc.

To foster long-term partnerships, Blevins recommends structuring agreements in
which the customer and vendor share both in the risks and the rewards.

For example, Harris Methodist has at least one agreement in which a software
vendor's licensing fees are based on revenues attributable to the use of the
software.  If the health care system makes more money by using the software,
the vendor earns more in licensing fees.

An incentive-based agreement such as this one gives vendors a vested interest
in Harris Methodist's future and encourages the development of long-term
relationships, Blevins says.

"I need someone that is there for the long term.  I need someone that has an
investment in my future," he says.  "That may mean changing the way we do
licensing, for instance.  Why not license per patient day or per member per
month cost?  Why not share in that deviation of business?  I'm not saying all
those ideas are right, but we should involve more of the vendors as partners
because that's really what we are."

Forming and maintaining long-term relationships with trusted vendors is vital
in weathering the changes that are sure to come in health care, says Blevins,
who jokes that CIO stands for "change information officer."

Preparing for change

"You're always designing to position yourself for change," he says.  "You
should never be designing for the problem as it's stated.  You should be
designing for the change of that problem because that, I can assure you, is
what will happen."

While change information officer is a good description of a CIO, a better
title is continuous improvement officer, says Blevins, a practitioner of the
management theory that emphasizes constant evaluation and improvement of
systems and procedures.

"A CIO must be a combination of a business and a technical person," he says.
"He or she must be a change agent as well as a business person with a
technical understanding."

And ideally a CIO applies those skills to health problems besetting a
community, which is what Blevins is doing in his work to develop a CHIN for
the area's health care and social service providers.

"Harris Methodist is a business and we must make money, but we really do have
a commitment to the community," Blevins says.  "I am part of that community.
My daughter is part of that community.  My grandchildren will be part of that
community.  And hopefully their grandchildren will be part of that community."

"Building something that helps the community, working with a group of
professionals that increases my knowledge of health care issues, those are the
kinds of things that make me want to get up in the morning and come to work,"
Blevins says.  "Where I put my time is very important, and, quite frankly, if
I didn't enjoy my job, if I didn't look forward to building, if I didn't look
forward to doing something today that gave back, I would change jobs."


Devising a practical CHIN strategy

When Larry Blevins shared his idea for a community health information network
with provider organizations in the Fort Worth, Texas area, he got a cool
reception.  Undaunted, Blevins started over, developing a new network-building
strategy and rallying support from local social service agencies instead.

Forty social service agencies, all funded in part by the United Way of
Metropolitan Tarrant County, have agreed to form what's being called a "human
service information network" to address health and social needs in the county.
Blevins remains hopeful that area health care providers eventually will join
the network.

Among the community projects that the emerging CHIN could address, Blevins
says, are tracking childhood immunization rates, measuring the outcomes of
certain cancer treatments, analyzing health care trends to develop wellness
programs and sharing computer-based patient records.

The networking project originated a year ago when Harris Methodist Health
System, abandoned plans to lead the development of a CHIN focusing on health
care financial and clinical transactions.  Harris dropped its original plans
because of its competitors' wariness about Harris' motives, concerns over
cost, widespread confusion among potential participants about what a CHIN is
and the largely unsuccessful experiences of CHIN developers in other markets,
Blevins says.

Faced with the lack of support in the health care community but convinced that
an electronic network could help meet public health needs, Blevins turned to
the United Way membership.  The strategy was a natural because Blevins serves
as chairman of the United Way's information technology committee.  "Where
better to start than the social service agencies that are funded to help our
community?"  he says.

United Way is developing the network to connect the agencies it funds and to
eventually build links to health care players, such as Harris Methodist, large
employers and not-for-profit agencies.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Scientific Method


For several years, librarians at the health sciences libraries of the Big 10
universities tried to gather relevant information on the Internet.  But
finding Internet-based information through Internet or World Wide Web search
engines proved disappointing to the librarians because engines search
primarily by terms only, finding plenty of essential as well as irrelevant
information during a single search.

To put an end to the time-consuming and often frustrating search process for
both themselves and their patrons, the librarians began developing Web home
pages that would cull and display or point the way to information on the
various health sciences fields.

But when the librarians realized they were duplicating efforts of their peers,
they decided to band together to create and maintain one Internet-based health
sciences information resource for everyone, including non-university health
care professionals.  The result is HealthWeb, a Web page that eventually will
present myriad educational, clinical and statistical data covering the three
dozen health sciences fields, running the gamut from general surgery and
occupational therapy to health care administration and informatics.

HealthWeb's mission is to present an easy-to-use and focused resource that
points health care Internet users to health sciences data that they otherwise
might have difficulty finding, says Julia Kelly, reference librarian at the
University of Minnesota Bio-Medical Library in Minneapolis and co-facilitator
of HealthWeb.

"The material included in HealthWeb is selected by librarians and health
sciences staff based on its significance to a particular health sciences
field," Kelly says.  "Entries in HealthWeb include descriptive annotations to
help users fully and immediately understand what information is being
presented.  Users get a one-stop shopping place for all their Internet-based
health sciences information needs."

The "one stop" is HealthWeb's reason for being, as searching the vast and
highly disorganized Internet for a specific piece of information is not easy.

"I do Internet searches for a living, and it is a mess," Kelly says.  "Search
engines are not systematic.  People mounting data on the Internet do not title
their data in effective ways.  Ultimately, searching is a hit-or-miss,
time-consuming chore.  HealthWeb alleviates the search process for users and
provides them a clear guide to the information they need."

Divide and conquer

Because the health sciences represent an enormous industry, participating
universities in HealthWeb opted to divide and conquer the task of creating the
health sciences Web page.  Each school is responsible for "areas of
excellence," health sciences fields for which individual universities are best
suited because of their resources and expertise.  The universities create the
field-specific Web pages that users can access via the HealthWeb home page.

Field-specific Web pages that now are up and running include:  a nursing page,
created and maintained by the University of Michigan; a minority health page,
by Michigan State University; and a radiology page, by Indiana University.

Sites due early this year include:  a consumer health page, by the University
of Illinois-Chicago; and an oncology page, by Indiana University.  Sites that
could be added later this year include:  a health care administration page by
the University of Michigan and a health informatics page by either the
University of Michigan or Indiana University.

Northwestern University maintains the HealthWeb home page.  Other
participating universities include:  the University of Minnesota, the
University of Iowa, the University of Wisconsin, Purdue University, Ohio State
University, Penn State University and the University of Chicago.

To access information, users enter the address for HealthWeb,
http:\\www.ghsl.nwu.edu\healthweb, into a Web browser to get to the home page.
From there, users select a field-specific page that reflects their interests.

"A nurse can select the hyperlink from the home page to the nursing page to
access information from a listing of all the Ph.D.  programs in nursing in the
nation to newsletter articles to consumer information from professional
associations.  And it is all free of charge," Kelly says.

As more field-specific pages are created over time, the usefulness of
HealthWeb will grow.  "Internet resources need to be found and evaluated for
their usefulness," Kelly says.  "HealthWeb does that so health care Internet
users don't have to."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Newsline


A bill designed to protect the privacy of medical records has created
divisiveness in the health care community.  Consumer advocacy groups, some
clinicians and others argue that the Medical Records Confidentiality Act of
1995 doesn't go far enough.  But proponents say the bill represents a
tremendous improvement over the current patchwork of state legislation on the
issue.

Critics of the bill say it contains too many exemptions to prohibitions
against transmitting patient-identifiable information.  And they contend that
the bill encourages the development of huge medical databases for the purpose
of further disseminating identifiable information, although nowhere in the
bill are these databases sanctioned.

Leading the opposition are the 40,000-member American Psychiatric Association
and two consumer advocacy groups:  The Center for the Study of Responsive Law,
formed by Ralph Nader, and the 75,000-member Public Citizen group.

The American Medical Association and the American Civil Liberties Union have
reservations about the legislation but haven't taken formal positions.

And two organizations, which were among 13 that signed a letter to the U.S.
Senate in October supporting the bill, now are having second thoughts about
that support.  Leaders of both groups-Bazelon Center for Mental Health Care
and New York Public Interest Research Group-say they signed the letter in
support of the concept and intent of the legislation, but the bill as written
is seriously flawed.

In contrast to critics who say the bill doesn't go far enough, some groups
that helped draft the bill say it goes too far in certain areas.

For instance, the Association for Electronic Health Care Transactions, an
electronic data interchange trade group, has serious reservations about some
provisions.  Language that places claims clearinghouses under strict
requirements to receive patient authorization to transmit claims and related
data electronically is unrealistic and would cause the price of claims
processing to skyrocket, says Jeanne Schulte Scott, chair of the association.

The provisions

Sponsored by Sen.  Robert Bennett (R-Utah), S.  1360 gives all Americans the
right to examine their medical records and request corrections.  The bill also
identifies persons or organizations that come into contact with identifiable
medical information as "health information trustees" and lists circumstances
under which information may be released.

Supporters of the measure include the Center for Democracy and Technology,
Association for Electronic Health Care Transactions, AIDS Action Council,
American Health Information Management Association, American Hospital
Association, and American Association of Retired Persons.

"Every group that signed the letter to the Senate believes the bill can be
strengthened," says Janlori Goldman, deputy director of the Center for
Democracy and Technology, a consumer advocacy group that studies privacy and
technology issues and was a driving force behind the legislation.  "We have
time to make sure the bill is as strong as it can be.  But if it passed today,
it would be a tremendous improvement over current practice."

But others say that legislation usually is weakened, not strengthened, as it
moves through Congress.  "We tend to believe it's not going to get tighter as
it goes through the process," says Lauren Dame, staff attorney for Public
Citizen's health research group.

Critics argue that some major health information services companies played a
part in drafting the bill to make sure it protected their interests.

They argue that such companies as Equifax, an Atlanta-based credit reporting
agency that's now involved in health care electronic data interchange, want to
develop huge databases and sell medical information to employers and insurers.

But Equifax says that charge isuntrue.  "We had zero role in putting the
legislation together," says John Ford, vice president for privacy and external
affairs at Equifax.  The company, which was among the first in the health
information services industry to develop and disseminate a set of
confidentiality principles, supports the concept of the bill but hasn't
finished a full assessment, Ford says.

Perceived weakness

One of the biggest weaknesses in the current bill, critics contend, is that it
provides too many exemptions to the stated prohibitions against transmitting
identifiable information, especially to law enforcement agencies and
researchers.

"The bill doesn't do what it purports to do," says Harold Eist, M.D.,
president-elect of the American Psychiatric Association.  "It gives away more
than it protects."

Eist and others worry that as more medical records are computerized, genetic
information will fall into the hands of employers and insurers-information
that, for instance, could show that a person has a higher-than-average risk
for breast cancer.

Goldman dismisses that argument.  "The Bennett-Leahy bill not only doesn't
sanction the development of computerized medical databases, it regulates and
limits them," she says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Big Get Bigger in Latest Clearinghouse Consolidations


The electronic claims clearinghouse industry closed 1995 with a bang with the
announcement of two major takeovers.  Both of the deals involve companies with
a strong presence in pharmacy electronic data interchange acquiring EDI
expertise in other areas.

Envoy Corp., Nashville, Tenn., announced Nov.  30 a definitive agreement to
acquire National Electronic Information Corp., Secaucus, N.J., for $89 million
in cash.

Earlier in November, National Data Corp., Atlanta, agreed to acquire
Conceptual Systems Corp., Cleveland, under terms that weren't disclosed.

Although clearinghouses have been consolidating in recent years, the latest
deals may signal the start of consolidation among some of the largest players
in the health care EDI market.  The industry is consolidating because of the
economies of scale that can be achieved by transmitting huge volumes of data.

"I don't see it as an aberration but as part of a continuing cycle," says Lee
Barrett, president of Barrett Consulting Group, Middletown, Conn.

NEIC's future

Envoy expects to complete its acquisition of NEIC early this year after its
shareholders vote on the plan.  Plans call for NEIC to become a division of
Envoy, with Richard Caliri remaining as NEIC's CEO.

NEIC's owners include several of the nation's largest commercial insurance
companies.  One of the largest clearinghouses for physician, hospital and
dental claims, NEIC processes more than 7 million claims each month.

In buying NEIC, Envoy gets a national clearinghouse that serves as a central
point for most claims destined for major commercial insurance companies.
NEIC's recent acquisition of Synaptek, a physician claims clearinghouse, and
an alliance with Claims Processing Service, a dental claims clearinghouse,
gives it the capability to process claims destined for most payers.

Envoy processes more than 34 million claims per month, mostly for
prescriptions.

Earlier attempts by the company to diversify its health care transactions
business include purchasing a stake in EMC*Express, a hospital claims
clearinghouse, in 1993 and National Computer Claims Services, a dental claims
clearinghouse, in 1994.  Envoy's next step likely will be to increase its
hospital claims clearinghouse capability, starting with exercising its option
to purchase all of EMC*Express, says James Kever, co-CEO of Envoy.

Excluding pharmacies, Envoy has links to 11,000 providers, compared with the
more than 150,000 providers linked to NEIC, industry observers say.

For more than two years, NEIC has been attempting to build on-line, real-time
transaction capability by creating its Health Care Information Network,
designed to meet the needs of managed care.  NEIC's efforts in this area could
benefit from Envoy's experience in processing on-line, real-time pharmacy
transactions.

The commercial insurance companies that own NEIC determined that long-term
success in the EDI field requires significant volume-and that requires
consolidation, Caliri says.  The owners also determined that owning an EDI
company was peripheral to their core business, he adds.

Envoy reportedly received $180 million when it sold its financial transactions
processing business in May to First Data Corp.  But the downsized Envoy lost
more than $2 million during the first nine months of this year on $18.9
million in revenues.

In comparison, NEIC officials have told executives at other claims
clearinghouses that the company expects to earn $5 million to $6 million this
year on revenues of approximately $40 million.  Once heavily subsidized by its
owners, NEIC has made a profit for at least the last four years, Caliri says.

To finance the deal, Envoy has secured debt and equity financing from General
Atlantic Partners, First Union Capital Partners, First Union National Bank of
North Carolina and NationsBank.

National Data deal

Like Envoy, National Data Corp.  is bolstering its effort to diversify its
health care electronic data interchange services with its latest acquisition.

The pending purchase of Conceptual Systems Corp.  will give National Data
electronic connections to physicians and hospitals, adding to National Data's
core strength of providing electronic transactions to pharmacies.

Conceptual Systems, which processes more than 800,000 claims per month for
hospitals and physicians, will be a wholly owned division of National Data and
will continue to be headed by Nicholas Rosenstein.

The purchase is the latest in a line of acquisitions made by National Data to
diversify its health care services.  Since July 1994, National Data has bought
Lytec Systems, a physician and dental practice management vendor; Zandall
Systems Group, a pharmacy practice management software company; Learned-Mahn,
a hospital EDI software company; and Claim*Net, a physician claims
clearinghouse.

Acquiring Conceptual Systems adds expertise in processing hospital claims to
National Data's mix of services, says Craig Eilermann, director of medical
sales and services for National Data.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Idaho CHIN Wins Big in New Round of Federal Grants


A community health information network born out of one CIO's frustration with
the challenge of bringing costly technology to rural America has attracted
support in high places.

The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, a unit of the
U.S.  Department of Commerce, awarded the Southern Idaho Medical Information
Network a two-year matching grant of nearly $1.7 million, more money than any
of the 12 health care projects for which it announced grants in November.  The
grants, totaling nearly $4.7 million, are through the Telecommunications and
Information Infrastructure Assistance Program (see chart).

Federal officials like the proposed network because it demonstrated an
excellent understanding of how technology can address public health issues,
says Steve Downs, a program officer at the Commerce Department unit.

"We really expect this to be a national model of how to implement a CHIN,"
Downs says.  "We see them as pioneers, and we expect other communities,
particularly rural communities across the country, to follow them and benefit
from the lessons that are learned from Idaho."

The health problems the network plans to address include:

* Improving childhood immunization levels and inaccurate immunization records
through better recordkeeping, collection and sharing of information from
multiple sources.  * Improving care to low-income, nutritionally high-risk
women and children younger than age 5 by enabling the public health agencies,
pediatricians and physicians to have immediate access to medical histories.

The project originating when David E.  Garets, CIO of Magic Valley Regional
Medical Center, recommended that his hospital spend more than $6 million for a
new, more robust clinical information system.  Although the hospital is the
largest in southern Idaho, management decided it couldn't afford the hefty
price tag.  Undaunted, Garets started over to devise an alternative.

The CIO knew that the other, even smaller, hospitals in the region had
virtually no computerization in place.  So he came up with a plan to help the
rural provider organizations enter the automation age together.

The end result:  An $18 million community health information network
initiative that already has $12.5 million in financial support, including a
$1.7 million federal matching grant, firm financial commitments from two
hospitals and tentative commitments from three others.

In June 1994, Garets led the formation of the network, which also will serve
northern Nevada.  He chairs the network's board.

Unusual approach

Like other CHINs, the Idaho network eventually hopes to handle a broad range
of clinical and financial transactions.  But unlike other CHINs, the Idaho
project will enable many participating small hospitals and remote physicians'
offices to gain access to information systems for the first time through links
to two data centers.

Providing access to information systems to hospitals and physicians that lack
computerization was a key to rallying support for the network, Garets says.
He convinced the providers that they might not survive the advent of managed
care without clinical information systems, and that cooperation was the only
way they could afford to acquire such systems.  He also assured them that an
independent board, and not Magic Valley Medical Center, would own and control
the network and the related systems.

The network is in final contract negotiations with HBO & Co., Atlanta, which
tentatively has agreed to provide its Pathways 2000 clinical networking
software at a significant discount to the hospitals participating in the
network, Garets says.  HBOC, which declines comment until the contract is
signed, views the Idaho project as a testbed for applying its software to the
formation of CHINs, Garets says.  The network also will use HBOC's Star
hospital information system where appropriate.

Data centers

The network will build two data centers that will give hospitals access to
HBOC software over an on-line, real-time private network.  In that way,
hospitals will avoid making a heavy investment in hardware.  Some 27
physicians will gain access to HBOC's computer-based patient record software
and Scientific Data Management's practice management software through links to
the data centers.

The data centers will be located at US West headquarters in Twin Falls and at
Elko (Nev.)  General Hospital.  In addition to the HBOC systems and several
other software systems, the centers will house centralized data repositories.
But the network hopes to eventually build a "virtual repository" based on
distributed databases, Garets says.

US West will provide the telecommunication links for the network in southern
Idaho.  AT&T will provide the connections between southern Idaho and northern
Nevada.  Lockheed Martin Idaho Technologies will coordinate the network design
and management and perhaps provide integration engine technology.

"We're trying to improve medical care delivery in rural America, and in order
to do that, you have to provide solid clinical systems, and none of us here
have that," Garets says.

Beyond providing access to clinical systems, the network initially will focus
on the exchange of clinical information to support outcomes research aimed at
reducing the cost of care in all settings, Garets says.

In the first phase, to be completed by October 1998, the network hopes to
offer access to several information systems at five hospitals, two public
health agencies and the 27 physician sites.

But the network will be open to any provider who wants to participate,
including physicians, pharmacies and public health agencies.  Garets hopes the
network eventually will expand to cover all of Idaho as well as parts of other
bordering states.

Financial support

So far, 27 physicians, two public health agencies and two hospitals have
committed a minimum of $11 million in funding for the five-year networking
project.

Convinced that the cooperative effort offers the most efficient way to make
full use of information technology throughout the region, Magic Valley
Regional Medical Center has committed $8.2 million to the networking project.
Only if every provider is linked to the network can the medical center achieve
its vision for promoting health in a large rural area served by independent
providers, Garets says.

Elko General Hospital has committed $2.6 million, and three other Idaho
hospitals are negotiating their contributions.  Participating physicians have
committed an average of $10,000 each.

The network expects to generate other funds when additional providers,
including another three hospitals in the region, agree to participate, Garets
says.  It also has applied for $3.5 million in shared revenue funds disbursed
annually by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission.  -Tyler L.  Chin





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Digest


CliniComp Gets Military Hospital Pact

The Department of Defense has selected CliniComp International, San Diego, to
provide its clinical information system at military medical facilities.  The
initial contract with the company includes laboratory and hospitalwide
installations of the system at two sites.  Pending acceptance of the clinical
charting system at those sites, it's expected that the system will be
installed at 35 additional military hospitals worldwide.  The CliniComp system
already is in use or being installed at three military hospitals.  CliniComp
expected to sign the contract in late December.  The value of the contract
wasn't available.

Kaiser Alters Its IS Strategy

Kaiser Permanente, which has encouraged its 12 regional operations to develop
independent information technology initiatives, is abandoning its
decentralized approach.  The nation's largest managed care company has
directed its regions to develop a common hardware and software architecture
that ultimately will enable Kaiser to build a network linking all its
affiliated providers.  As a first step, Kaiser will combine separate
networking projects underway in Northern and Southern California.  Oakland,
Calif.-based Kaiser has 29 hospitals, 242 medical offices and 9,395 physicians
serving 6.7 million people.

Securing Digitized Images

Researchers at the University of California, San Francisco, have developed a
security system to prevent unauthorized access to X-rays and other medical
images transmitted over computer networks.  The security system is designed to
work with the university's picture archiving and communications system, used
to store and transmit digitized medical images.  A modification of the public
domain Pretty Good Privacy software, the security system protects images
transmitted between departments at the university hospital as well as those
transmitted to other sites.

ANSI To Prepare Implementation Guides

The American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N insurance subcommittee
will develop implementation guides for its standardized transaction sets.
Until now, at least six other groups have been involved in writing guides for
implementing standard health care transactions.  ANSI X12N hopes that by
centralizing the preparation of guides, the transaction sets will be
implemented uniformly by providers and payers.

Sun Introduces New Workstations

Sun Microsystems Computer Co., Mountain View, Calif., has introduced Ultra
network computing workstations that use a 64-bit Ultra SPARC RISC processor.
The desktop workstations accommodate three-dimensional graphics, imaging and
video required for advanced medical applications such as teleradiology and
surgical simulations.

Canadian CHINs Continue to Multiply

Health Network Ventures, Westchester, Ill., has signed its second community
health information network contract in Canada.  The company will work with
Bell Sygma, a subsidiary of Bell Canada, to build CHINs in Ontario.  The first
project involves providers in the St.  Catharines region.  Earlier, Health
Network Ventures entered an agreement with AGT Ltd.  to develop networks in
Alberta and the Northwest Territories.

Hewlett-Packard Enters Networking Arena

Hewlett-Packard Co., Palo Alto, Calif., is entering the enterprisewide
networking market by expanding the inpatient functionality of its clinical
software and licensing outpatient clinical software from MedicaLogic Inc.,
Beaverton, Ore.  Hewlett-Packard has added medical-surgical applications to
its HP CareVue software and will license MedicaLogic's Logician software.  It
will market a package of clinical automation services to integrated delivery
systems.

Companies Announce Third Quarter Results

Shared Medical Systems Corp., Malvern, Pa., saw its revenues increase 22% to
$169.2 million for the quarter, compared with the same period a year earlier.
Net income was nearly $10 million, up 12%.

HBO & Co., Atlanta, posted $138 million in revenue for the quarter, up 51%.
Net income was $9.3 million, up 23%.

Cerner Corp.  Kansas City, Mo., reported $41.7 million in revenues for the
quarter ended Sept.  30, up 2% from the same period a year earlier.  Net
income totaled $5.8 million, down 31%.

Health Risk Management Inc., Minneapolis, posted quarterly revenues of $13.4
million, up 15%.  Net income was $529,000 for the period, compared with a loss
of $125,000 in the same period a year earlier.

Phamis Inc., Seattle, saw its revenues increase 25% to $10.4 million for the
quarter.  Net income increased 36% to $1.1 million.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Earning the Public Trust


To integrated health care delivery systems, computer-based patient records
mean better care and lower costs.  To many consumers, however, an electronic
record signals less privacy, more risk and the arrival of Big Brother.  One
large delivery system decided a formal information security policy would be an
effective way to bridge the gap between these perceptions.

PeaceHealth, Bellevue, Wash., is implementing a security and confidentiality
policy as part of its implementation of an enterprisewide health information
network and computer-based patient records.

The system has a wide area network to link its corporate office, 40 physician
office sites, corporate data center, and five hospitals in Washington, Oregon
and Alaska.  Early this year, starting with St.  Joseph Hospital in
Bellingham, Wash., PeaceHealth will begin developing electronic records using
Lastword software from Phamis Inc., Seattle.  By early summer, records from
patients throughout the system will be stored in a central data repository and
be accessible through the WAN.

"My job is to see our clinical records system meets the needs of physicians,
nurses, patients and the community, and it can't do that unless we pay
attention to security and confidentiality," says John Haughom, M.D., chief
medical officer and the architect of PeaceHealth's security policy.

The public is concerned that computer-based patient records are more
vulnerable to breaches of privacy than paper records.  Also, there is fear
that as large integrated delivery systems implement electronic records,
sensitive, private health information will be readily available to more
people.

In addition, Haughom's research on media coverage of electronic records showed
that some providers implementing computer systems without adequate security
measures were suffering from inadvertent as well as malicious misuse of
patient data.

In-depth study

Worried that PeaceHealth was unprepared for dealing with the challenge of
keeping electronic records private, Haughom began an in-depth study of
security issues in April 1994.  By January 1995, he convinced Peace-Health's
board to budget $100,000 to develop a security policy.  He gave the board a
business plan defining a new corporate security director position and calling
for the creation of a corporate security panel with human resource, physician,
nursing and community representatives.

The group eventually developed a security policy that Haughom circulated among
PeaceHealth's five regional hospitals to gain their support.  The corporate
board approved the security policy in June 1995, beginning what Haughom
expects will be a four- to five-year implementation phase.

PeaceHealth's seven-page "Policy on Confidentiality, Privacy and Security of
Information" covers the access, administration, maintenance, destruction and
storage of information.  For each, it states PeaceHealth "shall develop
consistent policies and procedures...that will protect the rights of patients,
employees, providers and other third parties to privacy and confidentiality
and ensure appropriate and legitimate use of information."

This information, the policy states, includes data available via electronic
and paper records, faxes and even conversations.  Security breaches include
stealing another person's password or security code or giving an unauthorized
user a valid password; a "lack of discretion" with or unauthorized disclosure
of any PeaceHealth information; and unauthorized access, modification or
destruction of information or databases.

Sanctions include firing or suspending employees, revoking medical staff
privileges and losing the right to gain access to PeaceHealth information.

PeaceHealth's password system is designed to give clinicians restricted access
to defined sets of information.  "It's based on a 'need to know' philosophy,"
says Haughom.  "People's access privileges are pretty strict."

While the policy indicates PeaceHealth will take steps to restrict access to
data, it also offers system staff the same privacy protection offered to
patients.  The policy also lists separate "rights and obligations" for
patients and providers.  Key provisions of these include giving patients a
list naming every person who accesses their medical record during their stay
at PeaceHealth.  Meanwhile, providers have the right to "clear and complete
presentation of information."

Setting limits

Balancing a caregiver's needs for clear and complete data with the patient's
right to privacy is a challenge that PeaceHealth asked its providers to
address by listing what patient data they absolutely required.  The response,
Haughom says, was that most clinicians and other staff members wanted wide
access to data.

"In some cases, the job description didn't even come close to justifying what
they thought they needed," he says.  The staff members were not asking for
data out of idle curiosity, Haughom says, but were simply used to having
certain information available whether they used it or not.  With further
examination, the providers often conceded they didn't really need certain
information.

Sorting out what data is truly needed compared to what providers feel more
comfortable having falls largely to Margaret M.  Chuman, PeaceHealth's
information security director.  Chuman, a registered nurse with a master's
degree in health care administration, formerly was a CEO of a PeaceHealth
hospital, so she has the credibility and authority necessary to negotiate with
providers and staff about their information needs, Haughom says.

She also has powerful computer tools for ensuring PeaceHealth staff are
following proper access procedures.  The hospital computer system tracks every
screen accessed and keystroke entered each day, a total of more than half a
million transactions.  Needing to monitor a more manageable number, Chuman and
Haughom identified the most sensitive screens in the records system.  Each
time one of these is accessed, the system will download a record of that
transaction in a security sub-database.

Searches of that database will enable Chuman to trace everyone who viewed or
altered a particular record.  She can run spot audits to research a particular
complaint or audit an entire department's use of records, with or without
notification.

PeaceHealth is avoiding an Orwellian aura by emphasizing that these measures
protect all employees as well as patients.  For example, Chuman says
PeaceHealth physicians have incorporated security measures into their medical
bylaws.  A review committee will examine infractions by physicians and issue
sanctions.  If the physicians fail to appropriately discipline one of their
own, the delivery system will take over the review process.

Another committee that Chuman heads reviews all PeaceHealth security
infractions.  In the first few months the security policy has been in force,
sever-al employees already have been terminated for privacy violations, Chuman
says.

While computer and networking technology are triggering the public's security
and confidentiality concerns, PeaceHealth's security policy emphasizes that
people and their attitudes, not technology, are the keys to keeping patient
data private.

"Security is not a computer issue," says Marsha George, vice president for
information services and CIO at PeaceHealth.  "A security policy must start
with what we talk about, what we write down, what we fax.  Much more
confidentiality is violated in the elevator or in the cafeteria than it is by
computer."

Continuing education

To encourage thinking along these lines, PeaceHealth plans continuing
education for everyone with information access privileges.  After finishing an
initial education course, staff members were asked to sign a statement
indicating they accepted responsibility for protecting and properly using
data.  Those who fail to sign a statement are prohibited from entering or
retrieving records data.

PeaceHealth also is educating the community about its electronic records
effort and its confidentiality program through an information kit sent to
Seattle-area media, and Chuman will be available to meet with consumer groups
in the area.

Spell it out

While praising PeaceHealth for having a security policy, Adele A.  Waller, the
partner heading the health information and technology practice in the Chicago
law firm of Gardner, Carton & Douglas, suggests institutions developing
similar programs spell out exactly what information is covered and precisely
how it will be handled.  She's also leary of assigning general "rights," such
as patients' right to review their medical records, without qualifying and
limiting them.

"You might want to state that these are principles that will govern what we do
with information, rather than framing them as rights," Waller says.  "The
notion of a right usually means the right to sue."

Chuman says she's working with several task forces to outline procedures for
handling specific information.

Additional security challenges for PeaceHealth network will come as physicians
access patient data from their home computers later this year.  To ensure it
accepts only bona fide data queries, the host system may use an automatic
callback feature to verify the request came from an authorized terminal,
Haughom says.  And until Internet security measures improve, the PeaceHealth
won't offer access to it.

Although its security policy is less than a year old, Haughom says he's seen
results already, with people changing behavior and challenging their
colleagues to do the same.  "Ninety-five percent of the people in health care
want to be good at their job," he says, "and they just need to be reminded
that the Hippocratic oath says part of being good at their job is protecting
the patient's confidentiality."

Sharon Watson is a Chicago-based writer specializing in health care issues.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

"What Role Will Speech Recognition Play in Health Care?"


Talk of building computer-based patient records always comes down to a
fundamental problem-how to get information into a computer.  Data entry is the
foundation of electronic records.  Without it, health care organizations
cannot hope to build the records systems they say are needed to achieve
efficiencies and improve the quality of patient care.

Therefore, it's critical that ways be found to encourage clinicians, who may
be hesitant to give up the familiar pen and paper chart, to record data in a
computer system.

Believing, whether rightly or wrongly, that clinicians cannot or will not
type, computer hardware and software companies have developed a number of
technologies intended to win clinician acceptance and generate electronic
records of patient care.

One by one, such technologies as handwriting recognition, speech recognition,
touch screens and voice capture have come on the market, only to receive a
lukewarm response from clinicians, who have discovered that those technologies
either have limited applicability or fail to live up to their promise.  As a
result, none has won universal acceptance among clinicians.

Yet, for many health care organizations, speech recognition still sounds like
the answer to the problem of entering data in computer-based patient records.

This emerging technology, which has captured the imagination of many in the
health care industry, automatically converts human speech to digital data that
can be collected, manipulated and exchanged electronically.

Speech recognition systems enable physicians, nurses and other caregivers to
enter information in patients' charts simply by talking to a computer,
eliminating the need for dictation devices, keyboards, light pens, mouses and
other means of data entry.

Early in development

But the technology is in its infancy.  Some users and skeptics say the
software struggles with the recognition of accents, dialects and speech
patterns.  Thus, many health care organizations say, the technology won't be a
viable option for many applications for at least several more years.

But proponents say the technology is viable today, and the next generation of
the software will be even more beneficial for health care providers.

Speech recognition produces readable, professional-looking reports, but the
technology is difficult to use, says Barbara Reynolds, M.D., quality
improvement director in the emergency department at Mercy Hospital and Medical
Center in Chicago.

The speech recognition system installed in Mercy Hospital's emergency
department stumbles over many words, requiring clinicians either to repeat
words until they are understood or enter them using a keyboard, she says.  As
a result, reports that could be written by hand in one or two minutes
sometimes take 30 minutes to complete using the speech recognition system.

Impatient and frustrated, three-fourths of the physicians in Mercy Hospital's
emergency department have stopped using the system.  "I am one of the best
users here," Reynolds says, "but there are times when I am ready to throw it
across the room."

Recent progress

Mercy Hospital's experience with speech recognition does not represent the
current state of the technology, argues William Meisel, a consultant in
Encino, Calif., who's studied the technology's development for 20 years.

Much has changed in the two years since Mercy Hospital installed the VoiceEM
system made by Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., Waltham, Mass., Meisel
says.  Today's speech recognition systems, including the latest version of
VoiceEM, understand far more words and often provide short-cuts, such as
macros that are able to construct an entire sentence of digital text from one
or two spoken words.

Thus, Meisel argues that today's technology is a viable option for many health
care organizations.  And some provider organizations already are firm
believers.

"I wouldn't even consider writing a chart by hand again," says Raul Rodriguez,
M.D., senior attending physician at Potomac Hospital in Woodbridge, Va., who
uses Kurzweil's VoiceMED system.

The newest speech recognition systems are much easier to use than earlier
versions, says Hossein Firooznia, M.D., who evaluated speech recognition
systems for use in the radiology department of New York University Medical
Center in New York.

The medical center selected the DragonDictate system made by Dragon Systems
Inc., Newton, Mass.  "With only a minimal familiarity with computers, I can
modify text or create macros," Firooznia says.  "There is no big problem with
my accent or if I pronounce a word differently than someone else.  It rapidly
adjusts to my particular way of speaking English words, and the system
continually improves its word recognition efficiency the more it is used."

Several companies are working on a new generation of software.  Philips
Dictation Systems, for example, soon will introduce the first
large-vocabulary, continuous speech recognition software, and at least two
other companies, Berdy Medical Systems and ACS InfoSystems, say they soon will
have next-generation products.

Still, it may prove difficult to convince health care organizations, wary of
information technology solutions that are seemingly too good to be true, that
speech recognition is getting to the point of being viable for many
applications.

Mercy Hospital, which had high hopes for the technology, will be among the
tough sells.  After spending more than $200,000 on a speech recognition system
that's little used, the institution can't afford to gamble again on the
technology, Reynolds says.

Speech recognition generated great excitement when it hit the market in the
late 1980s.  It appeared to be the ultimate approach to data entry, giving
clinicians the ability to record their findings electronically without lifting
a finger.

But some clinicians soon discovered that the technology had some shortcomings,
including a small vocabulary and a big cost.  The technology's ability to
understand fewer than 200 words limited its usefulness, and a cost of more
than $15,000 per workstation made it unaffordable for most health care
organizations.

Within a few years, however, Kurzweil and then Dragon introduced speech
recognition products with 1,000-word vocabularies.  Those products began to
find homes in hospitals' radiology and emergency departments, even though the
technology could do little more than fill in one-word blanks on an electronic
chart.

Today, speech recognition software has a vocabulary of as many as 60,000
words, giving it much greater capability.  In addition, the cost of the
technology has tumbled to several hundred dollars per workstation.  "Overall,
it's much cheaper than a transcriptionist," Meisel says.

Yet, the technology has had difficulty making inroads in health care.  Even in
radiology and emergency departments, where speech recognition is used most,
fewer than 10% of physicians use the technology, Meisel says.

Standing in the way of widespread use of speech recognition in health care are
five hurdles that have confronted the technology from the beginning:

1.  An inability to recognize normal speech patterns.  2.  An inability to
adapt to the voice of more than one person.  3.  An inadequate vocabulary.  4.
An inability to distinguish among words that sound alike.  5.  A shortage of
computing power.

The biggest shortcoming of speech recognition is its inability to comprehend
normal speech patterns, called continuous speech.  The technology requires its
users to speak in a staccato-like manner, called discrete speech, pausing at
least one-tenth of a second between each clearly spoken word.

That frustrates busy clinicians who expect speech recognition to reduce-not
increase-the amount of time it takes them to complete charts.  For clinicians
already wary of any changes in how they are accustomed to doing their work,
this provides a reason to avoid the technology, which is what happened at
Mercy Hospital.

Some vendors have responded by seeking a middle ground between discrete and
continuous speech recognition.  They have tweaked their existing systems,
enabling speech recognition software to construct an entire sentence or even a
paragraph from just a few spoken words.  That speeds the data entry process,
making it less frustrating for clinicians.  However, pauses are only
minimized, not eliminated.

Wait-and-see

Health care organizations, recognizing a major shortcoming in speech
recognition, are waiting for the development of continuous speech recognition
systems, which will enable clinicians to dictate normally instead of haltingly
as they must do now, says Joe Weber, vice president of marketing and sales for
Sudbury Systems Inc., a Sudbury, Mass.-based manufacturer of transcription
products for health care applications.

Sudbury, which is interested in incorporating speech recognition in its
transcription products, is not yet satisfied with the state of the technology
because of its inability to recognize continuous speech.

Although speech recognition has come a long way and continues to evolve, Weber
and some others who have closely monitored its development believe it still
will be several years before a practical continuous speech recognition system
is available.

Continuous speech recognition is "Star Wars" technology, says Dana Gaines,
product manager for InterVoice Inc., a Dallas-based company that designs,
manufactures and sells automated call processing and interactive information
solutions.  "It's the ultimate but not really feasible today because of the
problem of limited vocabulary or the number of words understood by the
computer."

Even if vocabulary size were not a problem, he says, the technology still
would be handicapped by its inability to recognize the voice of more than one
person.

Most of the speech recognition systems available today are speaker-dependent,
meaning they are able to recognize only one speaker's voice.  However, if the
speaker's voice becomes altered in any way, for example because of a sore
throat, the system won't recognize the voice and won't record information.
The speaker then must stop and take the time to reacclimate his or her voice
to the computer.  A system that stops functioning every time the speaker's
voice alters in any way becomes more frustrating than efficient, Gaines says.

Speaker-independent systems, which are designed to respond to any voice, would
be more user-friendly.  However, few systems available today are advanced
enough to provide that capability, he says.

Meanwhile, concern lingers over the number of words understood by speech
recognition systems.

While health care organizations say the current vocabulary size may be
adequate for radiology or emergency departments, it cannot satisfy the needs
of clinicians in all settings because each department has its own jargon.

But Meisel dismisses concern about vocabulary size.  "Most systems can now
recognize as many as 60,000 words, which is more than adequate," he argues.

The technology is still bedeviled as well by homonyms, words that sound alike
but have different meanings and spellings.  To counter this, vendors are
developing editing functions that rely on rules for grammar and sentence
structure to determine which word is syntactically correct.

Dependent on speed

Like the dictation technology from which it evolved, the performance of speech
recognition systems depends on the speed with which a computer can process
commands.  Speech recognition, while simple in concept, is complex in its
makeup and requires a computer to handle millions of instructions per second
for it to function properly.

While computers have become more powerful with each generation of
microprocessors, early machines lacked the enormous amounts of processing
power that speech recognition requires.  As a result, speech recognition
systems operated sluggishly.

"Not long ago, to make the computations needed, you had to have huge,
multimillion-dollar computers working overnight," says Mark Liberman, director
of the Linguistic Data Consortium, a 90-member speech recognition research
cooperative based at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.  Now, he
says, ordinary computers can make the calculations to process sound and pull
up close matches from memory in real time.

While great advances are being made in speech recognition, health care
organizations needn't wait for the commercial release of new products, Meisel
says.

While speech recognition does have some limitations, they are not severe
enough to warrant dismissal of the idea of using the technology in a number of
applications, he says.  "There are some minor problems integrating with word
processors, for example.  Otherwise, the technology works and with a great
deal of accuracy, too."

Speech recognition has an accuracy rate of about 90%, better than a rate of
about 75% for human transcriptionists, Meisel says.  When errors do occur,
they can be corrected via keyboard or a spell-checking function.

Much of the skepticism about the technology in health care stems from
disappointment resulting from providers' unrealistic expectations at the time
the technology was introduced, he says.

"The big hurdle is the first week or two of use," Meisel says.  "When you
first start, it seems that you always have to enter new words.  In addition,
most systems now let you put in macros, which, in some cases, can create
entire reports from just a few spoken words or phrases.  Speech recognition
presents hurdles at the beginning only because those things aren't there."

Speech recognition performs well for clinicians who are patient and willing to
learn how to use it, Meisel says.  "People say that, once they get used to it,
it's no big deal adjusting their speech patterns for the computer.  They say
the benefits, such as readable and complete reports that improve the quality
of health care, far outweigh any inconvenience."

Daniel Fought, D.O., an emergency department physician at Parkview Hospital in
Toledo, Ohio, endured a month of frustration to learn how to use a Kurzweil
speech recognition system.  Dozens of formats made it difficult, but Fought's
glad he persisted.

Charts that once took two or three minutes to complete by hand can now be
finished in about 30 seconds, and the end product is more complete, he says.

More complete charts mean health care organizations have better documentation
of patient care they delivered and, thus, are better equipped to defend
against lawsuits alleging malpractice.

Howard White, M.D., an emergency department physician at St.  Elizabeth
Hospital Medical Center in Youngs-town, Ohio, has mixed feelings about speech
recognition.  "I consider it a necessary evil," he says.

The Kurzweil system installed at St.  Elizabeth Hospital is difficult to
master and slower than writing by hand, but it produces better documentation
of patient care than does the paper-based recordkeeping system it replaced,
White says.

Like Fought, he believes better documentation of care discourages malpractice
claims.  White says no claims have been filed by any of the more than 200,000
patients treated in the emergency department since St.  Elizabeth installed
the Kurzweil system.

Despite the long learning curve, speech recognition is coming into its own,
Meisel says.

Although no studies have been conducted, he believes the overall market for
speech recognition will be measured in thousands of units in 1994, tens of
thousands of units in 1995 and hundreds of thousands of units in 1996.  "Every
year, thousands more people are using it," Meisel says.

"As the days go by, there has been more and more talk about it," says Andrew
Lederer, director of consulting and marketing for The Kennedy Group, a Redwood
City, Calif.-based consulting firm specializing in health care information
technology.  "Speech recognition is one of the technologies that could take
the use of computers to another level."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The market leader sticks with today's technology


Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., the first company to offer speech
recognition systems to the health care industry, continues to enhance the base
system it introduced in 1986.

Although some of its newest competitors are developing next-generation
products, Kurzweil intends, at least for now, to stick with what it knows
well.

While other companies pursue development of continuous speech recognition
systems capable of recognizing normal speech patterns, Kurzweil is staking its
near-term future on continued development of its VoiceMED product line.

Installed in 1,100 health care settings, VoiceMED is the most widely used
speech recognition software in the country.  The discrete speech recognition
system, which costs about $8,000 per user, is available in seven versions:
emergency medicine, emergency medicine triage, invasive cardiology,
orthopedics, pathology, primary care and radiology.

Kurzweil intends to develop additional versions of VoiceMED for other
specialties and continue to work on a new user interface scheduled for release
later this year, says Jonathan Bower, director of product management.

The Waltham, Mass.-based company has no plans to venture into continuous
speech recognition, Bower says.

"We'll stick with discrete speech," he says.  "It's proven and has a very high
accuracy rate.  We'll introduce continuous speech only when the technology is
mature, which we don't see happening for at least a couple of years.  In the
meantime, we'll keep improving."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The next generation of software


"Providing the ability to speak naturally to computers will remove the last
obstacle."

Three newcomers to the field of speech recognition software for health care
are working on a new generation of the technology.

Philips Dictation Systems is preparing to introduce continuous speech
recognition software.  In addition, at least two other companies-Berdy Medical
Systems and ACS InfoSystems-say they are working on similar new technology.

Philips, a San Francisco-based subsidiary of Philips Electronics, is beta
testing SpeechMagic, which has a 60,000-word vocabulary.  The company expects
to introduce the software commercially within six months.

Until now, speech recognition has been based on template matching, which works
like this:  Words to be recognized by a computer are dictated and stored as an
"acoustical" image in the computer's data base.  When a particular word is
spoken, the computer searches the data base for a match.

Template matching works well as long as the number of words to be recognized
is limited and a person speaks in a consistent manner and pauses between
words.  Philips contends it has overcome those limitations by basing its
product on the recognition of phonemes, the smallest acoustical component of a
language.  Phonemes go beyond the letters of the alphabet; the letter "a," for
example, takes on different forms, as in the words "car" and "make."

Phoneme recognition is the key to success in speech recognition, says Hans Van
Der Linde, marketing manager for Philips.  To be effective, he says, a speech
recognition system must have a large vocabulary tailored to the needs of a
specific group of users; it must be able to understand the context in which
those words are used; and it must have a database in which a specific
speaker's phoneme pronunciations are stored.

SpeechMagic enables physicians and other caregivers to enter information in
computer-based patient records at a rate of 200 to 250 words per minute, says
John Payton, president of CMHC Systems Inc., a Dublin, Ohio-based company that
is developing a psychiatric vocabulary for SpeechMagic.

Grant fuels research

Like Phillips, Berdy Medical Systems believes that continuous speech
recognition is the technology of the future.  It plans to incorporate the
technology in its SmartClinic computer-based patient records software for
physician group practices.

In early October, the Rochelle Park, N.J.-based company received a $1.98
million grant from the Department of Commerce's Advanced Technology Program to
integrate its computer-based patient records software with speech recognition
software developed by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.

With speech recognition as a front end, Berdy's computer-based patient records
software will enable clinicians to enter data simply by speaking in a natural,
conversational manner.

The system, now in prototype, will have not only a large medical vocabulary
but also the ability to understand words in context, says Rick Holtmeier,
Berdy's president and COO.  And unlike current speech recognition technology,
it does not require voice training, slow speech or pauses between words, he
says.

"Providing caregivers the ability to speak naturally to their computers will
remove the last obstacle in acceptance of the computer-based patient record,"
Holtmeier says.  "Although physicians recognize the need for and the
time-saving benefits of automation, many are unwilling to take the time to
enter patient information."

The new Berdy system will not be fully developed and commercially available
for three years.  However, Holtmeier says speech recognition for some
applications, such as physical examinations, may be available within 18
months.

ACS InfoSystems, best known for its development and installation of networking
software incorporating artificial intelligence at St.  Alphonsus Regional
Medical Center in Boise, Idaho, now is applying artificial intelligence to
speech recognition.

The result is speech recognition software that understands differences in the
way people speak, says Mark Hays, president of ACS InfoSystems, a small
software development company in Boise.

Speaker-independent

"It's speaker-independent, which means that anyone can use it without any
speech training whatsoever," he says.  "It also eliminates problems with
normal changes in voice quality that occur, for instance, when a user has a
sore throat."

The software, HInet Voice Control, also gives speech capability to a computer,
enabling it to respond orally to a clinician's request for more information
about a patient.

"It interacts with the user more like a person than a computer," Hays says.
"This allows a physician in the emergency room to focus on the patient-not the
computer screen-and simply talk with the computer while assessing the
patient."

The HInet Voice Control, which still is under development, will undergo beta
tests at an emergency room physicians' group and four hospitals early this
year.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

A Healthy Year For Electronic Claims Growth


Electronic claims processing is coming of age.  Nearly half of the more than
3.6 billion claims providers submitted during 1995 were transmitted
electronically.  Providers submitted an estimated 47% of all claims
electronically last year, compared to 41.5% in 1994.

The estimates are part of a complete look at health care electronic data
interchange and networking issues in Faulkner & Gray's Health Data Directory,
1996 Edition.

One major factor behind the increase in electronic claims is the continued
steady growth in the number of Medicare and Medicaid claims that providers
transmit electronically.  In addition, insurance companies are becoming more
adept at accepting electronic claims.

Last year, the pace of consolidation among electronic claims processing
companies picked up.  More than a dozen claims clearinghouses either bought
smaller competitors, practice management software companies or EDI gateway
software vendors to enhance their client base and product lines.

Clearinghouses that weren't buying competitors were aligning themselves with
companies that had desired technologies or services.  One company-National
Electronic Information Corp.  of Secaucus, N.J.-pulled off a triple play by
buying a company, aligning with another, then getting acquired by Envoy Corp.,
Nashville, in the year's biggest deal (see related story, page 10).

Number crunching

The 1996 directory's statistics for electronic claims mainly reflect
computer-to-computer electronic data interchange, but some organizations also
include shipping a magnetic tape or disk in calculating their electronic
claims totals.

Better ways of counting pharmacy and Medicaid claims account for large
increases in those annual claims totals compared with previous years'
directory statistics.  Last January, Scott-Levin Associates, a Newtown,
Pa.-based health care research and consulting company, began collecting daily
prescription activity from 34,000 pharmacies, more than half of the nation's
total.  In addition, the Health Care Financing Administration last year began
a comprehensive survey of Medicaid fiscal agents to support more accurate
estimates of annual claims volume.

The higher numbers this year for Medicaid and pharmacy claims, along with the
high rate of electronic submission for these claims, accounts for revised,
higher statistics for electronic submission of claims in previous years,
compared to statistics in previous editions of the directory.

In large part, provider reluctance is no longer the major reason that the
majority of claims submitted each year are still on paper.  "The problem is
not on the provider side, it's on the payer side," says Michael Eckstein,
president of EDI for Health Care, a Bryn Mawr, Pa.-based consulting company.

Most providers are at least technologically ready to use electronic data
interchange.  For instance, dental offices used to be considered a backwater
of automation.  Now, 62% of dental offices have computers and 70% of those
offices have modems or communications software that enable communication with
outside entities, according to a recent American Dental Association survey.

The percentage of claims that physicians submitted electronically grew from an
estimated 18% in 1994 to 27% last year.  Electronic dental claims increased
from 9% to 11%.  The increases reflect more computers in provider offices as
well as the increased ability of payers to accept electronic claims.

But electronic claims submission levels are not increasing in every provider
sector.  In two segments, hospitals and pharmacies, the rate of electronic
submission has hit a plateau of 80%.  "The remaining paper claims are destined
for small payers, HMOs and PPOs that aren't connected to clearinghouses," says
Nicholas Rosenstein, CEO of Conceptual Systems Corp., a Cleveland-based
processor of hospital and physician claims recently acquired by National Data
Corp., Atlanta.

While electronic claims submission has become routine for many providers,
there's still much work to be done.  For example, many smaller commercial
payers and managed care plans still cannot accept electronic claims.

And even some of the nation's largest payers are still making only slow
progress at getting electronic claims in the door.

Of 13 surveyed payers accepting more than 500,000 claims per month, only seven
received more than 20% of their claims electronically.  The seven are Aetna
Life Insurance Co., Cigna Healthcare, The MetraHealth Cos., Mutual of Omaha
Insurance Co., Provident Life Insurance Co., The Prudential Insurance Co.  of
America and United Healthcare Corp.  That compares with only one major
carrier-United Healthcare-that received more than 20% of its claims
electronically in 1994.

"Larger insurance companies are hampered by legacy systems patched together
with concrete and created by people no longer with the company," Eckstein
says.  "And the overwhelming number of managed care plans have yet to
implement any electronic encounter or referral systems."

Some payers say that they increased electronic claims submissions this year by
working more closely with providers and by establishing links with more
clearinghouses.

For instance, Aetna identified providers who had been submitting claims
electronically to the insurance company, only to revert to submitting paper
claims.  The carrier created teams to meet with providers through seminars or
office visits.  "We find out if they've had problems with electronic
submission and correct them," says Patricia Gray, Aetna's EDI administrator.

Furthermore, Aetna finally started doing what many other major carriers have
been doing for a couple of years-link to clearinghouses and other networks in
addition to NEIC.  Aetna established connections with EDI USA, U.S.  HDI and
the Texas Health Information Network, operated by Blue Cross and Blue Shield
of Texas.

Clearinghouse volume

In 1995, the nation's 25 largest claims clearinghouses handled an estimated
335.3 million claims per month, an increase of 23.4% over 1994 monthly volume.

Electronic Data Systems, Plano, Texas, remains the nation's largest processor
with monthly volumes in excess of 70 million claims, up 17% from the previous
year.  EDS transmits 80% of these claims to payers electronically.  But just
as in 1994, runner-up National Data Corp.  grew faster than EDS last year,
increasing its total claims volume by 66% to 59 million claims per month, all
of them electronic.

"Most of our growth has come from within our existing customer base," says
Bruce Roberson, vice president of health care information network services for
National Data.  "But we've also gotten aggressive in taking business away from
our competitors."

Other clearinghouses reporting large claims volume increases include Unisys
Corp., whose claims volume grew 89%; Equifax Healthcare EDI Services, with 65%
growth; National Electronic Information Corp., 56% growth; and PCS Health
Systems, 53%.

Stung by lost Medicaid fiscal agent contracts-especially in Virginia-First
Health Services saw its monthly claims volume drop 66% in 1995.  Likewise, a
lost Medicaid contract in Florida resulted in a 61% volume reduction for
Consultec Inc.

The clearinghouse consolidation of 1995 was the result, in part, of earlier
work by companies to reposition themselves in the health care EDI industry.
"It was the year that people began implementing strategies developed in 1994,"
says Richard Caliri, CEO of NEIC.

No longer do companies just look inward to develop new automation services for
the health care industry.  The new mantra is:  If you don't have it, buy it.
"It's a lot easier to buy relationships rather than build them," says Joseph
Bigley, president of Real:Time Investment, a consulting company in Alpharetta,
Ga.

Bigley should know.  His clearinghouse, Cooperative Healthcare Networks, was
bought by Equifax Inc.  in 1994 as the information services company's first
entrance into the health care EDI field.

Another reason for consolidation was the continuing decrease in the prices
that clearinghouses charge to transmit electronic claims.

A recent Faulkner & Gray survey of clearinghouses shows that the average price
per claim plummeted from 43 cents in 1994 to 34 cents in 1995.  "As the price
drops, the industry has to consolidate to get volumes through the switches,"
Bigley says.

Prices decline

Some clearinghouses are dropping prices to remain competitive in tight
markets.  "To stay in business, I had to lower my prices," says Beatrice
Dvorak, CEO of Medical Data Insurance Processing, Sioux Falls, S.D.

But other processors are cutting prices in an effort to raise transaction
volume quickly, thus making a clearinghouse a viable candidate for
acquisition.  "Volume is everything in the marketplace," says Frank
Giannantonio, president of Frank Giannantonio & Associates, a Piscataway,
N.J.-based clearinghouse.  "Some clearinghouses are saying, 'Let me get my
numbers up so someone will buy me.'"

The buying frenzy started early in the year, with National Data Corp.  buying
Learned-Mahn, a Boise, Idaho-based supplier of transactions processing
software.  Then in May, National Data bought Claim*Net, the claims
clearinghouse of Indianapolis-based Physicians Practice Management.

With that buy, National Data began implementing its strategy of integrating
the software and clearinghouse services of its new companies with its existing
pharmacy and dental claims processing services to provide one-stop shopping of
information services for integrated delivery systems and community health
information networks.

That strategy was further cemented in November when National Data announced it
would buy Conceptual Systems Corp.  With the acquisition, National Data will
gain hospital claims clearinghouse capability (see story, page 10).

"What we are looking for is established connectivity in markets beyond our
core pharmacy business," says Richard Cohan, senior vice president of health
care at National Data.

Driven by the increased information needs of integrated delivery systems as
they go after managed care contracts, National Data was by no means alone in
buying its way to increased functionality.

MedE America, formed by the acquisition of three clearinghouses in 1994, added
two more in 1995-General Computer Corp.  and Latpon Health Systems.  Now armed
with electronic data interchange software for claims processing and systems
integration for hospitals, pharmacies and physicians, MedE America is
aggressively marketing its expanded services to existing clients.

Seeking to become a leading provider of disease management services,
pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Co.  followed up on its 1994 acquisition of
pharmacy processing powerhouse PCS Health Systems with the purchase of
Integrated Medical Systems, a Golden, Colo.-based supplier of networking
services for the exchange of clinical and financial information.

Unisys Corp., a leading Medicaid fiscal agent, launched a diversification
strategy when it purchased Claims Express, EDI software from Comprehensive
Technologies.  The acquisition gave Unisys a valuable commodity it didn't
have:  software to send claims to private insurance companies.

A snail's pace

As the year drew to a close, the health care industry began to investigate why
providers and payers have made so little progress in implementing standard
formats for electronic transactions.

Although the American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N subcommittee
introduced its first standard transaction sets four years ago, the formats are
not widely used.

For example, only 2% of the Medicare claims that providers submit
electronically are in the X12 837 format.  And Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Florida reports that 5.5% of 3.6 million electronic claims submitted
electronically in October were in the X12 837 format.

Some say that although there is nothing technically wrong with the X12 837
transaction set, it evolved from previously developed retail EDI transaction
sets and didn't take into account the complexity of health care transactions.

"From a logical sequencing perspective, the 837 works well," says Catherine
Peper, director of health care information management for Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Florida.  "However, mechanically when you try to use it, it becomes
a nightmare."

But ANSI X12N members are skeptical that there's a significant problem with
the 837 format.

"People are saying it's too complex, but nobody's coming to us with specific
information that would lead us to believe the 837 is deficient in any way,"
says Bruce Horn, manager of electronic commerce for The Associated Group, an
Indianapolis-based payer, and co-chair of the X12N health care task group.
"To the extent that we can, we are going to address those issues.  If
something needs fixing, then we will fix it."  n

Joseph Goedert is editor of Health Data Network News, a Faulkner & Gray
newsletter.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Facing the Outpatient Coding Challenge


As more health care is delivered in outpatient rather than inpatient settings,
outpatient costs are skyrocketing.  This has prompted several payers,
including the federal government, to test a new method of paying providers for
the use of outpatient facilities.

As this complex new payment mechanism, known as ambulatory patient groups, or
APGs, is implemented, providers and payers are turning to coding software
developers for help in billing and paying for outpatient services.

The Health Care Financing Administration commissioned the development of APGs
as the potential basis of a federal prospective payment system for outpatient
care, similar in design to diagnosis-related groups, or DRGs, a treatment
classification system that's the basis of Medicare's inpatient payment system.

Under APGs, Medicare would reimburse hospitals and other outpatient facility
owners a fixed rate determined in advance for facility expenses, such as
outpatient surgery center use.  These payments would be based on resource use
as determined by the APGs' grouping mechanism.  Today, most payers reimburse
providers for outpatient facility costs based on charges or a percentage of
charges.

Because APGs group together outpatient services and procedures for
reimbursement of facility expenses, they generally result in lower payments
than if payers reimbursed providers based on facility charges for every
individual service or procedure.  As a result, APGs, like DRGs before them,
will force providers to carefully examine care delivery to ensure they are
delivering only those services that are clinically necessary.

HCFA is testing APGs in the Iowa Medicaid program, hoping to eventually
implement the payment system to cover all Medicare outpatient services.  HCFA
will allow individual states to decide if they want to use APGs for Medicaid
outpatient services.

Moving forward

The government has yet to finish testing the outpatient system or assign
national reimbursement levels for the 290 APGs.  But a handful of private
insurance companies have decided not to wait for HCFA to act and are moving
forward to implement APGs for outpatient facility payments to control costs.

Using consultants and their own reimbursement experience to devise
reimbursement rates for the outpatient groups, these payers are automating the
APGs grouping process in an effort to curb rising outpatient care costs and
encourage greater efficiency in outpatient care delivery.

"Providers are shifting services from inpatient settings to outpatient
settings, and outpatient costs are going nuts," says Ben Zelman, director of
utilization management at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio, which is
implementing APGs.  "To remain competitive, we need to know expected resource
utilization and have a clinical understanding of outpatient care, which
represents about half of health care costs."

Last July, the Ohio plan began using APGs to reimburse outpatient facilities
in a few regions of the state.  The plan wants to expand use of APGs to other
areas this year.  The Blues plan used consulting firms to help create weights
and rates, which determine levels of reimbursement for groups of services,
based on its past outpatient reimbursements and negotiations with Ohio
providers.

To facilitate the grouping of medical codes under APGs to determine
reimbursement, the Blues plan has added to its claims adjudication information
system the APG Grouper, Version 1.0, an automated code grouper from 3M Health
Information Systems, Murray, Utah.

"A provider sends us an electronic claim, which is sent through our claims
adjudication system and the grouper," Zelman says.  "The process of APG
grouping is automated and an integrated part of our health information
system."

Management tool

As payers use APGs to set payment rates and providers refine care delivery to
keep costs in check, providers and payers will learn to better predict
outpatient payments and expenditures, says Nancy Hirschl, director of
ambulatory coding and reimbursement enhancement services at Case Mix Analysis
Inc.  The North Grafton, Mass.-based consulting firm assists hospitals with
coding and reimbursement issues.

"APGs shift risk to providers; they are a management tool to monitor physician
practice patterns and hospital costs and expenses," Hirschl says.  "Payers are
finding in APGs an easily manageable tool to reimburse hospitals for
outpatient care.  And because payers know how successful DRGs have been in
containing inpatient costs, they are eager to embrace a similar system to
contain outpatient costs."

APGs are necessary because of the shift in health care from inpatient to
outpatient services, says Josh Pollatsek, vice president of finance at SOLON
Consulting Group Ltd.  The Silver Spring, Md.-based consulting firm
specializes in the design and implementation of prospective payment systems.

"APGs show payers and providers where they may or may not be having problems,
where they are losing money or where they can be making more money," Pollatsek
says.  "When relying on APGs for reimbursement, providers can filter out
unnecessary services, based on APG standards, to increase their efficiency in
outpatient care."

Groupers

To make more efficient use of the complex grouping methodology, payers and
providers are acquiring automated groupers, software that automatically
classifies medical codes under appropriate APGs.

"APGs require a tremendous flow of data into coding staff members' computers.
And with outpatient care, coders are dealing with enormous volume compared to
inpatient cases," says Steve Harris, president of IRP Systems Inc., a
Wilmington, Mass.-based company that specializes in coding and reimbursement
software for hospitals and payers.  "To successfully use APGs, providers and
payers need to have efficient, integrated information systems.  Otherwise,
coders will not be able to go through patient charts and find all necessary
codes for optimal reimbursement."

In 1988, HCFA commissioned 3M Health Information Systems to develop an
outpatient classification system in response to the increase in outpatient
care and the lack of a comprehensive outpatient cost containment system.  The
result was APGs, which use a combination of International Classification of
Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) and Current
Procedural Terminology, Version 4 (CPT-4) codes to group outpatient facility
costs for reimbursement.

APGs are a patient classification system designed to explain the amount and
type of resources used in an outpatient visit, explains Donn G.  Duncan, M.D.,
APG project clinical consultant for HCFA and 3M Health Information Systems,
co-developers of APGs.

"Patient visits that fall under one of the 290 APGs have similar clinical
characteristics and similar resource use and cost," Duncan says.  "Development
of APGs focused on the full range of outpatient settings-including same-day
surgery units, emergency rooms and clinics-and the full range of patients, not
just the Medicare population.  APGs also were designed to include only
facility costs, not professional costs, which are handled separately by CPT-4
codes."

Data elements used to define APGs included information on the UB-92 and the
Medicare claim forms, which include ICD-9-CM diagnosis and CPT-4 procedure
codes, he adds.

One major difference between APGs and DRGs is that APGs depend on both
ICD-9-CM and CPT-4 codes to group outpatient services, while DRGs use only
ICD-9-CM codes for inpatient services.  Further, where coding staff classify
an inpatient admission by only one DRG, they can classify one outpatient visit
by several APGs.

"Coders seek the reason for admission found in a medical record to arrive at a
DRG number," Duncan says.  "To figure out which APGs are relevant, coders look
at visit necessity by three categories-a significant procedure or therapy, a
medical visit, or an ancillary test or procedure."

A testbed

As HCFA's testbed for implementing APGs, the Iowa Medicaid program is the
crystal ball for many who want to view the future of APG automation.  In July
1994, when the test began, many Iowa hospitals were uncertain how to handle
the automation of APGs.

With HCFA's APG effort in full bloom in Iowa-and private efforts sprouting in
California, Maine, Nebraska, Ohio, Utah and other states-many health care
organizations now are looking to a limited selection of specialized coding
software to improve their handling of APGs.

Coding software can help coders better understand the APG system, says Harris
of IRP Systems, which distributed its APG Calculator system at no cost to all
Iowa hospitals before the start of the APG Medicaid test.  Coding staff use
the IRP system to automatically determine APGs for claims.

Staff at Mercy Hospital in Council Bluff, Iowa, use IRP's APG Calculator to
determine APGs for Medicaid claims, a task they are mandated to perform under
the HCFA test.  With a Medicaid patient population of nearly 25% and a need to
hasten the APG learning curve, automation has been an important element of APG
implementation for staff at Mercy Hospital.

"All we have to do is enter the principal ICD-9-CM code or the various CPT-4
codes, along with a patient's gender and age, and the grouper examines the
data and shows the various APGs for which the hospital will be reimbursed,"
says Jim Harwood, Mercy's supervisor of medical records.

Although it took some time to understand the new classification system, Mercy
Hospital staff members have realized both financial and clinical advantages.

"Through the APGs fixed-reimbursement system, the hospital is better able to
focus on outpatient costs as well as develop clinical protocols," Harwood
says.

APGs lump resources used during an outpatient service or procedure into a
group.  Thus, providers can use APGs as one indicator of which services and
procedures should be included in outpatient clinical treatment protocols.

Mercy Hospital is in very early stages of developing clinical protocols, which
recommend diagnostic and treatment approaches for treating patients with
certain medical problems.  But APGs already have helped staff see where such
protocols could improve care and the bottom line.

"Everyone that comes into our emergency room does not need a chest X-ray or
laboratory work," Mercy's Harwood says.  "APGs make our providers think more
in terms of necessity.  APGs make caregivers and administrators more aware of
costs.  APGs make people acutely aware of the fact that health care has
changed."

Private-sector test

Just as HCFA is testing APGs in Iowa's Medicaid program, Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Utah is testing APGs as a strategic way to control payments.

"We wanted to move to a prospective payment system where, through negotiations
with providers, we could control the levels of reimbursement for outpatient
care," says Mark Watson, director of hospital reimbursement at the Utah Blues
plan.  "We found that the APG system was the only comprehensive prospective
payment system with an established grouper for the outpatient health care
environment."

The Utah Blues plan has been working on APG implementation for about two
years.  The payer plans to begin testing APGs in April at two hospitals.

Staff at the Utah Blues plan know that automation will be a key to successful
use of APGs.  The payer is recalibrating its internal claims information
systems so that it can handle the new grouping methodology.

"We have not traditionally collected all the CPT-4 codes and other data
necessary for APGs; we have been using revenue and ICD-9-CM codes for
outpatient care," Watson says.  "We are enhancing the backbone of our claims
processing system to accept the CPT-4 codes to facilitate the grouping of
claims data for APGs."

For the actual grouping, the Blues plan will use the automated grouper from 3M
Health Information Systems.  The plan has hired a consulting firm to help
create the payment weights and rates needed for reimbursement.

More work is needed at the federal level before APGs can become a universally
mandated classification system for Medicare.  While the grouping methodology
is in its second version, HCFA still must devise formalized payment weights
and rates.

"The weights and rates used in the Iowa Medicaid program are based on older
data; we have to develop Medicare-based weights and rates on the new data from
our tests," says Mark Wynn, a member of the special analysis staff for the
associate administrator for policy and team leader for development of
prospective payment systems for outpatient services at HCFA.

"And to finalize

the policymaking, APGs will have to go through further evaluation to gauge
their impact on various types of providers," Wynn adds.  "Many payers are
waiting for Medicare to implement APGs; that is the main reason why APGs are
not yet widely accepted."

However, some observers believe that the private market will lead the way on
APGs, whether HCFA completes work on the system or not.

"Like us, a lot of health care organizations around the country are starting
to work with APGs," says Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio's Zelman.  "Right
now the private market is leading the government because the assumption is
that APGs will provide a competitive edge in managing reimbursement and
quality in a health care delivery system."

Payers and providers will have to deal with spiraling outpatient care costs
one way or another, Zelman says, and automated APGs represent the best
outpatient cost containment resource available.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Putting the Pieces Together


the objectives underlying disease management appear to be essential components
of the new health care delivery business strategy in the next few years.
Managed care is increasing its stranglehold as a reimbursement approach,
forcing providers and payers to develop ways to limit their financial risk in
providing individuals' health care.  That's creating stronger incentives for
preventing illnesses from occurring, intervening early and appropriately, and
handling chronic illnesses in the least expensive and most clinically
effective way.

HMOs have long claimed that those objectives were central to their philosophy.
But until now, most HMOs have been able to succeed financially by merely
managing health care costs, not actual care delivery.  Now, as margins tighten
and pressure from purchasers grows, providers and payers are finding they have
no choice but to seek ways to avoid costly health care interventions and to
improve individuals' health.

Fortunately, providers' and payers' urgency to start disease management
programs is coming at a time when information technology tools are available
to provide the information and the organization needed to develop and
effectively implement such strategies.

Information a key

While there's much debate about exactly what this discipline should be called
and how it should be used in health care, there's little argument that as risk
becomes a centerpiece in efforts to limit health care spending, disease
management will flourish, and information tools will be absolutely essential
in dealing with risk-based reimbursement strategies.

"The whole industry of managed health care is evolving to a level of higher
quality, and that means managing outcomes, which is another term for disease
management," says John C.  Marlow, M.D., vice president of health care
programs for Capp Care, a Newport Beach, Calif.-based managed care company
that operates preferred provider organizations.  "Parallel to the development
of disease management, information technology has evolved, and we're seeing
the beginning of enabling or empowering technologies that help providers make
decisions to navigate through the health care system.  That will have a big
impact on disease management."

Those still-developing tools, including outcomes assessment technology,
computer-based patient records, central data repositories and health
information networks, will enable disease management to have more of an effect
on health care by building a strong foundation of data on which to base
clinical guidelines.  But, like those enabling technologies, disease
management is embryonic in its development, and skeptics now are wondering if
it's a marketing invention that will fade as quickly as it's burst on the
scene.

Key issues in successful disease management programs include picking diseases
that can be managed effectively, doing high-quality research, navigating the
politics of getting physicians and other providers to use computers for data
collection, and standardizing clinical data from disparate sources so it can
be compared and analyzed.

Finding a niche

Disease management is an extension of several trends in directing health care
delivery-utilization manage-ment, case management, outcomes assessment,
patient education and clinical protocols and pathways.  Proponents say disease
management seeks to harmonize those disciplines to arrive at the best of
managed care, using evidence-based ap-proaches that offer the best care at
least cost.

In disease management programs, researchers develop a comprehensive plan for
handling patients who have a chronic specific illness or condition.  Providers
use best practices and patients use preventive measures.  These interventions
can occur in home, ambulatory or acute care settings.  The goal is to deliver
the most effective care in the least expensive setting.

Information technology will facilitate the gathering of evidence for disease
management research.  And computers' ability to analyze data and provide
direction at the point of care will provide critical impetus to disease
management.

Lee Newcomer, M.D., chief medical officer of United HealthCare Corp., an
Edina, Minn.-based managed care company, defines disease management as a set
of interventions, determined prospectively, targeted at a large group of
patients with particular diseases, with the intent of altering the course of
the disease, preventing exacerbations and improving the patients' quality of
life.

While most disease management programs are seeking those objectives, there is
a wide range of approaches for achieving those ends, says Michael Miele,
president of Capitated Disease Management Services, a Montclair, N.J.-based
company that provides disease management services.  "It can be anything, as
little as an education program or as aggressive as planting case managers on
site in somebody's home."

Some say the disease management buzzword doesn't really explain the work that
needs to be done.  That's why they are terming their efforts care management,
health management or outcomes management.

In addition, the status of disease management as a buzzword is making many
view it as a hot business opportunity.  New entrants in the market range from
startup companies seeking contracts to organize and direct care for a specific
group of patients for providers or managed care organizations, to giant
pharmaceutical companies hoping to leverage their research experience and
enormous databases while they find a new and more important niche in health
care delivery.

Many payers and providers, such as hospitals and integrated delivery systems,
are beginning to develop disease management programs on their own.  That's
because they're under more pressure to reduce costs.  Also, buyers of health
care services are becoming more sophisticated, demanding that those bidding to
provide health care coverage have clinical protocols or disease management
initiatives in place.

Capp Care's Marlow sees disease management as another step in the evolution of
managing health care costs.  Starting with efforts to manage costs in the late
1970s, the health care system has moved to managing utilization through such
1980s efforts as precertification requirements and utilization review and most
recently to managing components of the process, such as behavioral health and
drug formularies, to deliver cost-effective care.

Disease management, Marlow says, is the next step in health care management.
It differs from previous efforts because it seeks to manage a patient's
treatment across a continuum of care, not just in a hospital setting.

In addition, disease management differs from case management because it's not
just implemented when a person enters an intensive inpatient setting in an
effort to limit costs and lengths of stay.  Instead, it's intended to be a
wide-ranging plan that keeps people out of the hospital and manages chronic
conditions so that these individuals enjoy the best health possible and thus
consume the most appropriate and effective health care resources.  It's
believed that this will provide the best payoff in long-term cost savings.

Risk as the impetus

The emergence of risk-shifting in providing health care, through such devices
as capitated managed care contracts, has shifted incentives.  If providers or
payers are paid a fixed amount per month per plan enrollee, regardless of
their medical needs, the use of unnecessary services and resources comes out
of their pockets.  Conversely, the better an enrollee's health is, the more
profit can be made, and the more satisfied the enrollee is.

It's no surprise, then, that those at most risk for covering health care costs
are most keenly interested in disease management.

As James B.  Couch, M.D., sees it, the push for evidence-based disease
management is coming right from the top, from large companies that see health
care costs as limiting their ability to compete worldwide.  It's also coming
from government programs, which want to get the most effectiveness for their
health care dollar, says Couch, director in charge of disease management
consulting for Coopers and Lybrand, a New York-based consulting firm.

"Global competition has driven companies to look at what they get for their
health benefit dollar.  They are going beyond managed care to finding the most
cost-effective way to identify and treat diseases within specific populations
with the intent of achieving measurable improvement in health status," he
says.  "Major purchasers are finally assessing health care suppliers like they
do any other supplier.  For many, health care is their most expensive
supplier.  When they manage the value and quality and cost-effectiveness of
health care, the net effect is a happier and more satisfied workforce and a
better bottom line."

An example of large companies' interest in disease management is the Managed
Health Care Association, a group of companies organized to promote and improve
managed care.

One of its initiatives is the Outcomes Management System Consortium, which
seeks to apply patient-centered outcomes assessment methods to monitor and
improve the quality of health care services, says Michael R.  Huber, executive
director of the Health Outcomes Institute, a Bloomington, Minn.-based
not-for-profit organization that's coordinating research efforts for the
consortium.

"The consortium's work reflects the growing demand for marketplace
accountability of health services," Huber says.  The focus is on the results
of care, which can help consumers compare health plans.  The institute's first
study, involving severe asthma patients, sought to study how plans managed the
chronic disease and relate treatment to patients' outcomes.  "We're looking to
develop models for application of this data, either for providing comparisons
across plans or feedback to providers," he says.

Payers that are assuming risk for health care also are beginning to phase in
disease management programs.  For example, one of the largest managed care
organizations, United HealthCare, is developing disease management programs
for asthma, diabetes, lower back pain and chronic heart failure, says Karen
Keown, its senior director of medical management projects.  United HealthCare,
which recently acquired New York-based MetraHealth and covers 27 million
through managed care programs, will begin gradually implementing the programs
in March, she says.

The diseases that United HealthCare is targeting in its new program are common
candidates for disease management.  These diseases get a lot of attention
because they are known to be sources of high utilization, says Jaan Sidorov,
M.D., director of the continuous health improvement program for Geisinger
Health Plan, a Danville, Pa.-based HMO.

Studying diseases also can indicate whether a coordinated plan of management
can help reduce costs and increase patient satisfaction.  That's a crucial
question to ask, United HealthCare's Newcomer says.  He recalls that a task
force for his company spent many weeks studying low birthweight and high-risk
pregnancies as a potential condition for disease management, but wound up
deciding that no amount of preventive interventions would significantly reduce
the risk that women would have these pregnancies.

Disease management also involves scientific research, and experts say an
effective program must compare the results of interventions-both for cost and
outcomes-against a control group so that the effectiveness of those efforts
can be analyzed.

Automation's promise

That's why information technology will play a pivotal role in disease
management.  Computerization capabilities fit hand-in-glove with the need to
capture and bring together clinical and financial information to conduct
complex research.

"Better information is indispensable," says Couch of Coopers and Lybrand.
"You need to identify the ultimate customer of the health care system and
their wants and expectations, then design and implement a health care system
that is intended to meet their needs.  You need to be able to track the actual
clinical results of the health care delivery process, and track and trend
those results with financial results so you can constantly look at the process
and continue to improve."

Doing the necessary research for evidence-based disease management will be
impossible without the use of computers.  It's extremely difficult for
researchers to cull paper-based systems and monitor the outcomes of variations
in treatment.  In fact, current automation trends will have to continue if
researchers are to have a chance of discovering the most clinically effective
and least expensive treatment regimens for particular diseases.

"The automation of medical records and the automated collection of health data
is going to be critical for any of this to work," Couch says.  "In our present
state of affairs in medical records, it's almost hopeless to really be able to
manage disease.  We need to capture

real-time information from large populations of patients concerning pre- and
post-intervention health status to be able to demonstrate that systematic
disease management interventions have resulted in improvements in the health
status of populations."

The benefits of automation will go beyond improved data collection.  Disease
management experts say it's crucial to get guiding information back to
practitioners so that they have it available at the point of care, when
they're treating patients.  That involves automating treatment guidelines and
assisting physicians with decision support systems.

For example, Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound has operated a program
called Clinical Roadmap.  It's paper-based for the physicians, although data
is compiled on a mainframe computer, says Robin Johnson, manager of the
program for the Seattle-based HMO.  But this month, Group Health will pilot
the program on its clinical workstations in physicians' offices for its
diabetic population.

Computer assistance

"It will be a decision support system that will give providers information
that helps them deliver the most appropriate care to their patients," she
says.  For example, a physician will be able to see how many diabetics he has
treated and, of those, how many have had eye or feet examinations to meet the
HMO's clinical guidelines.  Such examinations can prevent more expensive
treatment if a patient's condition deteriorates before it's detected by
clinicians.

Physicians' use of information technology will be important, both in
implementing practice suggestions as well as gathering data to refine disease
management approaches, says Dan Segedin, vice president of health systems
management for PCS Health Systems.  The Scottsdale, Ariz.-based pharmacy
benefits manager recently was acquired by Eli Lilly & Co., an
Indianapolis-based pharmaceutical company, and is leading the parent company's
disease management effort.

"The linkage to physicians is critical.  They remain the primary decisionmaker
in health care, and on average, they're influencing how $1 million per
physician is being spent downstream," Segedin says.  "We need to have some
connection to physicians to get data from them to measure outcomes and to get
data back to them, which they now get in a piecemeal fashion, or clinical
guidelines over the network."

It's not enough for such information systems to collect financial information,
says Paul Tang, M.D., medical director of information systems at Northwestern
Memorial Hospital in Chicago.  "It's almost a no-brainer that we need
information systems, but if we don't look at clinical practice through our
systems and just look at costs, then we're missing a big opportunity," he
says.  "If the overemphasis on financial issues comes at the risk of ignoring
the quality issues, then we risk not gathering the right data."

Network building

The other challenge for applying information technology to disease management
initiatives is to build health information networks to make information
readily available at multiple sites, including physicians' offices and other
ambulatory care settings, Tang says.  Clinical guidelines and preventive
measures can most easily be implemented at outpatient settings to pre-empt
expensive inpatient treatment of serious conditions.

Northwestern, which is building a $580 million facility expected to be ready
in 1999, is designing a new enterprisewide information network that will
include links to about 600 physician offices in the building, as well as
ancillary diagnostic and testing services, in an attempt to give physicians
needed clinical and financial information drawn from one data repository.
"We're not addressing what physicians need to make these decisions, so we need
to target physicians in ambulatory care settings," Tang says.  "We have to
reorganize the data and design applications that help physicians use and view
data the way they need to."

Involving ambulatory care physicians is also part of the information systems
strategy of Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, which is seeking to
automate its disease management program.  Automating best practice information
and patient documentation is important because Children's handles about
200,000 outpatient visits annually throughout the metropolitan Chicago area.
The hospital plans to begin testing a computer-based patient records system in
one of its primary care clinics this spring.

Disease management programs will become a way of life for most hospitals,
predicts Julie Bonello, Children's CIO, and physicians will need to use
information technology if they are to survive under managed care.  "I don't
know if there will be a big complaint from them about practicing cookie cutter
medicine, because this will affect their pocketbook," Bonello says.  "They'll
have to know how to aggressively manage their patients.  They'll need a lot of
information to do that and a lot of tools."

In addition to using tools such as electronic records to capture information
and data repositories to collect it, disease management will benefit from new
hardware technologies that bring information and data collection nearer to the
point of care.

New tools

For example, University of Texas M.D.  Anderson Cancer Center in Houston is
using its clinical repository, built over the last 50 years of specialized
care, to continually refine its critical pathways.  The cancer center is
giving its 28 case managers portable computers to aid in implementing its care
management program, says Charles Emery, the center's associate vice president
and CIO.

A similar approach is being developed by Capp Care, which is developing a
pen-based wireless computer that both captures clinical data and gives
physicians decision support at the bedside.  Capp Care, which has PPO
contracts with more than 104,000 physicians and 4,300 hospitals, hopes to
complete work on the system by mid-year and to market it commercially.

Marlow says such systems will offset costs with more efficiency, reductions in
costs and elimination of mistakes, which can reduce malpractice exposure.  The
payback period will shorten because technology costs are falling.

But he cites a more sobering reason why providers need to move to automation
to implement strategies such as disease management.  "Within three to five
years, providers that haven't taken strides to implement this type of
technology will be at a significant disadvantage, and they may be out of
business," he contends.  "If this helps reduce costs by two-thirds to
three-quarters, those using more archaic forms won't be able to compete."

Still, some organizations aren't sure that the concepts underlying disease
management will work and that money will be saved.  Some note that other
health care initiatives and technologies have been hyped as potential money
savers but only resulted in increased utilization.

Skepticism exists

One person who's hedging her bets is United HealthCare's Keown, who oversees
disease management.  She says the HMO company is "going into disease
management incrementally."  United will test modules for asthma, diabetes, low
back pain and chronic heart failure starting in March.

"We clearly don't know what pieces of the program work, and we don't want to
waste customers' money if we can't clearly show a value for the intervention,"
she says.  She cites some efforts at direct case management as not being
consistently successful in reducing health care expenditures.

But Capp Care's Marlow sees disease management as part of a logical
progression in health care that eventually will result in the development of
payment methodologies that move beyond capitation.  Where capitation sets a
financial incentive to limit care in order to maximize profits, Marlow
foresees a system that will give providers incentives to provide optimal care,
promoting the use of disease management.

Couch of Coopers and Lybrand believes providers will have to do more than
voice support for information technology and disease management programs.
"I'm still seeing primarily lip service to making these investments among
medical leaders," he says.  "They have to recognize that these types of
investments, if they are not made, will basically leave the management of
health care to those that have access to this information and data.

"If physicians are going to continue to have influence over clinical
decisionmaking, they will have to lead in making investments into electronic
medical records and into integrated systems that allow this research," he
continues.  "There's a tremendous amount of distrust that this kind of
information will be used against them.  If they don't have the courage to put
themselves out there and lead the medical information revolution, it will be
inflicted on them by those that have the technology and the information."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Information technology essential to HMO's disease management strategy


Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound is approaching disease management as
an extension of its concept of population-based care, says Robin Johnson,
manager of the Seattle-based HMO's Clinical Roadmap program.  And it plans to
use information technology to help physicians better monitor patients'
conditions and give them guidance in providing preventive and non-acute care.

Providers can define populations in many different ways, she says, such as
seniors or women of child-bearing age.  The Clinical Roadmap program is Group
Health's effort to define a population by its clinical needs, and then to
improve its services in certain key areas:

* Planning for care across the continuum rather than emphasizing sickness or
acute care needs.  * Looking at what the patient wants and needs vs.  meeting
the organization's needs.  * Looking at health care delivery instead of just
looking at business performance.  * Paying attention to patients' quality of
life.

The process of putting together a system of care for a clinical population has
helped Group Health predict and manage care by measuring important outcomes
and then using the information to see what it should be doing differently,
Johnson says.

"It's like a decision tree underlying the individual case," she adds.  "For a
diabetic, for example, you can not only see when the last eye exam was, but
there's a linkage between that and the underlying guideline.  The information
will be highlighted in some way to help the clinician know that the patient is
out of compliance."

Primary care physicians are the coordinating point for the system, she says,
and Group Health plans to use its growing network of workstations in
physicians' offices in two ways.  First, physicians will be able to use
patient registries to determine which of their patients have specific
conditions.  Secondly, by linking those patients to guidelines of care,
physicians can see suggestions for what treatment is appropriate.

The Clinical Roadmap program started in late 1992 to target diabetics and
those needing heart care, pregnancy care and tobacco cessation.  Since then,
it's been expanded to include depression, breast care, immunizations, HIV/AIDS
and asthma.

Besides functioning as a decision support system for physicians, the computer
network "will be a very important tool in aiding provider and patient
decisionmaking," Johnson says.  "It will help us evaluate outcomes and give us
better ways to learn what works from the care we're delivering.

"The power of the information system is that it can really make planning a
proactive component so the physician can focus on the care rather than
figuring out who needs to provide the care."

Anecdotal evidence suggests that Group Health patients who are involved in the
program feel more empowered by the approach and are more satisfied because
physicians are taking a proactive role in their health, not just treating them
when they get sick, Johnson says.

Group Health's disease management automation effort is part of a broader, $100
million, five-year initiative to build an enterprisewide network to connect
all care delivery sites.  It's using its own legacy results reporting
software, Sun Microsystems servers and networked personal computers, most of
which are made by Compaq Computer Corp.  (see story, July/August 1994 issue).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>