
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B10-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B023-182</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb49.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040657 text/html 28997
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:05:00 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:22 GMT
Content-length: 28810
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/pb49.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JUNE 14, 1993<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>IT'S HERE! IBM FORMALLY ANNOUNCES SATCONNECT SERVICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(642 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>FIRST UNION EXPANDS DATA NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(256 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>MAINSTREAM DATA TAKES ON NEW SERVICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>COMSTREAM KIT HEADS EAST FOR SHANGHAI SE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>WHAT IS A VSAT SAYS US DEPT. OF COMMERCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>EURO VSAT MARKET SET TO RISE--REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(180 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>HUGHES LAUNCH VOICE VSAT PRODUCT AT AT93</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>COVENTRY SET TO BE TELETEXT CAPITAL OF WORLD?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(327 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>DBC TO FORM CHINESE DB JV</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>NEWS IN BRIEF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(761 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>VSAT IN EUROPE -- REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(571 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>DBN DIARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(323 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

IT'S HERE! IBM FORMALLY ANNOUNCES SATCONNECT SERVICE

IBM has finally announced the official existence of
its IN Satconnect service in Europe, much to the
chagrin of the other satellite network operators who
are keeping a somewhat discrete silence over the
whole affair.

After many months of waiting and broken internal
deadlines, IBM executives have allowed news of the
new service to become officially released.  Many
software revisions and internal quality assurance
certifications contributed towards the internal
delays.  Many observers who have seen the system
believe that the IBM-induced delays were worthwhile.

The system has been announced in Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland and the UK.

Data transmission rates of 9.6kbit/s to 2mbit/s can
be attained through the new 'digital pipe'.  The
"general availability" date is slated for 30
September 1993.  Countries will be free to set their
own dates.

Typically IBM expects one bit in two billion (10 to
the power of 10) to be corrupted at the downlink.
Error correction significantly reduces this
occupance.

IN SatConnect is designed to be operated
independently of other telecommunications networks,
although it can be linked with the existing IBM
Information Network services like the IBM Information
Exchange EDI service to collect data. With the
system, the information provider will link into IBM's
network to transmit data for distribution. Receive
sites will use conventional VSAT hardware combined
with IBM PCs and custom-designed hardware. VSAT
receivers as small as 80cm can be used in the centre
of the Eutelsat satellite's footprint.

Signal security is a key feature of IN SatConnect,
and advanced data masking technology has been
included to provide integrity for transmitted data.
As the system is digitally-based, video, audio and
data can be merged and transmitted securely.

Data can be scheduled so that it is broadcast at a
set time even though it has been loaded by the
information provider onto the transmission system in
advance. Real time data throughput will be supported
on the system during 1994 once a second release of
software is made during December 1993.  IBM is
presently attempting to attract "batch broadcasters"
who wish to send large files to multiple locations
rather than the continuous small-file feed companies.

Real time feeds are considered an important business
area and they will be approached once a steady stream
of customers has been found.

The information provider is charged for connection to
the SatConnect service. There is an initial charge of
GBP3,552 and an annual charge of GBP13,331 for the
transfer of 500 megabytes of data.  Further use is
charged according to a tariff.  Receive sites cost
GBP1,068 initially with a GBP720 annual charge
thereafter.  Under the existing IBM discount scheme,
existing IN users can achieve discounts up to 40
percent of standard tariff guides, bringing the costs
down significantly in the process.

IBM has signed an agreement with Comstream Corp. to
market and distribute its satellite receiver
equipment.  Although IBM is not making the use of
Comstream equipment mandatory, thus allowing the
potential use of plug-compatible equipment, Comstream
equipment will be marketed as a "complimentary non-
IBM product" and will feature in all promotional and
sales literature.

The Comstream DBR401 multi-function satellite
broadcast receiver and LNB are provided under the
marketing agreement.

One feature of the IBM network is that bandwidth can
be changed "over the air" in accordance with users'
needs.  The DBR401 receiver will have four pre-
selected data rates programmed as standard reducing
the requirement for field maintenance.

Data sent to the receiving PS/2 computer can
immediately be routed to a LAN server or mainframe if
required, thus freeing local receiver resources and
permitting the prompt processing of data.

* Minimum system requirements for the PS/2 receiver
are: MCA-based bus; 20MHz clock speed; 8MB RAM; slot
for IN card; RS-232 port; OS/2 version 1.3 standard
edition or OS/2 version 2.0




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

FIRST UNION EXPANDS DATA NETWORK

First Union Corporation, a Charlotte, NJ, USA-based
commercial company has extended its contract with GTE
Spacenet to continue the provision of a Skystar VSAT
network.  The new contract, valid for five years,
will see over 300 new terminals brought on-stream
taking the network capacity to around 1100.

The company is using the additional terminals to
connect new locations in the Maryland, Washington DC
and Virginia areas.

"The Skystar network provides the speed and
reliability our branches need to provide our
customers with the best possible service.   The
network has also helped facilitate our growth through
mergers and acquisitions because we are able to get
new sites on-line quickly and to continue to deliver
the highest quality of customer service possible
throughout the First Union system," said George
Mattingly, senior vice president and director of
telecommunications at First Union.

"Our VSAT network has survived two hurricanes and an
ambitious expansion program while providing
significant cost savings compared to terrestrial
alternatives."

A spokesman for GTE Spacenet said that First Union is
one of its most demanding customers and attempts to
satisfy their requirements has in turn germinated
other benefits for Skystar customers generally.

In 1988 First Union became the first bank in the US
to use high-speed satellite-based communications in
its branch banking network.  The network supports
branch automation and transaction processing of ATMS,
video broadcasts and training systems.

First Union awarded GTE its "Supplier of the Year"
award recently out of over 18,000 suppliers in
recognition of the service, says
the company.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

MAINSTREAM DATA TAKES ON NEW SERVICES

Mainstream Data has added three new services onto its
Mainstream Newscast satellite-delivered news service
portfolio in North America.

Ziffwire, NewsNet and Information Inc. services are
now being carried on the service.   With the new
services, there are now over 150 information services
from 20 information vendors carried on Mainstream
Newscast.

Full-text transmission from Ziff Davis' publishing
stable including PC Week, PC Magazine, PC Computing,
MACWeek and Computer Shopper will be distributed, as
well as around 300 business and industry trade
publications representing 17 vertical markets carried
by NewsNet. Information Inc. will relay executive
summaries from over 650 professional and industry
related trade journals, major newspapers and
newswires.

Mainstream Newscast works by delivering data through
an FM Squared satellite transmission direct to PC and
MAC user-interfaces.  News stories are filtered in
tune with user requirements and displayed.

John Bennion, executive vice president of Mainstream
Data, says that the addition of the new services will
'enable us to deliver breaking news and information
on virtually any vertical market, be it technology,
pharmaceutical or energy.'

Over 15,000 users presently sign up for Mainstream
Data's services.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

COMSTREAM KIT HEADS EAST FOR SHANGHAI SE

The Shanghai Stock Exchange has signed a contract
with Comstream Corp for two parallel 1000 site
satellite networks to broadcast digital data and
audio to SSE member brokers.

Under the massive contract, the Shanghai Scientific
and Technical Development Company will conduct
installation and operation of the network.  Eight
installation teams are already installing equipment,
and many more are to be taken on to ensure that the
network is completed by October.

Comstream DBR401 digital data receivers and ABR200
digital audio receivers will be installed at broker
offices throughout China, and the network will
transmit real time stock information and prices while
the audio circuit will carry profiles of traded
companies, analysis of stock trading and business
news. In the downtime, 'background' music will be
broadcast.

The Shanghai Metals Exchange has also signed a
contract with Comstream for the provision of a much
smaller network.  Under the SME contract, 52
locations will be connected to the network by the end
of July.

The data networks will operate at 19.2kbit/s with
full redundancy and diversity as standard.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

WHAT IS A VSAT SAYS US DEPT. OF COMMERCE

After being asked "What is a VSAT?" by the US
Department of Commerce as part of an investigation
into alleged trading misdemeanours, Satellite
Technology Management is holding consultations to
resolve technical questions raised over the
exportability of a STM designed and built
telecommunications system in Iran.

The Department of Commerce has classified a VSAT
system to be a commercial communications network
eligible for export to Iran without prior US
government approval, but the Commerce Department has
investigated recent shipments made by STN to Iran,
and agents raided offices seizing papers (DBN
passim).

STM points out that Iran currently has two US-built
VSAT systems in operation, with the largest network
provided by Hughes Network Systems for the
Telecommunications Company of Iran.  STM has supplied
the second, smaller network to the Iranian national
broadcasting organisation to demonstrate VSAT
applications to commercial entities such as the
Central Bank of Iran.

Following on from the demonstration, STM is now
battling against AT&T, GTE and Hughes to win the
lucrative contract conservatively valued at US$15
million.

A VSAT system ordered in December 1992 by Iran
Electronic Industries (IEI) under a US$1.4 million
contract is presently held at US docks after shipment
was stopped by customs officials.  The system was
destined for use within a shared hub using Intelsat-
leased transponder segment.

The problem now facing STM is to prove exactly what a
VSAT is, and confirm to Department of Commerce
officials that there is nothing untoward about the
shipment that could contravene US technology export
restrictions.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

EURO VSAT MARKET SET TO RISE--REPORT

CIT Research's annual Satellite Communications in
Europe report for 1993 has just been released, and it
forecasts that the total market for satellite
business services will be almost ECU1.2 billion by
2002, with the facilities management of two-way VSAT
networks and services accounting for 24 percent of
revenues.

The rise in takeup for VSAT services will rise with
the market developing in many diverse ways.  VSAT
services are likely to be used foremost in the UK,
Germany and France -- countries noted for their
'awareness' to VSAT operators' needs -- and by 2001
there would be an estimated 19,000 one-way VSAT
terminals installed and around 15,000 two-way VSAT
terminals.   This number still pales into
insignificance when compared to North America or the
Far East.

CIT says that during 1992, as in 1991, Germany was
the largest market for VSAT services with the
presence of four network operators, and Italy
continues to be experiencing steady, firm growth. The
UK's market has consolidated following the sale of
British Aerospace Communications, and the often lack
lustre performance of its own incumbent operators.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

HUGHES LAUNCH VOICE VSAT PRODUCT AT AT93

Hughes Network Systems has launched a new VSAT
product designed to provide small, remote business
locations with a high-grade data and voice
communications service at a lower price than
comparable systems.  The launch was made at the
recent Asia Telecom show in Singapore.

The new PhoneLINK single channel telephony system is
a by-product of HNS' Telephony Earth Station -- a
product designed to offer full mesh connectivity and
toll quality voice transmissions without a network
hub -- and PhoneLINK will draw heavily on TES'
construction.

PhoneLINK can be connected into a TES network, and
provides point-to-point or point-to-multipoint
communications using Demand Assigned Multiple Access
(DAMA) and voice activation to minimise recurring
satellite usage charges.

Paul Gaske, HNS vice president for international
satellite networks, said; "PhoneLINK builds on the
tremendous acceptance of the Telephony Earth Station
for remote satellite telecommunications.  With the
new technology, industries worldwide can gain
affordable basic phone and data service to their
remote locations."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

COVENTRY SET TO BE TELETEXT CAPITAL OF WORLD?

Continuous research work at the Coventry University
may be keeping the idea and concept of teletext in
the public eye.

W J Overington of the Coventry University's
Management Division, has already published a series
of papers on teletext formats and telesoftware, and
it was much of his pioneering work which led to the
system and standard being implemented in the United
Kingdom.

A new system, known as Telescontext, has now been
proposed which could lead to audio subcarrier
broadcasts being used in conjunction with teletext-
like transmissions.  A discussion and proposal paper
was released to members of the UK academic community
late in May.

The system relies upon broadcasters manually
synchronising the start of audio with the start of a
teletext multipage sequence, such as a demonstration
or advertisement.  It could also be used to provide
on-screen representation of a live event, such as
sports results or elections.  Using telescontext
would enable the user to access a lot more
information while listening to a continuous audio
feed.

One of the key differences of Telescontext against
standard teletext is that the audio can be totally
separate from the television broadcast.  A lot of the
preparatory work has been based around satellite
transmissions because of the availability of audio
subcarriers, but the process could equally be used on
a terrestrial system using either broadcast offsets
of pseudo-digital transmissions.

"I recently caught the end of a television news item
about using teletext to send out live reports of the
live chess championship matches.  It has occurred to
me that if such a teletext feed could be supplied to
an Astra broadcaster that has teletext, a live sound
commentary could be provided as well using an audio
subcarrier channel.  Indeed if two or more audio
subcarrier channels were used, the live commentary
could be in several languages such as Eurosport does
with cycling and other sports, each of four
commentators speaking in one language on a separate
audio subcarrier."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

DBC TO FORM CHINESE DB JV

Data Broadcasting Corporation has signed a memorandum
of understanding with the Chinese State Information
Center to form a joint venture in the areas of data
broadcasting, information technology, interactive
broadcasting, cable television and associated
subjects.

The SIC is the principal government agency
responsible for IT in the country and is charged with
the economic redevelopment of the nation's businesses
through the use of IT.

Under the agreement, DBC will provide hardware and
software from its product portfolio to establish
trial and demonstration systems, and ultimately
contracted service offerings.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

NEWS IN BRIEF

Maxat has confirmed its contract with ICV as
exclusively revealed in the last issue of DBN.  ICV
has signed a multi-year contract with Maxat for
Eutelsat II-F4 SMS capacity with a comprehensive
redundancy package.  A secondary uplink will be
located at ICV's headquarters.  David Taylor,
managing director at ICV, said: "The result of this
satellite network will be  better quality service to
TOPIC 3 customers, backed up by the security of
additional transponders, satellites and uplinks which
removes the chance of network breakdown."  The
network will be used to relay the London Stock
Exchange's TOPIC and TOPICLINE financial service
feeds.

AT&T Tridom has been awarded a US$3.8 million
contract with the Civil Aviation Administration of
China for satellite communications covering airline
reservations and voice applications.  A AT&T Tridom
Clearlink hub station with a 4.5 metre antenna and 50
AT&T Tridom System 400 VSAT terminals will be
installed under the contract to relay voice and data
traffic.  The agency is committed to an aggressive
four-year modernisation plan to upgrade its current
datacomms network covering 120 cities, with more than
30 comms processors, 5000 remote terminals, 300 local
access lines and 80 leased trunk lines.

Polycom, has been granted a service contract by
Marconi, the Portugese Telecom satellite services
operator, to install and manage ten VSAT stations for
the new economic data service of LUSA, the Portugese
press agency.  By the end of 1994 the network is set
to expand up to over 150 locations.

The European Space Agency has held the first
ESA/European Centre for Space Law meeting and
workshop on intellectual property rights in outer
space on May 26.  IPR in outer space is a legal area
which will gather importance in the near future
because of the increased amount of space exploration
flights and subsequent masses of data.

A virus has been carried over the Channel Videodat
teletext VBI data service in Germany. The "Tremor"
virus attached itself to PKUNZIP, a PC compression
program and version 104 of Mcfee's Anti-Virus
software -- a package which cannot detect Tremor.
Around 60,000 people have signed up for Videodat
services, but it is unknown how any people have been
infected.

Countrywide Communications says that it decided not
to re-pitch for the BT Visual and Broadcast Services'
massive PR account despite having good relations with
the client and conducting business for other business
units involved with satellite.  After a four-way
pitch the account, worth a rumoured GBP75-100,000, went
to Infopress in London.  Meanwhile sources say that
BT is close to landing a new business television
customer, its first in a long time, for a yet unnamed
client.

Reuters America Inc. and Variety Inc. have formed a
new newswire aimed at covering the international
entertainment industry.  The service will be relayed
by satellite and existing terrestrial circuits
initially in North America, although the service will
be rolled out into Europe and the Asia Pacific
regions in the future it is understood.

Scientific Atlanta has introduced a new receiver-
decoder that can handle up to 20 compressed video
signals over a 45mbit/s trunk line. Although the new
D9700 unit is being aimed at cable companies, it will
be able to handle video and data.  IDB Communications
has already signed a contract with SA for use within
its Russian distribution system.

In a separate move, Mainstream Data has announced a
Microsoft Windows version of its Mainstream Newscast
PC front end system, and the first user demonstration
was held at Windows World in Atlanta, USA at the end
of May.   A new MAC product, known as MACWIRE, has
also been launched to filter news carried over the
network. It will be premiered at NEXPO in New Orleans
on 14 June.

Reports say that the rooftop to rooftop satellite
link between the Press Association offices in London,
UK and Polycom in Paris, France is working well.  Two
1.8 metre dishes at the PA are linked to a 3.7 metre
terminal in Paris for data transfer.

Polycom says that it is still on schedule for the
implementation of its two-way VSAT service (Ku and C
band) in Europe by February 1994.  Agence France
Presse is reportedly to be the first customer with a
30 terminal network.

Sources at Channel Four Television in the UK suggest
that a subsidiary company -- Channel Four
Communications -- is considering the launch of a
Usenet by terrestrial data broadcasting feed in the
future.

Maxat is reportedly signing up two customers in
readiness for its two-way VSAT venture with Hughes
Network Systems, as exclusively revealed in DBN
recently.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

VSAT IN EUROPE -- REPORT

Delegates attending the VSAT '93 conference in London
recently heard that even with a lot of European
Commission assistance and patronage, European
businesses are failing to maximise the full potential
of satellite communications services for pan-European
trading.

Hans Schoof, of the DGXIII satellite services section
of the European Commission said that the EC would
continue to act in its bid to see a free and level
trading market, particularly in the fraught satellite
services sector.

"There is a general lack of user awareness of
satellite services and European telecommunications
manufacturers are not very willing to take risks and
use VSAT networks," said Schoof, pointing out that
there is a very fragmented and unconsolidated
marketing structure for European satellite
communications.

A generally-poor fixed-line telecommunications
infrastructure in Eastern and Central Europe has seen
a growth in demand by emerging businesses for VSAT
services, with banks and news agencies being the
initial primary users of VSAT services.  In Germany
VSATs were popular after the reunification of East
and West Germany, and were extensively employed by
'West' German companies to link-up offices in the new
'Eastern Lands.'

Jon Collins, the outspoken and well-respected
managing director of AT&T Tridom Europe, pointed out
that there have been a lot of positive developments
in the marketplace over the past five years, and that
demand will continue to rise.

"The tremendous possibilities in central and Eastern
Europe are clear, and it is significant that in
Germany new legislation specifically encouraged the
use of satellite networks to overcome the problems of
limited infrastructure."

There will always be a place for terrestrial
telecommunications infrastructure, and companies such
as AT&T Tridom readily realise and accept this. "VSAT
is not going to replace all of a company's network.
It will be driven by certain applications.  It needs
to be case and cost-justified.  I am not forecasting
explosive growth [for VSAT], but I am genuinely
optimistic that we have finally turned the corner in
the European VSAT market," said Collins.

Chris Bell, head of Unisource Satellite Services
(USS), formerly known as Vesatel, believes that
Eastern European and CIS countries will act as an
important driver for new VSAT systems orders, even
though the average 'terminals per network' ratio will
be lower.

According to Bell, VSATs provide an ideal network
infrastructure for establishing a full range of
telecommunications services in areas with poorly
developed or unreliable communications, such as the
developing countries in Central and Eastern Europe.
But Europe has a long way to go before satellite
networks are as  successful as those operated in the
United States.

"A VSAT network can be installed within weeks and at
a relatively low cost. Eastern Europe and Central
Europe are almost without exception faced with poor
telecomms," said Bell.

Many industry commentators have often noted that
smaller VSAT networks are not economically viable,
and at times network operators have failed to
understand the economics of providing comparatively-
smaller VSAT networks.

In Western countries 150-300 terminal networks are
often the norm, but in areas with a poor
telecommunications infrastructure, a 20-50 terminal
location or even a dedicated point-to-point satellite
communications link can prove to be economically
viable, especially where economic regeneration and
exports are concerned.

Delegates and speakers at the conference agreed that
further moves in deregulation were an essential and
good thing, and that greater emphasis should be
placed on integrated, pan-European network in the
future.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
DATA BROADCASTING NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 14, 1993

DBN DIARY

9 June
Cable Telephony (conference)
London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 637 4383

10-15 June
18th International Television Symposium & Technical
Exhibition
Montreaux, Switzerland
Tel: +41 21 963 32 20

15 June
Satellite services for Eastern Europe
London, UK
Tel: +44 71 240 1871

15-17 JUNE
Multimedia 93
London, UK
Tel: +44 81 742 2828

17-18 June
Subscription Television 1993
London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 637 4383

22-23 June
Introduction to Satellite Communications
Cambridge, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 440 62534

24 June
Satellite Voice Services
Cambridge, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 440 62534

29-30 June
Satellite Data Services
Cambridge, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 440 62534

1 July
Satellite Video Services for Business
Cambridge, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 440 62534

7-8 July
Maritime Communications & Control
London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 481 8493

18-23 July
Satellite Communications Systems
Surrey, UK
Tel: +44 71 240 1871

19-23 July
New Broadcast Standards & Systems
Warwick, UK
Tel: +44 71 240 1871

20-25 August
Teleteaching '93 (including distance learning)
Trondheim, Norway
Tel: +47 7 544040

27 August-5 September
Internationale Funkausstellung
Berlin, Germany
Tel: +49 30 3038 0

14 September
Cable Communications
London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 631 3214

16-20 September
Live '93
Olympia, London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 782 6000

29-30 September
UK Telecommunications Policy
London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 631 3214

5-7 October
Vision '93
Olympia, London, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 71 830 8447

27-29 October
Home Satellite TV Asia
Phuket, Thailand
Tel: +1 305 767 4687

29-31 October
Broadcast India 93
Bombay, India
Tel: +91 22 215 1396

29-30 November
A Charter for Public Broadcasting (EBU)
Brussels, Belgium
Tel: +41 22 717 2111

Companies are requested to fax information about
forthcoming events to "DBN  Diary" on +44 203 717 418
or through mail in good time to the DBN editorial
office. There is no charge for this facility.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>