
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B041-24</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te49.html 205.156.212.5 19970122052218 text/html 38915
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:20:24 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:59 GMT
Content-length: 38728
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te49.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>COMPETITION, CRIME, PSC PRACTICES DOMINATE '95 STATE PHONE LAWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2211 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DEMOCRATS, BELLS SCORE ON TELECOM BILL - WHICH DEBUTS THIS WEEK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1665 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>AVOID PROFIT LOSS BY CREATING A SAFETY NET FOR ACCOUNTS PAYABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(723 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>IBM ALLIANCE ADVANCES AMERITECH'S DESKTOP SERVICES REACH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(239 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>TIME WARNER ASKS PUCO TO INTERVENE WITH AMERITECH&nbsp;INTERCONNECTION TALKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BOARD OF DIRECTORS RAISES TELCO'S LARGEST DIVIDEND IN FIVE YEARS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>BELL ATLANTIC 'ONE STEP CLOSER' TO COMMERCIAL VDT IN TOMS RIVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>CWA PICKETS IN PROTEST OF PHILLY TV STATION'S REFUSAL TO AIR&nbsp;UNION ADS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>PACTEL SIGNS SEACHANGE FOR DIGITAL  WIRELESS INSERTION EQUIPMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>TELCO PLANS GROWTH VIA NEW RETAIL BUSINESS ALIGNMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>U S WEST, AMERITECH SHARE NAME, NUMBER FOR LONG-DISTANCE CALLER&nbsp;ID</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

COMPETITION, CRIME, PSC PRACTICES DOMINATE '95 STATE PHONE LAWS

Legislation addressing telephone competition, telephone crime,
and state regulatory practices and structures dominated state
lawmaking in 1995.

Of the 49 states that met in session in 1995 to consider close
to 1,000 proposed telecom-related bills, 38 states produced new
telecom laws, with legislation on competition, crime and
commission structures and practices accounting for 53 of the 92
measures that made it onto state lawbooks this year.

State legislatures in 1995 produced an unprecedented outpouring
of legislation relating to telephone competition and
deregulation; these closely related topics together accounted
for 26 of the 92 state laws passed.

But telephone crime and state regulatory structures also were a
focus for strong legislative activity in 1995.  These two areas
together accounted for another 27 new telecom laws in 1995.

Other areas that got significant legislative attention in the
1995 legislatures included "911" emergency dialing (eight laws),
physical telecom facilities and infrastructures (eight laws) and
telecom taxation (seven laws).

There also was a scattering of state legislation passed on
consumer protection, extended area service, privacy, special
needs of the handicapped, universal service and abuses by
telemarketers.  Although in past years each of these topics
would account for a significant number of state laws, in 1995
these areas collectively accounted for just 17 laws passed.

In the area of competition and deregulation, 13 states passed
major new laws that effectively abolished their telephone
companies' legal local exchange monopolies, threw all local
services open to competition, and allowed more lenient
regulation of competitors.

Another 10 states enacted lesser measures affecting the scope
and direction of ongoing competition and deregulation activity.

Many observers attribute the flood of major state competition
laws in 1995 to the highly preemptive federal telecom
legislation that almost made it through the 103d Congress in the
fall of 1994.

That 1994 legislation would have forced open all closed telecom
markets while preempting outright many aspects of state
authority in the local exchange, and would have made the
remainder of the state jurisdiction into a creature dominated by
the FCC.  That legislation passed the House and likely would
have passed the Senate if not for a last-minute lobbying logjam
thrown up by local exchange and interexchange carriers as they
fought over the issue of Bell company entry into the interLATA
long-distance market.

The strong support for telecom reform and competition in the
103d Congress foreshadowed the drive to pass a telecom bill in
the 104th Congress.  State interests hoped that a strong state
movement to accommodate competition would head off the
preemption "hawks" in Congress.  The rush of successful state
competition bills did help the states' cause, but perhaps not to
the extent the states had expected.

Although they vary greatly in their details, the major
competition laws en-acted in 1995 by Colorado, Florida, Georgia,
Hawaii, Iowa, Minnesota, New Hampshire, North Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia and Wyoming have several
general attributes in common.

All specify explicit dates in 1995 or in 1996 for the start of
wide open local exchange competition, require certification of
local competitors, permit lenient regulation of new local
entrants, direct state regulators to develop local competition
and interconnection rules, and require universal service
support.

The laws of Florida, Minnesota, New Hampshire, North Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah and Wyoming shield their smaller
telephone companies from local competition for time periods
ranging from three to 10 years.

These major state competition laws generally permit immediate
local service resale, except in Texas and Florida where local
resale is restricted while federal interLATA restrictions on
Bell and GTE remain in effect.

Except for Hawaii, these major laws generally allow regulators
flexibility to adopt price-based alternatives to rate-of-return
regulation for incumbent telephone companies.  Hawaii's law bars
telco price regulation until effective local competition is
established.

However, the laws in Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Iowa,
Minnesota, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming prescribe explicit
structures for price-based regulation of incumbent telcos that
state regulators must follow.

In addition to the sweeping laws described above, other 1995
laws related to competition and deregulation include a
Connecticut law that sets definite procedural deadlines for the
local competition rulemakings required by the 1994 law that
legalized local competition.

A California law allows regulators the option to control
competitive market entry through registration instead of
certification.  Another California law requires regulators to
find that mergers and acquisitions won't impair competition and
that benefits of the deal will be split evenly between
shareholders and ratepayers.

Michigan enacted a law that simplifies competitive market entry,
mandates local interconnection, deregulates competitive services
and all rate reductions, and requires arbitration of minor
disputes, among other provisions.  This law replaces an expiring
1991 telecom regulation act.

Bucking the pro-competition trend, an Idaho law and a provision
within the 1995 Michigan law prohibit state imposition of
mandatory intraLATA toll dialing parity  requirements on a telco
that is prohibited by federal edict from intraLATA long-distance
service.

But in a direct challenge to federal authorities, the Michigan
law also requires Ameritech and GTE to begin intrastate
interLATA service in 1996.

Idaho deregulated telecom resellers, while North Dakota
deregulated payphones and terminal equipment.  Wisconsin and
North Dakota increased the maximum line size of small telcos
eligible for deregulation.

State commissions in Washington and Oregon gained legal
authority to adopt price-based alternative regulation systems
for telephone companies.

Bucking the pro-competition trend, an Idaho law and a provision
within the 1995 Michigan law prohibit state imposition of
mandatory intraLATA toll dialing parity requirements on a telco
that is prohibited by federal edict from providing interLATA
long-distance service.

After competition, a major area of state legislative activity in
1995 was phone crime, either where the phone service provider is
the victim of crime, or where telephone service is an instrument
for commission of other crimes.

State legislatures in 1995 took aim at theft of telecom services
in response to industry complaints that up to 40 percent of
cellular airtime is being stolen, that some 5 percent of the
households in a typical urban cable market are stealing cable
programming, and that present penalties are too weak to be
effective in deterring theft of phone, cellular and cable
services.

Phone crime laws in Arizona, Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,
North Carolina, Oregon, and Washington expanded previous law on
service theft to cover thefts of cellular and cable TV services.

These laws also increased penalties for all thefts of telecom
services and for enabling others to steal service, in many cases
upgrading the crime from a misdemeanor to a felony.

For example, Arizona's new theft-of-service law not only makes
phone service theft a felony.  It also denies parole or other
early release from confinement to any persons convicted of
stealing or enabling a theft where the crime involved more than
$100,000 worth of stolen telecom or utility service; they must
serve every day of the prescribed sentence.

A Massachusetts law sets the maximum penalty for theft of
telecom service at a $30,000 fine or 15 years in prison, while
an Oregon law sets the maximum penalty for stealing cellular
service, or enabling a cellular service theft, by means of an
unlawful "cloned" cellular phone at a $200,000 fine and 10 years
in prison.

Many of these new state phone crime laws also allow victims of
service theft to sue convicted perpetrators for civil damages.
In Washington state, a repeat offender now can be sued for
treble damages under the state's Criminal Profiteering Act.

Other new state laws addressing criminal uses of phones include
a Maine law allowing prosecutors to subpoena telephone
companies' customer call detail records where phone usage is
materially related to a criminal investigation.

A New Mexico law makes it a crime to use the telephone to
perpetrate telemarketing frauds, while Oregon and Virginia make
it a crime to call a "911" center for any purpose other than
reporting an actual emergency.

Georgia expands the crime of telephone harassment to include
"silent" harassing calls and phone calls intended to incite
minors to violence.

Legislation affecting the ways state commissions conduct their
business included laws in Tennessee and Texas that restructured
the state utility regulatory system.

Tennessee abolished the elected Public Service Commission,
effective July 1, 1996, and created a new appointed body, the
Tennessee Regulatory Authority, to take over regulation of
telecommunications and electric utilities; jurisdiction over
other regulated industries goes to other state agencies.

The new regulatory body is nonpartisan, and its members are
forbidden to engage in partisan politics while in office.

Texas passed a law recodifying the state utility regulatory act
into separate sections for telecommunications and other
utilities, so as to permit a reorganization of the Public
Utility Commission that structurally separates regulation of
telecommunications from regulation of electric companies and
other utilities.

The purpose is to separate telephone policy-making from that for
electric utilities as these respective industries become more
competitive.  Passage of the recodification law was required
before the legislature could pass the 1995 telephone competition
law.

Laws in Kansas and Oregon allow regulators to protect the
confidentiality of sensitive utility data that otherwise would
have to be disclosed under open records laws.

A New Mexico law allows regulators to levy administrative fines
on telecom providers for regulatory violations, while a Rhode
Island law requires establishment of regulatory fees for telecom
filings made by new types of provider.

Another Rhode Island law allows regulators to assess cable TV
companies for the costs of reviewing mergers, acquisitions and
other transfers of control, while a South Dakota law requires
all telephone exchange sales to be approved by the state
commission.

State lawmaking on infrastructure and phone facilities includes
laws in California and Connecticut, and provisions in the
telecom competition laws of Florida and Texas, all intended to
encourage the spread of advanced telecom facilities for distance
learning and/or telemedicine applications.

Laws in California and Nevada assert localities' rights to
assess fees on facilities-based telecom service providers for
use of public rights-of-way, although the Nevada law puts a cap
on the fees or annual fee increases localities can impose.

A Maryland law establishes a three-year pilot program to
encourage use of telecommuting by government agencies, while a
Massachusetts law authorizes a $75 million state bond issue to
finance a 12-year program to link all trial courts, police and
public safety agencies, and prosecution and defense attorneys to
a statewide computer network for judicial information, case
processing and trial management.

In legislation affecting "911" emergency dialing services, a
Washington state law requires shared tenant service systems and
school phone systems to provide "911" location identification by
1997 for each phone connected to the system.

An Oregon law requires "911' districts with multiple answering
centers to consolidate them into a single location by 2001,
while another Oregon "911" law allows "911" districts to sell
bonds to finance system improvements, with voter approval, and
levy a tax to cover debt service.

In telecom taxation, Virginia and Pennsylvania passed laws
allowing local governments to levy a 5 percent video gross
receipts tax in lieu of a local franchise fee on new video
service suppliers, such as telco video dial-tone services, that
would compete against the incumbent cable TV company.

As introduced, these bills would have permitted local gross
receipts taxation of providers who sell TV programming through
home satellite dishes and other forms of wireless video
programming distribution that do not use terrestrial rights-of-
way.

But in the face of lobbying by the direct-to-home satellite
industry, the tax bills were amended to exempt program suppliers
who use satellites and other wireless distribution systems.

Other noteworthy state telecom laws passed in 1995 include
Georgia and Arizona measures that extend wiretap protections to
include cellular and/or cordless phones.

Nebraska established a program to distribute adaptive telephone
equipment to qualifying low-income handicapped persons.

Oregon capped the phone bill surcharge that supports subsidized
lifeline phone services at an amount sufficient to cover six
months of demand, while raising by a dime the cap on the
surcharge that supports the state telecom relay service for the
deaf.

A Tennessee law requires telephone companies to provide county-
wide toll free calling by 1996, while a Virginia law permits
county-wide toll free calling for counties where the municipal
governments and a majority of affected subscribers support it.

California and Connecticut enacted consumer protection laws to
combat the unlawful practice of "slamming" - switching a
presubscribed interexchange carrier without the customer's
authorization.

Another California law prohibits telephone companies from
billing for calls placed to 800-number information services that
do not comply with FCC subscription regulations.

A Georgia law requires that printed solicitations for inclusion
in classified telephone advertising directories must clearly
state that the notice is not a bill.

One 1995 bill still hanging in there is a measure in Oklahoma to
authorize all forms of local exchange competition and permit
alternative price regulation.

It was introduced late in Oklahoma's 1995 session.  While
introduced too late to win passage in 1995, the bill managed to
garner enough support to be carried over to the 1996 session.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

DEMOCRATS, BELLS SCORE ON TELECOM BILL - WHICH DEBUTS THIS WEEK

Casey Stengel would be proud.  Turns out Stengel's axiom "it
ain't over 'til it's over" applies as aptly to telecom reform
legislation as it does to baseball games.

Late last month, Sen. Larry Pressler, R-S.D., chairman of the
House-Senate conference committee on the bill, thought he and
key committee members had struck a compromise that gave
concessions to the Clinton administration in order to avert a
threatened veto.  But when conservative Republicans heard about
the terms, they rebelled, forcing Pressler to call his deal just
a "framework agreement" and scuttling plans to bring the bill to
a pre-Christmas vote.

The new uncertainty left the bill vulnerable to more changes.
The latest draft of the bill is not public but a copy obtained
by Telco Business Report sister publication FCC Report shows
changes already have been made to Pressler's framework deal.
One of them is the removal of language that would have kept the
Bell companies from joint-marketing long-distance and local
service until a year after their local competitors were doing
so.

But, this time, it looks the deal will stick.  The Senate
Republican leadership is tacitly endorsing the new draft bill
and a key House Republican, Rep. Thomas Bliley of Virginia, is
calling on colleagues to vote for the revised measure.

Recognizing this, key sides in the yearlong battle have
curtailed their lobbying.  Jim Smith, president of the
Competitive Telecommunications Association, said his group of
local competitors doubts it will get the conference committee to
reverse itself and toughen a condition on Bell long-distance
entry.

At the United States Telephone Association, chief lobbyist Larry
Clinton said his group has given up hope of getting the
conference to undo a change to the bill that lets states use
rate of return regulation for competitive services.  The
provision was excised early last month by the conference
committee, which is producing a compromise version of the
telecom bills passed this summer by the House and Senate.

Another measure of how the deal is jelling:  Key factions are
releasing statements endorsing the new draft bill, even though
it has not been released.  Supporters include the
Telecommunications Industry Association, the Alliance for
Competitive Communications - the Bell's lobbying group - and the
National Association of Broadcasters.

The USTA and Comptel haven't issued statements, but Clinton said
he expects the USTA "will be OK" on the bill and Smith said his
group will find the bill "minimally acceptable" as long as it's
not changed more.

The heavy-hitters are checking their swings because they've
chalked up plenty of runs in this the last inning of bill's ball
game.  In recent days, the Bells have won the right to keep one
of their brethren, Ameritech, from expanding its alarm-
monitoring operations (TBR Dec. 18. 1995) beyond the company's
current holdings.  Ameritech, the only Bell the bill lets into
alarm monitoring - by "grandfathering" the company's current
holdings - now cannot expand its alarm monitoring presence until
after the five-year wait the bill imposes on all of the Bells
seeking to get into that line of business.

Ameritech's next alarm monitoring move was expected to be
outside of its territory.

The nation's 14 largest utility companies also scored by
convincing the conferees to let these federally regulated
utilities offer telecom services.

But the latest draft of the conference report - in effect, the
new telecom bill - shows that the biggest runs were scored by
the Democrats.  These include addition of a role for the
Department of Justice (DOJ) in assessing the long-distance entry

applications of the Bell companies.  Although the role is only
advisory, as the Senate bill originally offered, the change was
one of three called for by the White House when the
administration was threatening a veto.

Another recent change is adoption of the House bill's 35-percent
cap on the size of national audience that any one TV station
chain may accumulate.  The 35-percent cap, a part of the House
telecom bill added by Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass., addresses the
"media concentration" aspect of the bill, another prime White
House worry.

Those and other changes were added to the bill after a meeting
Dec. 13 between Pressler and Bliley and the two top Democrats on
the conference committee, Rep. John Dingell of Michigan and Sen.
Ernest Hollings of South Carolina.

For his part, sources say Hollings was able to convince Pressler
to remove from the bill entirely all language that would have
lifted the current 25-percent cap on foreign investment in FCC
licensees.

The next day, Pressler and Bliley were set to sell their deal to
House and Senate Republicans.  But that morning's newspapers
reported that Vice President Al Gore had endorsed the bill on
behalf of the Clinton administration, the entity most
conservative Republicans despise.

That error cost Pressler his run.  He was forced to call his
deal a "framework" - not an agreement - when key conferees,
including Rep. Jack Fields, R-Texas, the chairman of the House
telecom subcommittee and a key drafter of the House bill,
rebelled.  Fields released a statement saying, "There was no
deal" with the White House and then left to spend the holidays
with his family in Texas.

Fields likely will have to back down and vote for the conference
report, but at the moment all eyes are on House Speaker Newt
Gingrich, R-Ga.  Rather than endorse the new bill, Gingrich has
called "time out," advising House Republicans to hold off on
voting on the conference report until after Congress returns to
session.  His staff said the speaker had not yet reviewed the
new language to see if it was sufficiently deregulatory.

Besides the new role for the DoJ in deciding Bell entry into
long-distance, other key aspects of the draft version of the
report are:

*  "Grandfathering" states that, as of Dec. 1995, require the
Bells to offer dialing parity,

*  Expedited judicial review of the bill's "cyberporn"
restrictions, and

*  Inclusion of the Senate bill's requirement that discounted
telecom service be offered to schools and libraries.  Now,
however, that requirement is part of the definition of universal
service itself, meaning that providers can seek compensation for
their loss via the universal service subsidy.

The DoJ's role on Bell long-distance entry will come as part of
the FCC's imposition of a public-interest test on Bell long-
distance applications, a concept taken from the Senate telecom
bill.  The FCC must give "substantial weight" to the DOJ's
assessment, but that assessment will not be decisive in itself,
the new version of the bill states.

The Pressler compromise also requires a Bell first to have a
facilities-based competitor in place - as the House wanted -and
give the FCC the power to test whether there is "actual and
demonstrable" local competition in the Bell's local market.  But
the Pressler framework agreement eliminates language adopted by
the conferees just days before that would have required Bell
long-distance entry to be predicated on the Bell facing
competition throughout each of its states, not just in one city
in each state.

The bill adopts the House bill's requirement that a Bell first
seek long-

distance entry by applying to its state commissions.  To be
certified by a state, a Bell must have met the bill's checklist
of unbundling and open access requirements and have a
facilities-based competitor in place in at least one location.
Gone is the language requiring a state to determine whether
local competition is prevalent "to an extent that demonstrates
that the telephone exchange market is competitive."

The bill does not require the Bells to provide dialing parity
until they enter the long-distance business, unless they operate
in a state that has only one LATA or which required the service
as of December 1995.  Dialing parity, already available in long-
distance, means the ability to place a local call on a competing
carrier's network by dialing the same number of digits as needed
by the local carrier's network.

The bill bans making indecent material available over electronic
networks, a hewing to the Senate bill's approach.  The bill's
penalties for sending "cyberporn" - a fine up to $100,000 and up
to 10 years in jail - are also the same as the Senate bill's,
but the draft bill uses the test of whether such material is
indecent, not the "harmful to minors" standard that has been
upheld by federal courts.

As a concession to opponents, the bill calls for expedited
judicial review of this provision, meaning that legal challenges
to the law will, if appealed, go directly from the federal
district court to the U.S. Supreme Court.

Contrary to the House version of the telecom bill, the draft
agreement has no language banning the FCC from regulating the
Internet or letting the FCC selectively lift the 25-percent cap
on foreign ownership of FCC licensees.  But these changes may be
subject to change.  The Senate appears willing to accept
Pressler's view that the latter matter should be dealt with via
separate legislation - he says a bill will be introduced this
spring - but some in the House are still pressing their fight to
return their foreign ownership language to the bill.

In the Senate, Pressler believes he has "a good majority" but
his compromise has won an ardent foe, fellow conferee Sen. John
McCain, R-Ariz.  A source with McCain's office told FCC Report,
"My boss and others were beside themselves" when they heard
about the framework agreement.  The deal, he said, was worked
out behind closed doors, with the Hollings, the ranking
Democratic Senator on the conference committee, carrying water
for the White House.

McCain voted against the Senate bill when it came to the floor
and now his staff hints he will use his considerable power as a
senator to slow the conference report's progress in the Senate
until he wins his revisions.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

AVOID PROFIT LOSS BY CREATING A SAFETY NET FOR ACCOUNTS PAYABLE

Telcos can avoid millions of dollars in profit loss by
monitoring errors in their accounts payable.

A new trend is developing whereby telcos and other
telecommunications companies are hiring auditing services to
double-check their books against overpayments, double payments
and missed sales.  Industrywide, telecom companies are estimated
to lose approximately $10 million to $20 million in profits due
to such accounting problems.

"In this industry, frequent corporate acquisitions and
divestitures, expanding geographic territories, numerous local
vendor relationships and multiple payables offices increase the
likelihood of profit loss," Ronald Loder, president and CEO of
Loder, Drew & Associates in

Irvine, Calif., recently told Telco Business Report.  Loder's
company handles such audits for roughly a dozen telcos, several
RBOCs and various telecom firms.

According to Loder, about 35 percent of the nation's Fortune
1,000 companies audit their accounts payable, item by item, to
recover overpaid funds and to establish systems and practices to
help reduce future profit loss.

"Absolutely every single company in the country is going through
a change right now," Loder said.  "And because everything is in
a state of flux, there are lots of accounts payable problems."

BellSouth Telecommunications, for example, had done what it
calls a "billing reconciliation" in which its central office
accounting procedures were reviewed for discrepancies.  The
process is similar to an audit, telco spokesman David Rogers
said, and was done to make sure the company wasn't losing money
through its accounting practices.

"There are no pending plans right now to have the process done
again," Rogers told TBR last week.  "But that doesn't mean there
aren't potential problems.  It's something that always has to be
looked at."

Loder, Drew & Associates provides its auditing services on a
contingency basis.  "We get paid 50 percent of what's
recovered," Loder said.

"And it's not unusual for us to recover $1 million in over-
payments for a telco," he added.  "That equates to $500,000 in
profit, which is tantamount to about $10 million in sales.  For
large or small companies, that's a lot of money."

Loder offers these five tips to ensure accurate accounts
payables:

*     Avoid manual check requests.  These are non-valued
transactions that require repeated attention from your payables
staff and often lead to errors.  "We've conducted more than
2,000 accounts payable audits and have uncovered numerous
payments that never appeared in the client's database because
they were written or logged by hand," Loder said.

*     Never pay from a copy of an invoice.  Loder said this is
the most common cause of double payments.  Vendors - local
equipment companies, network providers, computer programmers -
traditionally mail invoices directly to the central accounts
payable department.  In many cases, they send a copy of the
invoice by fax if they have not received payment after 10 days.
For telco companies that operate in several geographic regions
with multiple local vendors, these double invoices can amount to
hundreds of thousands of overpaid dollars, he said.

*     Be consistent when entering invoice numbers into the
accounts payable system.  Increasing use of advanced accounting
software has left gaping holes in telecom companies' payables
process, Loder explained.  His company's proprietary software,
for example, called Scansearch, cross-references invoices and
payments by vendor, category, product group and geographic
region and identifies errors that would otherwise be missed
without accurate invoice number tracking.  Inconsistent use of
invoice numbers leads to payment lapses, double payments and
over payments.  Be sure, Loder said, that every vendor payment
is directly tied to a specific invoice.

*     Avoid use of blanket purchase orders.  Every payment must
have a corresponding p.o. number and every p.o. number must have
a corresponding payment.  The key to error-free payment,
according to Loder, is careful tracking.  Numbered purchase
orders are essential to an orderly, traceable payables system.

*     Reconcile large vendor accounts frequently.  Loder said
his company's audits and subsequent reports indicate that
frequently reconciled vendor accounts allow for more efficient
cash management, improved vendor relations and accurate invoice-
to-payment tracking.

Accounts payable processing errors are one of the most common
sources of profit leaks within a company, and while "telcos are
very large corporations," Loder said, "they're less likely to
air their dirty laundry.  However, many now realize there are
real savings to be found out there."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

IBM ALLIANCE ADVANCES AMERITECH'S DESKTOP SERVICES REACH

Ameritech and IBM have formed an alliance to give both companies
a stronger foothold in the swelling $30 billion desktop
computing market.

 Under terms of the new agreement, signed just before the
Christmas holiday, the telco and IBM will jointly market
integrated voice, data and video managed desktop services and
establish a 24-hour customer service facility to be operated by
Ameritech and IBM's Integrated Systems Solutions Corp (ISSC).
The one-stop center will support integrated voice, data and
video service line with a single phone call.

To achieve their goals, the companies together will provide $400
million during

the next seven years in desktop services to each other.  Both
Ameritech and IBM also stated they envision their alliance
growing during the next several years.

The creation of the alliance is Ameritech's response to the
transformation in

the telecommunications industry, Jack Reich, president of
Ameritech custom business services, said in announcing the
agreement.

"Ameritech is positioning itself to be at the forefront of
helping customers benefit from changes in technology," Reich
said.  "When we searched for the right partner to help us make
it happen, it was clear that IBM, and in particular ISSC, was
the perfect choice."

Ameritech and IBM plan to address the gamut of desktop services,
including telephones, printers, personal computers software,
wiring, local area networks, servers, videoconferencing,
equipment, fax equipment, voice mail, paging and wireless
equipment and technical support.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

TIME WARNER ASKS PUCO TO INTERVENE WITH AMERITECH
INTERCONNECTION TALKS

After nearly a year of stale-mate with Ameritech over an
agreement to interconnect their telephone networks, Time Warner
Communications is asking the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio
(PUCO) to intervene.  Time Warner made the request for PUCO
intervention in its second 60-day report to the commission on
the status of interconnection negotiations with Ameritech and
other incumbent telcos.  The PUCO must approve certain rules
under which telcos will compete before TW enters the market.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

BOARD OF DIRECTORS RAISES TELCO'S LARGEST DIVIDEND IN FIVE YEARS

The board of directors just before Christmas raised Ameritech's
quarterly dividend 6 percent to 53 cents per share, or $2.12 on
an annual basis.  This figure represents the largest dividend
increase since 1991 from Ameritech or any of the other six
regional Bell companies.  The increase is Ameritech's 12th
consecutive dividend increase in 12 years.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

BELL ATLANTIC 'ONE STEP CLOSER' TO COMMERCIAL VDT IN TOMS RIVER

Bell Atlantic last week came "one step closer" to its goal of
delivering video dialtone (VDT) services to consumers in Toms
River.

Spokesman Harry Mitchell tells Telco Business Report the telco
has just completed hooking up the initial 200 customers who will
test the system for six to eight weeks without paying a monthly
fee.  The telco is about one-third of the way to its goal of
passing 38,000 homes with its all-digital network, according to
Mitchell.  Cost of the buildout is $1,700 per home, or $60
million to $70 million.

Although it is rosy about its VDT progress, the telco is seeing
red over the FCC's recent proposal to deregulate incumbent cable
competitor Adelphia Cable's Tier 1 service in Dover Township,
N.J., where Toms River is located, once Bell Atlantic begins to
provide commercial service there.  Several other telcos,
including the U S West, have filed comments with the FCC
regarding the situation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

CWA PICKETS IN PROTEST OF PHILLY TV STATION'S REFUSAL TO AIR
UNION ADS

More than 50 members of the  Communications Workers of America
picketed outside Philadelpha station WCAU-TV just before
Christmas to protest the station's refusal to air advertisements
the union produced in conjunction with its ongoing campaign
concerning current contract disputes with Bell Atlantic.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

PACTEL SIGNS SEACHANGE FOR DIGITAL  WIRELESS INSERTION EQUIPMENT

SeaChange Technology will supply the digital ad insertion
equipment for Pacific Telesis Video Services' wireless cable
system in Riverside, Calif. (called Cross Country Wireless), and
also for the land-based system it is constructing San Jose.

Concord, Mass.-based SeaChange is the leading supplier of
digital insertion equipment to the cable industry and recently
notched an agreement with Prevue Networks.  PacTel is the first
Bell company to install the  company's system.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

TELCO PLANS GROWTH VIA NEW RETAIL BUSINESS ALIGNMENT

Southern New England Telephone aims to leverage its line of
products and services via a new retail business alignment that
seeks to provide customers with one-stop shopping for a variety
of needs.

The restructuring will revamp the telco's current structure of
independent business units, which sees each unit having its own
product development, marketing, and sales and advertising
functions.  SNET's retail operation will evolve into four
customer distribution channels and three product groups.

"This new alignment is another step toward offering customers
what they want: one-stop shopping for innovative packages that
ultimately may include a whole array of wireline, wireless,
information and entertainment services," Daniel Miglio, SNET
chairman and CEO, said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
TELCO BUSINESS REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

U S WEST, AMERITECH SHARE NAME, NUMBER FOR LONG-DISTANCE CALLER
ID

U S West and Ameritech last week took their recent FCC-endorsed
freedom to provide long-distance Caller ID service (TBR Dec. 18,
1995) one step further.  The telcos together now are sharing
name as well as number information for interexchange calls
originating within their respective service territory.  Both
companies say they intend to negotiate similar agreements




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>