
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B10-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B025-127</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122041553 text/html 21201
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:14:02 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:23 GMT
Content-length: 21014
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/pb46.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MULTIMEDIA PUBLISHER via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>CD-MAX EXECUTIVES WIN INFORMATION AUTHORSHIP&nbsp;AWARD FOR ARTICLE ON CD-ROM PRICING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1221 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE&nbsp;PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT&nbsp;OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(969 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CHIP BRINGS QUALITY VIDEO AUTHORING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(662 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA PUBLISHER via NewsNet
January 1996

CD-MAX EXECUTIVES WIN INFORMATION AUTHORSHIP
AWARD FOR ARTICLE ON CD-ROM PRICING

CD-MAX Inc., of Murray Hill, NJ, developer and marketer of
patented copyright protection and billing services for
publishers of electronic information, have announced that two
company executives, John David Wiedemer, Ph.D., and David B.
Boelio, have received the 14th annual Information Authorship
Award for their article on "CD-ROM Pricing: The Pay-As-You-Go
Option," which appeared in CD-ROM Professional magazine
(September/October, 1994).

The award, for "Best Article," was sponsored by Information
Access Company and Online Inc.

In selecting Wiedemer and Boelio's article, a panel of
independent judges reviewed the contents of the July 1994
through June 1995 issues of CD-ROM Professional, a leading
trade magazine. According to Information Access Company
spokesman Eric Swartz, articles were judged for writing
excellence, originality, insight, practicality, technical
content, scholarship and impact on the industry. As winners
of the best article award, Wiedemer and Boelio each received
an engraved plaque and a cash prize.

"David Wiedemer and Dave Boelio should take great pride in
receiving such prestigious recognition for their work," said
CD-MAX president Robert A. Wiedemer. "The award reflects not
only their creativity and writing skills, but also the high
degree of teamwork they and the rest of our staff exhibit in
approaching every task," he added. CD-MAX, Inc., a
wholly-owned subsidiary of InfoServe, Inc., develops and
markets a patented software system for the encryption and
billing of intellectual property distributed electronically. A
major CD-MAX benefit for electronic publishers and their
customers is flexible, usage-based pricing.

For additional information, contact CD-MAX, 219 South Street,
Suite 203, Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974-2100.
Telephone: 1-800-236-2901.

NEW CD-ROMS

EYEWITNESS VIRTUAL REALITY: BIRD AND CAT These two new
titles are based on DK'S incredibly successful EYEWITNESS
Books (over 22 million copies sold). Each disc takes the user
on a high-tech "living" museum tour for entertainment or in-
depth research. Click on the "eye" icon to take a virtual
reality trip to learn about birds or cats. Both discs are
filled with many video and audio clips and will be available
this month for Windows for an estimated street price of
$39.95; Mac versions will be available in August 1996.

EYEWITNESS VIRTUAL REALITY: BIRD - "Bird watch" from your own
computer. This disc showcases major bird families, species,
sub species, breeds or groups. "Museum visitors" can tour
different rooms and galleries and explore various categories
such as family, anatomy, and behavior. A short trip to the
Song Booth allows users to choose and listen to a wide variety
of bird calls.

EYE WITNESS VIRTUAL REALITY: CAT is a "purr-fect" gift for any
cat lover. From simple meows to beastly roars, explore cat
art, folk stories, and 100 different species in their natural
habitats. Using the latest in virtual reality technology,
users can manipulate a cat's skull 360 degrees to explore the
bone structure in a level of detail never before achieved.
Other exhibits demonstrate a cat's capabilities - for
example, an interactive game allows users to race a cheetah
against people or sports cars!

THE AMA FAMILY MEDICAL GUIDE. - The indisputable authority of
The American Medical Association teamed with the
internationally acclaimed design technology of DK Multimedia
make THE AMA FAMILY MEDICAL GUIDE the most extensive and
useful family medical reference available on CD-ROM. When the
book version of The AMA Family Medical Guide was first
published in 1982, it set a new standard for depth, authority,
and accessibility (over 5 million copies have been sold).
Today, that same high standard has been achieved in multimedia
form. THE AMA FAMILY MEDICAL GUIDE provides up-to-date, easily
understandable information on more than 650 diseases,
disorders, and other health concerns. It provides reliable
guidance on wellness and prevention and thoroughly explains
revolutionary new technologies.

Other Popular Titles

CARTOPEDIA: Explore the planet at the click of a mouse! This
all-in-one atlas and encyclopedia is an indispensable source
of reference showcasing 600 maps and 9,000 pop-up screens.
Users can explore the world as never before, from world and
continental overviews to close-up views of regions and
individual countries. CARTOPEDIA features specific up-to-date
details on such topics as populations, natural resources,
climate, religion, and more. CARTOPEDIA is available
immediately for Windows for an estimated street price of
$65.95; Mac versions available February 1996.

THE WAY THINGS WORK: Based on David Macaulay's best-selling
book (over 1.7 million copies sold) 200 historic inventions
come to life through vivid animations, pop-up windows, and
sound effects to offer a truly comprehensive understanding of
machines, science, technology and the inventors themselves!
Breakthrough inventions from A-Z are explained and explored in
a precise, colorful way. To make things "work," just dick on
anything that appears in red and experience exciting
innovations. THE WAY THINGS WORK is available immediately for
Mac or Windows for an estimated street price of $54.95.
***THE WAY THINGS WORK was a recipient of the 1995 Software
Publishers Association Critic's Choice Award for Best
Education Software Product .

THE ULTIMATE HUMAN BODY: Learn what you're really made of!
Brilliantly detailed 3-D images, illustrations, animations,
sound, and text will take users on an interactive journey of
the human body. Learn how and why the body carries out complex
processes such as sight and hearing by "dissecting" organs to
learn how they function. This award-winning CD-ROM offers more
than 1,000 illustrations, 700 pop-up windows, 90 animations,
1,400 sounds, and 45 minutes of audio. THE ULTIMATE HUMAN BODY
is available immediately for Mac or Windows for an estimated
street price of $39.95. ***Multimedia World: "The Ultimate
Human Body's exemplary interface magnificently blends razor-
sharp illustrations, simple animations, text and audio.  The
sheer amount of information is remarkable.

DK Multimedia has 12 exciting titles for adults and children.
In addition to the titles mentioned above, DK Multimedia's
full range of titles includes:

MY FIRST INCREDIBLE, AMAZING DICTIONARY: A one-of-a-kind
interactive dictionary with thousands of sights and sounds to
make learning fun.

P.B. BEAR'S BIRTHDAY PARTY: A wonderful "first" disc that
makes learning and using a computer fun.

STOWAWAY: An interactive tour of an 18th-century fighting ship
that lets the user experience the high seas with intricate
graphics, narrations and sound effects.

EYEWITNESS ENCYCLOPEDIA OF NATURE: A visual encyclopedia of
the world of nature, referencing hundreds of species of
animals and plants portrayed in their natural settings.

EYEWITNESS ENCYCLOPEDIA OF SCIENCE: A comprehensive
exploration of chemistry, mathematics, physics, life science
and a Who's Who index of scientists.

EYEWITNESS ENCYCLOPEDIA HISTORY OF THE WORLD: A journey
through twelve time periods including dynamic maps, pictures,
archival recordings and speeches.

All DK Multimedia product offerings are available wherever
CD-ROM's are sold throughout the country!

ANNE HOOPER'S ULTIMATE SEX DISC: This exciting CD-ROM title
helps couples effectively analyze their sexual relationships
and enhance lovemaking techniques. The disc functions as a
private consultation with one's own sex therapist. Based on
the best-selling book (over 500,000 copies sold), consumers
use interactive questionnaires to define their own sexual
profiles and hear Anne Hooper's customized responses in a
private home setting. The disc features three hours of audio,
over 60 minutes of stimulating video, and 375 full-color
photographs.  ANNE HOOPER'S ULTIMATE SEX DISC is available
immediately for Windows for an estimated street Price of $49-
95; Mac versions available in April 1996.

For more information, call (212) 213-4800 ext. 220.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA PUBLISHER via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE
PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS

Mediaplex Application Development System Offers Best Of Class
Cross-Platform Authoring Environment

Digital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (San
Francisco) have forged an agreement to create a development
solution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,
the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.
Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will be
bundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, and
Macromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimedia
applications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximum
revenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part of
their agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in joint
technical development and marketing, and provide technical
support to developers.

"We've already achieved critical mass with the number of
telecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in their
trials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director of
worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and Interactive
Information Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoring
technology with Digital's Mediaplex Application Development
System, we can offer both the platform and middleware strength
of Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoring
capabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkey
content creation solution."

"Because we already have the Director Player running on a
variety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position to
bring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the device
they have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,
Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With their
cost-effective architecture and strong understanding of what
broadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is an
ideal partner."

Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, Sasha
Magee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,
said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already using
Director, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with a
smooth and continuous path to move our business to the
broadband marketplace, particularly because both companies are
committed to delivery on multiple computing and set-top box
platforms."

Complete Authoring Resources

The Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporate
several Macromedia authoring solutions, including: Macromedia
Director 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creating
multimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution image
editing and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering and
animation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge by
Sonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content for
the World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an application
for compressing and playing Director files on the World Wide
Web -- is included.

These products will enable developers to create client
applications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fully
integrated with the streaming capabilities of the media
server. For custom client/server applications such as
interactive home shopping, distance learning, and home
banking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit
(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes of
application services on the server.

Robust Content Design and Testing Platform

The Mediaplex Application Development System also includes
complete hardware resources for creating applications,
including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and a
Pentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using this
configuration, developers can design content on the PC and
test their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.
Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia network
extensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, the
World Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments from
Apple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).

The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equipped
with a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of hard
disk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,
and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. A
dual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIX
for testing interactive broadband applications, or Microsoft
Windows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating point
processor capabilities for graphics rendering and video
editing. The Mediaplex Application Development System comes
with Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.

The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentium
processor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB of
hard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,
16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, and
Ethernet connectivity.

Pricing and Availability

The Mediaplex Application Development System, with this full
complement of hardware and software resources, is priced
starting at $33,900, with significant discounts available for
qualified developers, and will be available from Digital in
the first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one year
membership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access to
support forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital's
SDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced as
separate options.

About Macromedia

Macromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts software
tools, offers a full range of products for the Windows and
Macintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:
Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design and
illustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standard
animation and authoring tool for multimedia production;
Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoring
environment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the most
powerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,
the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;
Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design and
editing; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentation
application.

About Digital

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, and
Westminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunications
companies using Digital technology include US West's trial in
Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in the
Northeast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's servers
are also being used in production environments to insert
advertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TV
headends served by Adlink in California, and to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MULTIMEDIA PUBLISHER via NewsNet
January 1996

CHIP BRINGS QUALITY VIDEO AUTHORING

Digital Equipment Corporation has announced a powerful, new
video coder/decoder (codec) chip that delivers high-quality,
30-frames-per-second (fps) video compression and decompression
for desktop PCs. The PCI-based 21230 codec chip puts
affordable video authoring and video conferencing on a wide
range of platforms based on Pentium, Alpha, and PowerPC
microprocessors.

Ed Caldwell, vice president, Digital Semiconductor, a Digital
Equipment Corporation business, said, "With the 21230 video
chip, PC vendors can deliver affordable capability on the
desktop for creating and using video-enhanced presentations,
interactive training, video conferencing, on-line monitoring,
and other forms of multimedia communication."

Video Compression Essential

Susan Yost, Digital Semiconductor's multimedia marketing
manager, called image compression/decompression "essential" to
reduce the heavy data storage and bandwidth demands of video
applications.

"Video authoring and video conferencing need a video codec
that not only compresses data efficiently, but delivers
high-quality video that accurately represents the original
material. And they need it in real time," she said.

"The 21230 chip is the first video codec to meet this
challenge at an affordable price," Yost continued. "The 21230
video chip implements state-of-the-art compression and
filtering techniques that provide efficient data compression,
exceptional image quality, and realtime performance. In
addition, as a PCI-based, single-chip implementation, it is
designed and priced for the PC market."

According to Peter Hess, manager of OEM development for FAST
Electronic US, Inc., a manufacturer of multimedia products,
"The 21230 chip is capable of encoding video and audio data
from tapes and laser disks into MPEG-1 format in real time for
storage and playback on digital compact disks."

Video Chip, CPU Work Together

Designed as a coprocessor, the 21230 chip takes advantage of
host CPU computing resources while concentrating on codec core
processes to achieve maximal functionality in a cost-effective
package.

The superior image quality of the 21230 video chip reflects
the product's sophisticated filtering, motion estimation, and
scene characterization capabilities, which enable optimal
video compression and decompression for excellent image
sharpness.

The chip interfaces directly to the PCI local bus and features
glueless interfaces to industry-standard NTSC and PAL
decoders, audio digital signal processors (DSPs), optional
peripherals, and external memory, greatly simplifying system
and board design processes.

Supports Video, Audio Standards

For video authoring, the 21230 chip supports MPEG-1
IB(B)P-frame and I-frame standards from constrained bit rates
(1.15 Mb/s) to higher bit rates. For video conferencing
applications, it implements the H.261 video compression
standard for H.320 video conferencing. In addition, the 21230
codec chip is architecturally compatible with the H.263
standard for H.324 POTS video conferencing. The chip also
offers resolution and format flexibility to satisfy customers'
specific needs.

Mikhael Haidar, general manager, Software and Systems
Technology Division at Analog Devices, Inc., said, "We have
worked cooperatively with Digital Semiconductor to provide our
industry- leading family of audio DSPs and codecs to complete
the audio subsystem of the 21230 solution," Haidar said. "This
combination furnishes outstanding multimedia capabilities for
desktop PCs at the lowest cost."

Pricing and Availability

Digital Semiconductor's 21230 video codec coprocessor chip is
priced at $75 in quantities of 10,000. Volume shipment is
scheduled for spring 1996.

The 21230 chip will be packaged with software drivers,
libraries and utilities for Windows 95 and Window NT to
expedite development on standard consumer platforms. An
evaluation board, documentation and supporting software also
will be available from Digital early in 1996 to help board and
system suppliers to design the 21230 chip into their products
quickly.

Digital Semiconductor, a Digital Equipment Corporation
business headquartered in Hudson, Massachusetts, designs,
manufactures and markets industry-leading semiconductor
products including Alpha microprocessors and PCI chips for
networking, bridging, and graphics/multimedia, as well as
low-power StrongARM microprocessors under license from
Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. Digital Semiconductor operates
design centers in Hudson; Palo Alto, California; Austin,
Texas; and Jerusalem, Israel. A new, $450-million fabrication
facility in Hudson will begin revenue production in 1996.
Mitsubishi Electric Company is a second source for Alpha
microprocessors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>