
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B09-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B020-296</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me05.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035409 text/html 113787
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:51:41 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:55 GMT
Content-length: 113599
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/me05.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>SPORTS AND EXERCISE DURING ACUTE ILLNESS&nbsp;Recommending the Right Course for Patients</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2809 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF EXERCISE-INDUCED ASTHMA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4897 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EMERGENCIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NECK INJURIES&nbsp;Urgent Decisions and Actions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2285 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PATIENT ADVISER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EXERCISING--OR NOT--WHEN YOU ARE SICK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(714 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ECG QUIZ</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>AN IRREGULAR PULSE IN A SKYDIVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(679 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CASE REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>NONTRAUMATIC HIP PAIN IN ACTIVE CHILDREN&nbsp;A Critical Differential</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2633 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>GOING ONLINE: SPORTS MEDICINE AND MORE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(706 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>RELIEF FOR EXERCISE INCONTINENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(640 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PEARLS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>EXPEDITE ANKLE EVALUATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>IMPROVE YOUR GOLF GRIP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>EARLY ASTHMA DETECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(58 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>ESTABLISHING TEAM CONFIDENCES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(105 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>WOUND CARE FOR AQUATIC ACTIVITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EXERCISE ADVISER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>STRENGTHENING THE HIP ABDUCTORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(536 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

SPORTS AND EXERCISE DURING ACUTE ILLNESS
Recommending the Right Course for Patients

By:
William A. Primos, Jr, MD

In brief: Active people who suffer acute infectious illness may have
questions concerning participation in exercise or sports during their
illness. Many patients are reluctant to ``get behind'' on their training or
``let down the team.'' Physical activity, however, may worsen the
condition, result in impaired performance, or infect others. On the other
hand, some contagious diseases are relatively benign, and some activities
don't affect others. Therefore, clinicians need to understand both the
sport and the illness to know what level of activity to recommend. For
example, solo exercise at a reduced intensity is generally safe for
patients whose symptoms are above the neck.

   Although regular exercise can help improve health, even well-trained
athletes develop acute infectious diseases. Most physicians advise patients
to rest during an acute illness. However, highly motivated athletes and
exercisers often have a variety of reasons to continue athletic activities
during an illness:
   -- Marcia is a 30-year-old runner training for a marathon. She develops
infectious gastroenteritis. She does not want to miss a day of running and
fall behind in her training schedule. Despite several episodes of diarrhea
the night before, she decides to accompany her friends on their usual
Saturday morning 20-mile run. The weather that day is unusually warm and
humid. During the run she collapses and suffers heatstroke.
   -- Mark, a 16-year-old wrestler, has influenza. Tomorrow the conference
tournament will be held, which he must win to qualify for the state
championships. His symptoms include headaches, chills, and myalgia. His
temperature is 103 degrees F (39.4 degrees C). Mark decides to enter the
tournament. In his first-round match he loses to an opponent he had easily
defeated 2 weeks before. Mark's team receives no points in his weight class
and is narrowly defeated for the team championship.
   -- Michelle is a 32-year-old aerobics instructor who has an
upper-respiratory tract infection with rhinorrhea and a sore throat. She is
scheduled to teach two classes tonight and one tomorrow morning and cannot
find a substitute instructor. She slightly alters the routine for her
classes, decreasing the number of high-intensity steps and increasing the
time spent stretching. She is able to complete her classes, has no
worsening of symptoms, and is asymptomatic 2 days later.
   Patients with acute infectious diseases often have questions about
participation in athletic activities. What effect does exercise have on an
infection? Can physical exertion worsen the problem?
   Physicians should be able to determine what level of activity is safe
for their patients with infectious diseases and to explain to the patients
who need restrictions why they should avoid sports. An understanding of
athletes' susceptibility to infection, effects of illness on physical
performance, risks of exercising during an illness, and general guidelines
about determining playability will guide the physician's recommendations.

How Susceptible to Infection?
   Does regular exercise and physical conditioning affect susceptibility to
infection? Do athletes have altered immunity? A number of factors can
affect a physically active person's risk of acquiring an infection.
   Active people may be placed at increased risk of contracting infectious
diseases because of increased exposure. Athletes are often in close contact
with other participants who may carry pathogens. Transmission may occur
through a number of different mechanisms. Training and competition often
involve heavy respiration, coughing, and spitting. These acts may transmit
nasopharyngeal secretions containing infectious organisms. Direct
transmission may occur by bodies touching in some contact sports. Infection
may also be transmitted by contact with contaminated objects such as mats,
towels, and water bottles.
   Some studies1,2 (Reference) have shown that intense physical training
may lead to a suppressed immune system and an increased susceptibility to
infection. A recent study3 showed that natural killer cell activity
increased immediately after high-intensity exercise, but decreased 1 hour
and 2 hours after both moderate- and high-intensity exercise. These changes
may have been due to a shift of the natural killer cells from the blood to
peripheral tissues.
   Eichner4 (Reference) reviewed several studies dealing with exercise and
the immune system. Some showed alterations in the immune system by
exercise. Most of the data, however, were inconclusive about whether the
changes that occurred in the immune system were clinically important. Also,
some changes in immunity in athletes may be attributable to emotional
stress.
   Even if exercise does not increase susceptibility to illness, physical
activity may make people more sensitive to symptoms. Minor symptoms such as
nasal congestion or a cough are likely to be noticed by a runner during a
train- ing session but may be overlooked by a sedentary person.

Harmful Effects
   In making a decision about whether an individual should participate in
athletics, a number of different factors should be considered. The primary
area of concern is how exercise would affect the health of the patient.
Could exercise worsen symptoms, cause complications, or delay recovery?
   Strenuous exercise may result in more severe symptoms. Studies have
shown that intense exercise during the incubation phase of an infection can
increase the severity of the illness.1 (Reference) This may be related to
suppression of the immune system during exercise.
   Exercising with an infection also carries some disease-specific health
risks. Symptoms of a respiratory tract infection, for example, may worsen
with exercise. These infections are often associated with inflammation of
the airways and increased bronchial secretions. In individuals with asthma
or reactive airways caused by a respiratory tract infection, strenuous
exercise may cause bronchospasm, with increased cough, wheezing, and
dyspnea.
   Splenic rupture is a potentially fatal complication of infectious
mononucleosis. Physicians restrict patients who have infectious
mononucleosis from strenuous athletic activities for extended periods
because of the perceived risk of splenic rupture from direct trauma or
exertion.5 (Reference) The decision on the proper time for resuming
athletic activity is controversial, ranging from 1 to 6 months after the
onset of the illness.5-8 (Reference) Since only enlarged spleens rupture,
and because almost all splenic ruptures occur in the first 3 weeks of
illness,6 (Reference) the following criteria may be used for determining
the proper time for return to athletic activity, assuming the patient is
also asymptomatic:
   -- For light, nonstrenuous exercise, patients can resume activity 3
weeks after the onset of the illness as long as the spleen is not markedly
enlarged on physical examination.
   -- For strenuous and contact sports, patients can resume activity
approximately 1 month after the onset of the illness if the spleen is not
enlarged on palpation. (Physical examination may not be reliable for
determining spleen size. Therefore, ultrasonography should be considered
for assessing spleen size in a patient who wishes to return to strenuous or
contact sports before 1 month.)
   Another group of diseases that might be worsened or complicated by
exercise is infection with enteroviruses such as coxsackieviruses.
Enteroviruses usually cause respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms, but
they may also cause myocarditis.9 (Reference) (See ``Viral Myocarditis:
Detection and Management, July 1995, page 63.) Studies on viral myocarditis
in mice found that strenuous exercise can result in myocardial necrosis and
cardiac dilation, which often led to death from pulmonary edema.10
(Reference) Myocarditis has also been implicated as a cause of sudden death
during exercise in humans11 (Reference) and has been reported as the most
frequent cause of sudden death in military recruits.12 (Reference) Because
of the potential for myocarditis, it has been recommended that people who
have systemic symptoms such as fever and myalgia avoid strenuous
exercise.11 (Reference)

Impaired Performance
   A different factor to consider in determining playability is impaired
performance. Acute illness can hinder athletic performance by influencing
several different body systems.
   Cardiac function may be altered during acute infections, especially
those accompanied by fever. Cardiac output and cardiac stroke volume may
decrease during systemic febrile viral infections. These effects were found
in subjects who were inoculated with sandfly fever virus.13 (Reference) In
another study,14 (Reference) individuals with febrile illness showed higher
oxygen uptake and higher maximal heart rate during exercise. Still another
study15 found acute disturbance of myocardial electrical and mechanical
function in subjects who had viral infections.
   Acute viral respiratory tract infections can affect pulmonary function.
For example, research studies have shown respiratory infections to impair
pulmonary gas exchange, though the impairment is not serious. A possible
explanation for this effect could be mild bronchiolitis that results in
mild ventilation-perfusion abnormalities.16 (Reference) Additionally,
rhinovirus infection may produce transient peripheral airway abnormalities,
which are detected by measuring the dynamic compliance of the lungs and
also are not serious. In a study by Blair et al,17 (Reference) five of
eight individuals with rhinovirus infection developed increased lung
compliance with higher respiration rates. These changes were transient,
usually resolving in 2 weeks.
   Viral infections can also affect the muscular system. Studies9,13,18
(Reference) have shown impaired skeletal muscle performance and strength
during acute viral infections. One study13 found that all subjects had
decreased muscle strength and function, and another18 (Reference) showed
that 9 of 10 subjects had statistically significant loss of isometric and
dynamic strength and muscle endurance.
   Some infectious diseases may alter an active person's fluid status.
Acute infectious diseases, especially those with gastroenteritis and fever,
often result in reduced fluid intake and increased fluid losses. A fluid
deficit of as little as 2% to 3% of body weight stresses the circulatory
system and can impair endurance.19,20 (Reference)
   Low levels of body fluid could also affect temperature regulation since
less perspiration results in dissipation of less body heat. Although body
temperature normally rises during exercise, exercisers who have a fever
experience an even greater rise.21 (Reference) Impaired fluid status and
thermoregulation caused by febrile illness could put an active person in
danger of developing heat exhaustion, heatstroke, and circulatory
collapse.
   Because of these effects on the various body systems, acute infectious
illness may result in decreased endurance, strength, speed, concentration,
or any combination of these factors. If an athlete is unable to perform
adequately, the goals of the team would probably be better served by using
another team member who is able to perform at a higher level.
   Because of the previously discussed physiologic effects of acute febrile
viral infections, it is logical to assume that working out during a viral
illness would impart fewer fitness gains than would working out while
healthy. Patients who are concerned about losing training time can be
reminded of this supposition.

Risk of Infecting Others
   Playability decisions are also affected by whether other people would be
put at risk by the infected person's participation. To determine the risk
of transmission, one must consider the period of contagiousness, the mode
of transmission, and the type of contact. If the illness is potentially
severe and is in the contagious period--and the type of contact would put
others at risk of infection--participation should be avoided. Athletes
should be encouraged to consider the health and welfare of others more
important than their participation in sports.
   Measles is an infection that can be transmitted to others through sports
participation. Measles is a highly contagious illness for those who are not
immune and is transmitted person to person via aerosol droplets. Measles
transmission during athletic events such as the 1991 International Special
Olympics and the Maryland high school state wrestling tournament has been
documented.22 (Reference) The period of contagiousness for measles lasts
until 4 days after the appearance of the rash; people with measles should
be disqualified from sports participation during this period.
   Epidemic pleurodynia, or epidemic myalgia, is characterized by abrupt
onset of chest or abdominal pain and fever. The usual pathogen is
coxsackievirus B. Outbreaks of this disease have been reported on football
and soccer teams. In an outbreak on a New York high school football team, a
possible mode of transmission was shared water containers.23 (Reference)
   In a recent review of infectious diseases in sports in the United
States, the most common disease spread by person-to-person contact was
herpes simplex,24 (Reference) with 12 documented reports among wrestlers
and rugby players. Close contact is required for transmission. The disease
can be spread either via body fluids or by direct contact of the lesions
with uninfected skin or mucous membranes. The risk of transmission is
increased if the uninfected skin is abraded or otherwise damaged. To
prevent spread of herpes simplex, infected athletes should be disqualified
from contact sports until all lesions are crusted over or healed.

Practical Advice
   Physicians need to educate patients about exercising during an acute
illness, limiting spread of the disease, and preventing infection in the
first place (see the patient handout ``Exercising--or Not--When You Are
Sick'' on page 55). As pointed out by Goodman et al,24 (Reference) athletes
should be reminded that by their participation in sports, others may be put
at risk of acquiring infection. If infection could be transmitted during
the sport, participation should be avoided.
   In addition, athletes should be immunized against preventable diseases
such as measles, mumps, tetanus, rubella, and, possibly, hepatitis B.
Diseases such as enteroviral infections can be prevented by avoiding shared
water bottles and towels. Also, healthcare providers need to report
outbreaks of infectious diseases to public health officials to allow
control measures.
   Active people who do develop acute infectious illnesses should be
advised that the benefits of exercise are decreased during illness and that
they might as well wait until they have recovered. Patients should also be
informed that participation in strenuous exercise may be dangerous to their
health.
   To help prevent serious complications such as myocarditis, patients can
use a ``neck check'' of symptoms.4 (Reference) If the person has only
``above the neck'' symptoms, such as nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, and sore
throat, then he or she can probably safely try participation. However, if
the patient has ``below the neck'' symptoms, such as myalgia, hacking
cough, fever, or chills, it would be wise to refrain from intense physical
activity. By following these recommendations, patients who have acute
illnesses may avoid complications and make a safe return to full activity.

   Address correspondence to William A. Primos, Jr, MD, SportsMedicine
Charlotte/Metrolina Orthopaedic, Sports Science Centre, 335 Billingsley Rd,
Charlotte, NC 28211.


About the Author(s):

Dr Primos practices primary care sports medicine in Charlotte, North
Carolina, and is a charter member of the American Medical Society for
Sports Medicine.

Reference(s):

1. Fitzgerald L: Overtraining increases the susceptibility to infection.
Int J Sports Med 1991;12(suppl 1):S5-S8
2. Heath GW, Ford ES, Craven TE, et al: Exercise and the incidence of upper
respiratory tract infections. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1991;23(2):152-157
3. Nieman DC, Miller AR, Henson DA, et al: Effects of high- vs
moderate-intensity exercise on natural killer cell activity. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 1993;25(10): 1126-1134
4. Eichner ER: Infection, immunity, and exercise. Phys Sportsmed
1993;21(1):125-135
5. Haines JD Jr: When to resume sports after infectious mononucleosis: how
soon is safe? Postgrad Med 1987;81(1):331-333
6. Maki DG, Reich RM: Infectious mononucleosis in the athlete: diagnosis,
complications, and management. Am J Sports Med 1982;10(3):162-173
7. Eichner ER: Infectious mononucleosis: recognition and management in
athletes. Phys Sportsmed 1987; 15(12):61-72
8. Rutkow IM: Rupture of the spleen in infectious mononucleosis: a critical
review. Arch Surg 1978;113 (6):718-720
9. Roberts JA: Viral illnesses and sports performance. Sports Med
1986;3(4):298-303
10. Lerner AM: A new continuing fatigue syndrome following mild viral
illness: a proscription to exercise, editorial. Chest 1988;94(5):901-902
11. Johnson RJ: Sudden death during exercise: a cruel turn of events.
Postgrad Med 1992;92(2):195-206
12. Phillips M, Robinowitz M, Higgins JR, et al: Sudden cardiac death in
Air Force recruits: a 20-year review. JAMA 1986;256(19):2696-2699
13. Friman G, Wright JE, Ilback NG, et al: Does fever or myalgia indicate
reduced physical performance capacity in viral infections? Acta Med Scand
1985;217 (4):353-361
14. Grimby G: Exercise in man during pyrogen-induced fever. Scand J Clin
Lab Invest 1962;14(suppl 67):1-112
15. Montague TJ, Marrie TJ, Bewick DJ, et al: Cardiac effects of common
viral illnesses. Chest 1988;94(5): 919-925
16. Cate TR, Roberts JS, Russ MA, et al: Effects of common colds on
pulmonary function. Am Rev Respir Dis 1973;108(4):858-865
17. Blair HT, Greenberg SB, Stevens PM, et al: Effects of rhinovirus
infection of pulmonary function of healthy human volunteers. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1976;114(1):95-102
18. Daniels WL, Vogel JA, Sharp DS, et al: Effects of virus infection on
physical performance in man. Mil Med 1985;150(1):8-14
19. McArdle WD, Katch FI, Katch VL: Exercise Physiology: Energy, Nutrition,
and Human Performance, ed 2. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1986
20. Guyton AC: Textbook of Medical Physiology, ed 7. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders Co, 1986
21. Hanson PG: Illness among athletes: an overview, in Strauss RH (ed):
Sports Medicine. Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co, 1984
22. White J: Measles: a hazard of indoor sports. Phys Sportsmed
1991;19(11):21
23. Ikeda RM, Kondracki SF, Drabkin PD, et al: Pleurodynia among football
players at a high school: an outbreak associated with coxsackievirus B1.
JAMA 1993;270(18):2205-2206
24. Goodman RA, Thacker SB, Solomon SL, et al: Infectious diseases in
competitive sports. JAMA 1994; 271(11):862-867

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF EXERCISE-INDUCED ASTHMA

By:
Ned T. Rupp, MEd, MD

   In brief: Exercise-induced asthma (EIA) affects 12% to 15% of the
general population. Its symptoms include chest tightness, shortness of
breath, coughing, wheezing, fatigue, and prolonged recovery times after
exercise. Diagnosis depends on accurate history, physical examination, and
lung function testing. Nonpharmacologic management includes modification of
both activity and ambient conditions, along with rigorous patient
education. Short-acting inhaled beta (subscript) 2 agonists are the
pharmacologic treatment of choice for isolated and breakthrough EIA.
Anti-inflammatory medications such as inhaled cromolyn sodium, nedocromil
sodium, and corticosteroids are used to control underlying asthma as well
as EIA. Other agents such as oral theophylline or long-acting beta agonists
may be important but their roles aren't clearly defined.

   When undiagnosed, exercise-induced asthma (EIA), a common clinical
syndrome characterized by a transient increase in airway resistance
following several minutes of exercise,1,2 (Reference) can be an obstacle to
an active lifestyle. But when the disease is identified and well managed,
the results can be remarkable for patients of all activity levels. Of the
597 members of the 1984 United States Olympic Team, 67 (11.2%) experienced
EIA.3 (Reference) The athletes who had EIA won 41 medals during the games.
Their superb achievements indicate the high level of performance that
people who have EIA can reach with appropriate therapy.

How Common is EIA?
   EIA affects a broad segment of the population. Up to 90% of people who
have asthma experience EIA during the course of their disease, and most
consider exercise to be a major precipitant of their asthma.4-6 (Reference)
In addition, 35% to 40% of patients who have allergic rhinitis experience
EIA precipitated by allergens, viruses, cold air, air pollutants, or a
combination of these factors.2,4-7 (Reference) The general population who
are not diagnosed as asthmatic and do not have noted respiratory allergies
have a much lower EIA incidence of 3% to 10%. Combining these groups gives
an overall EIA incidence of 12% to 15%.8 (Reference) The incidence is
somewhat higher in children than in adults.8 (Reference)
   Among active people, the incidence of EIA ranges from 3% to more than
12%.3,6,9-11 (Reference) The presence of EIA in active people, however, may
be underreported, as many athletes may not be aware they have the
condition. The symptoms of EIA can often be perceived as part of the
experience of normal vigorous exercise.11 (Reference) In addition, denial
of illness is common among young athletes.

When Exercise Obstructs
   Asthma is an obstructive disease of the airways characterized by airway
inflammation and hyperreactivity. Airflow obstruction is influenced by
bronchial wall edema, mucus production, airway smooth muscle contraction,
and hypertrophy. The obstruction may be initiated by inflammatory events in
the airways, particularly the release of inflammatory mediators from mast
cells, macrophages, and epithelial cells. Airway hyperreactivity is an
exaggerated bronchoconstriction response to various stimuli including
allergens, environmental irritants, viral respiratory infections, cold air,
and exercise. Airway obstruction brought on by exercise is termed EIA.
   The etiology of EIA is probably multifactorial. Though much has been
discovered about EIA, complete understanding of the pathophysiology of the
disease has not yet been obtained. For example, the concept of airway
inflammation contributing to asthma is relatively new, and its impact on
management of the disease is still being determined.
   There is a general consensus that the airway obstruction that develops
in EIA is related to thermodynamic events within the airway during
hyperpnea. As a result of hyperventilation during and after exercise, the
upper airway is unable to bring inspired air to body temperature and 100%
humidity. Heat and water are drawn from the respiratory tissue in order to
warm and humidify the inspired air, resulting in respiratory tissue water
loss and airway cooling.12-14 (Reference)
   Typically, EIA begins with bronchodilation either during or immediately
following exercise. All people experience bronchodilation in response to
exercise. Normally, widening of the glottis and bronchodilation meet the
increased oxygen requirements during exercise. In EIA, however, the glottis
widens but the lower airways constrict. Respiratory demand increases, and
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV (subscript) 1) and peak
expiratory flow rate (PEFR) decrease significantly. Maximal
bronchoconstriction generally occurs 3 to 15 minutes after exercise
ceases.15 (Reference) Factors that can vary the usual bronchoconstriction
timing include environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity, air
quality, or pollens; the type, duration, or intensity of the exercise; the
time from a previous exercise session; and the degree of bronchial
hyperreactivity.
   With a second exercise challenge, less than half of the original degree
of obstruction will occur--this is defined as the refractory period.
Approximately half of patients are refractory within 1 hour, but nearly
everyone loses the effect after 2 to 3 hours. It is impossible to predict
whether a person will be refractory to EIA, and occurrence of a refractory
period may be intermittent in any patient. Original bronchospasm severity
plays no role in a patient's refractory status, though certain factors
encourage the refractory period: a warm-up session before exercise;
breathing or exercising in warm, humid air; and prolonged submaximal
exercise.
   Though most patients recover from EIA within 1 hour,2 (Reference) late
asthmatic responses that occur 3 to 9 hours after exercise have been
reported.16,17 (Reference) Patients at higher risk for late responses
appear to be children and those with severe early responses.2 (Reference)
Some investigators have doubted the existence of this late response or its
clinical relevance19 (Reference) because bronchoconstriction during the
late response is usually much less severe.
   In other words, repeated exercise challenge during the refractory period
may still reduce FEV (subscript) 1 and PEFR, but less than half as much as
with the initial postchallenge reduction.18 (Reference)
   The factors that influence the severity of EIA (table 1) are similar to
those that affect the refractory period and include the degree of
underlying bronchial hyperreactivity; duration, type and intensity of
exercise; environmental conditions; exposure to allergens; respiratory
infections; interval since the last episode of EIA (refractory period);16
(Reference) and low fitness level. Environmental factors such as cold, dry
air, airborne allergens such as pollens or house dust mites, and air
pollutants can exacerbate EIA. In patients with EIA who are susceptible to
allergens, antigen challenge during exercise has been found to double the
intensity of EIA.20 (Reference) Therefore, designing an individual
treatment regimen requires consideration of seasonal and geographic
factors. Activities such as running and cycling that require high levels of
activity at or near maximal levels of aerobic capacity are most likely to
cause EIA. Generally, the more vigorous the exercise, the more rapid and
severe the bronchospasm.21 (Reference) The relationship of duration of
exercise to intensity of EIA is more complex. With a short period of
activity, the severity of bronchospasm is related to exercise length;
however, some patients find that if they continue to exercise after
symptoms develop, they may be able to ``run through'' their
bronchospasm.2,8 (Reference) This effect may be related to the refractory
period.

EIA Workup Strategies
   In the workup of a patient who has suspected EIA, a thorough history is
vital (table 2). The signs and symptoms of EIA are typically those of
classic airway obstruction: dyspnea, cough, and chest tightness with or
without wheezing, though some patients may also complain of
gastrointestinal discomfort. EIA may also present as chest pain in children
and adolescents.22 (Reference) Without a careful history, possibly
augmented by teammates, coaches, family, or friends, these signs and
symptoms may be easily misinterpreted as postexercise fatigue. Also, denial
of symptoms is common, especially among student-athletes because of peer
pressure, embarrassment, and fear of losing their place on the team.11
(Reference)
   A careful physical examination of the upper and lower respiratory tracts
is important. However, because of the episodic nature of EIA, the physical
exam is often normal despite the presence of significant disease. The
pharynx should be examined for mucus indicating postnasal drainage.
Examination of the nose may reveal erythema, congestion, and enlarged
turbinates. Sinuses should be percussed to assess for tenderness.
Examination of the lower respiratory tract should include auscultation of
the lungs to determine the presence of a prolonged expiratory phase,
wheezing, or coughing with inspiration.
   Pulmonary function testing is an integral part of EIA diagnosis. Initial
FEV (subscript) 1, forced vital capacity (FVC), FEV (subscript) 1/FVC
ratio, and PEFR values should be determined. FEV (subscript) 1 and FEV
(subscript) 1/FVC values below 80% of predicted value indicate obstructive
airway disease. Caution should accompany a diagnosis based on PEFR
measurements: Peak flow is highly effort dependent, and a low PEFR may
indicate either obstructive or restrictive respiratory disease. Once the
EIA diagnosis has been made, PEFR measurements may be useful in following
the course of the disease and response to treatment.
   However, many patients have symptoms of EIA but a normal resting
pulmonary function test. These patients may require inhalation challenge,
exercise challenge, or a therapeutic trial to establish the diagnosis. (See
``Exercise Challenge for Exercise-Induced Bronchospasm: Confirming
Presence, Evaluating Control,'' August 1995, page 47.) Furthermore, active
patients often have lung function well above normal predicted values; for
example, a 30% drop in a patient with 150% of normal function may appear
satisfactory, but could represent a bronchospastic problem for that
individual.
   Bronchoprovocation testing is sensitive for diagnosing hyperreactive
airways.6 (Reference) Patients inhale gradually increasing concentrations
of a bronchoconstrictor, usually methacholine (though histamine may also be
used), while spirometric changes in airflow are recorded. The degree of
airway hyperreactivity is related to the amount of bronchoconstrictor
required to cause bronchospasm. Another laboratory test that has gained
popularity is bronchoprovocation with cold air.
   Exercise challenge testing involves determining baseline lung function
before exercise and measuring forced expiration at 5- to 10-minute
intervals following exercise for 15 to 30 minutes. Exercise challenge
should consist of 6 to 10 minutes of strenuous exercise at 85% to 90% of
the predicted maximal heart rate. Postexercise decreases of 10% to 20% in
FEV (subscript) 1 indicate mild EIA, 20% to 40% moderate, and more than 40%
severe.23 (Reference) When the patient's history is compatible with EIA yet
spirometry at 15 minutes is nondiagnostic, a prolonged postexercise
evaluation is necessary.15 (Reference)
   Exercise challenge is less sensitive than methacholine challenge, so
negative results do not exclude the diagnosis of EIA; however, exercise
testing is highly specific for EIA, and positive results provide good
assurance of the presence of the disease. Results of provocation testing
may vary due to the influences of allergens, air pollution, temperature, or
upper respiratory infections. These same factors can account for the
seasonal occurrence of EIA in many people.
   Because a patient who has EIA may have normal ``at rest'' pulmonary
function, a history consistent with EIA should prompt patient education
about the condition and its treatment. A trial of a short-acting beta
(subscript) 2 agonist prior to exercise, with symptom monitoring by the
patient, is often the next appropriate step. Follow-up exercise challenge
is often unnecessary in cases of clear benefit, so this strategy can be a
very cost-effective management approach.
   Challenge testing is warranted when the patient history is unclear or
when the patient's coach or parents have brought the symptoms to the
physician's attention. Testing can help avoid overuse or unnecessary use of
medication when the patient's breathing problems are caused by anxiety,
hyperventilation syndrome, poor conditioning, upper airway obstruction, or
seasonal EIA. Finally, an exercise challenge can not only reproduce the
symptoms for the patient, but also encourage compliance by demonstrating
the effectiveness of therapy.

Nonpharmacologic Interventions
   The goal of EIA management is to allow patients to participate fully in
athletic activities without difficulty. The ultimate success of
pharmacologic therapy will depend on the following nonpharmacologic
strategies: activity modification, improvement in ambient air conditions,
and patient education.
   Management should begin with efforts to increase physical conditioning,
which can reduce the requirements for pharmacotherapy and decrease the
incidence of asthma attacks.7,24 (Reference) Also, short bursts of activity
have been shown to decrease EIA.25 (Reference) By incorporating warm-up
activities into their exercise program, patients may be able to take
advantage of the refractory period and decrease the frequency and severity
of bronchospastic episodes.
   Warm, humid environments or breathing in warm, humid air will ameliorate
EIA and will improve the patient's chances of being refractory to repeated
exercise challenge over the next 1 to 3 hours. Wearing a face mask during
activity warms and humidifies inspired air when outdoor conditions are cold
and dry. Breathing through the nose rather than the mouth will filter,
warm, and humidify inspired air.
   Education can boost the effectiveness of other therapeutic
interventions. Patients must be aware of the conditions that exacerbate
their disease and how to avoid them, early signs of an impending asthma
attack, and appropriate use of medications for prevention and flares.

Pharmacologic Options
   The pharmacologic goals of treating EIA are preventing the onset of
asthma episodes and treating breakthrough episodes that may occur following
exercise. Several classes of drugs with bronchodilating and
anti-inflammatory effects are used to treat EIA, including beta agonists,
cromolyn sodium, nedocromil sodium, and corticosteroids--all most
frequently given by inhalation--and oral theophylline.
   Beta agonists are the drugs of choice for preventing isolated EIA and
for on-demand treatment of exercise-induced acute asthma
exacerbations.2,6,7,15,24,26 (Reference) This group includes the
established short-acting agents albuterol, bitolterol mesylate,
metaproterenol sulfate, pirbuterol acetate, terbutaline sulfate, and the
newer, longer-acting salmeterol. Both short and long-acting beta agonists
are effective in nearly all patients who have asthma--those with chronic
obstruction and those who have only exercise-related obstruction. However,
short-acting beta agonists are the most effective agents for preventing
EIA, and are effective in 80% to 95% of patients.27 (Reference) They
reverse contraction of bronchial smooth muscle and are very effective
bronchodilators.28 (Reference) In the laboratory, beta agonists have
exhibited some anti-inflammatory activity through stabilization of mast
cells and prevention of release of histamine and other inflammatory
mediators; however, the clinical relevance of these effects is not yet
known.29 (Reference) Short-acting inhaled beta agonists have a rapid onset
of action, usually within 5 minutes, and maximal bronchodilation usually
occurs within 15 minutes.30 (Reference) Therefore, to achieve maximal
effect during intense exercise, short-acting beta agonists should be
administered 15 minutes before exercise. Duration of action varies, but
effectiveness against EIA generally lasts 3 to 6 hours.
   Salmeterol, the long-acting beta agonist approved for use in patients
age 12 or older in the United States, has been shown to protect against EIA
for up to 12 hours in 55% of patients who have EIA and take no chronic
asthma medications.31 (Reference) Because its onset of action is slower
than that of the short-acting beta agonists, salmeterol is never to be used
as a rescue medication, and dosing is limited to 2 puffs every 12 hours.32
(Reference) Patients who take salmeterol, therefore, must have a
short-acting beta agonist available to relieve sudden onset of
bronchospasm.33 (Reference) The effectiveness of short-acting beta agonists
for rescue purposes may be blunted if salmeterol is being used.34
(Reference)
   In addition, tolerance to the effects of beta agonists is an area of
active research. In general, tachyphylaxis appears to occur with regular
use of beta agonists.33,35,36 (Reference) With regard to EIA, a recent
study37 reported that after 4 weeks of regular salmeterol administration,
tachyphylaxis developed to the point that there was no significant
difference in effectiveness between the drug and placebo. The controversy
surrounding the regular use of beta agonists has led to the current
consensus recommendation of on-demand use.24,26,38,39 (Reference)
   Current guidelines for the management of EIA begin with administration
of a short-acting inhaled beta agonist 15 minutes before exercise. Patients
should then undertake a 15-minute warm-up period of stretching and
low-level exercise, followed by a 15-minute rest period before intense
exercise if possible. If asthma symptoms develop during exercise, on-demand
therapy with two puffs of short-acting beta agonist should be repeated.6
(Reference)
   Patients must be carefully educated about the proper use and roles of
short- and long-acting beta agonists. If a patient's use of a short-acting
beta agonist increases, he or she should immediately contact the physician:
Increased use may be a sign of worsening disease, and the patient may need
further evaluation and anti-inflammatory therapy. Patients should also
clearly understand that a long-acting beta agonist is not intended as
rescue medication nor as a replacement for inhaled anti-inflammatory
therapy. Recent reports of deaths attributable to respiratory arrest in
patients using salmeterol40,41 (Reference) emphasize the importance of
patient education and proper use of asthma medication.
   Cromolyn sodium is another frequently used medication for the treatment
of EIA; its anti-inflammatory effects prevent EIA in 70% to 85% of
patients, with a very low incidence of side effects.28 (Reference)
Administered before exercise, it is most effective in patients who have
normal pulmonary function tests. Cromolyn combined with a beta agonist is
highly effective in patients who don't respond to single-medication
therapy. Early- and late-phase asthmatic responses are inhibited by
cromolyn sodium, though its exact mechanism of action in EIA is unknown.
Theories include inhibition of mast cell mediator release and alteration of
calcium influx. Because the duration of action and efficacy of cromolyn
sodium are less than those of the beta agonists, it is generally used as a
second-line agent.7 (Reference) The greatest inhibitory effect of cromolyn
sodium on EIA may occur at much higher doses than provided by two puffs of
the metered dose inhaler.42 (Reference)
   Cromolyn is most effective for EIA when given by inhaler 10 to 45
minutes prior to exercise.43 (Reference) Cromolyn does not have any
bronchodilating action, and if it fails to prevent bronchoconstriction, a
beta agonist inhaler should be used for immediate relief.
   Nedocromil sodium, an inhaled anti-inflammatory agent, has also been
found to inhibit exercise-induced asthma,44,45 (Reference) showing
effectiveness equal to that of cromolyn sodium.46 (Reference) Like
cromolyn, nedocromil is administered before exercise and is most effective
in patients who have normal pulmonary function tests. Nedocromil combined
with a beta agonist is highly effective in patients who don't respond to
single-medication therapy.
   Corticosteroids administered through an inhaler improve asthma symptoms
by reducing airway inflammation and bronchial hyperreactivity. They do not
have any immediate bronchodilator effect and are not effective if used
alone just prior to exercise. Corticosteroids should instead be used as
maintenance therapy to control asthma. Such use can improve the
effectiveness of pre-exercise beta agonists in preventing or decreasing the
severity of EIA.6,47 (Reference) Inhaled dosages of less than 400 g daily
have a low incidence of side effects. When side effects occur, the most
common are oropharyngeal candidiasis and dysphonia; both can be avoided by
using a spacer.28 (Reference)
   Oral theophylline has been widely used in the treatment of asthma for
decades. Its bronchodilating effects are directly related to plasma
concentration, and theophylline may also have some anti-inflammatory
effects.29 (Reference) Theophylline is not a first-line agent in the
prevention and treatment of EIA--it is generally used for patients who do
not respond well to inhaled beta agonists. Theophylline would be a third
choice behind beta agonists and cromolyn for patients under age 12, and
would rank behind beta agonists, cromolyn or nedocromil, and perhaps
ipratropium bromide in those over age 12. Theophylline may be given either
in rapid-release form 1 to 2 hours before exercise or regularly in the
sustained-release form for prophylaxis. Even in rapid-release form,
theophylline's long onset of action (approximately 90 minutes) limits its
use in an athletic setting.29 (Reference) Factors influencing serum
concentration and the possible effect on classroom concentration in
children make theophylline less desirable than other options in most
patients. As with cromolyn sodium, the combination of theophylline and a
beta agonist may be additive in the prevention of EIA,29 (Reference) though
concerns have been raised regarding increased incidence of side effects
when these two agents are used together.7 (Reference)
   Ipratropium bromide is a derivative of atropine and has bronchodilating
effects. The inhaled drug is used in some patients with EIA who are unable
to tolerate or who do not respond well to beta agonists. It may also be
used in combination with beta agonists or cromolyn sodium. If cromolyn or
nedocromil combined with a beta agonist do not adequately control
bronchospasm, a trial of ipratropium bromide would be recommended. The drug
has a slower onset of action than beta agonists, and its use in EIA is
limited: When used alone, the drug is effective in only 30% to 40% of
patients and requires nearly normal baseline pulmonary function to be
effective.7 (Reference) When combined with a beta agonist, ipratropium
bromide may be a helpful adjunct in adults who have moderate-to-severe
asthma. Though some studies have reported effective prophylaxis of EIA with
ipratropium bromide, others have not found it to be effective.48
(Reference)
   Other agents that have been used in the treatment of EIA include
antihistamines and calcium channel blockers. Antihistamines decrease
bronchospasm in some individuals but will not prevent EIA. However, they
can improve nasal function, allowing the patient to breathe better through
his or her nose. The calcium channel blockers nifedipine and verapamil
hydrochloride have been shown to inhibit mast cell mediator release and
prevent symptoms of EIA in a select group of patients;49 (Reference)
however, data are insufficient to recommend them for EIA control.
   Recent studies50,51 report that leukotriene inhibitors and heparin
relieve EIA. The clinical effectiveness and use of these medicines will
become more apparent after further trials.

Removing Breathing Barriers
   From allergies to air temperature, many factors can affect the
bronchospastic response of EIA, and the physician must be aware of the
nuances of each patient's response. Fortunately, there are many
nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic options that can be combined to control
nearly any degree of EIA.
   The efforts put into the diagnostic workup, follow-up, and patient
education are rewarding because they enable patients to perform at or near
maximal activity levels.

   Address correspondence to Ned T. Rupp, MEd, MD, Medical College of
Georgia, Section of Allergy and Immunology, Dept of Pediatrics and
Medicine, BG-247, Augusta, GA 30912; e-mail to deptped.nrupp@ mail.mcg.edu


Table 1. Factors Contributing to the Severity of Exercise-Induced Asthma

   -- Ambient air conditions (cold air, low humidity, pollutants)
   -- Duration, type, and intensity of exercise
   -- Exposure to allergens in sensitized individuals
   -- Overall control of asthma
   -- Poor physical conditioning
   -- Respiratory infections
   -- Time since last episode of exercise-induced asthma
   -- Underlying bronchial hyperreactivity

Table 2. Factors in the Patient History That Suggest the Presence of
Exercise-Induced Asthma

   -- Coughing, wheezing, dyspnea, or chest discomfort with exercise
   -- Symptoms that vary by season or outdoor temperature
   -- Discontinued, decreased, or altered exercise regimen
   -- Complaints of decreased or limited endurance
   -- `Out of Shape' label used to describe a well-conditioned athlete
   -- Minimal problems with swimming or in warm, humid environments

About the Author(s):

Dr Rupp is assistant professor of pediatrics and medicine at the Medical
College of Georgia in Augusta, Georgia. He is a fellow of the American
College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the American Academy of
Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology; he is a member of the sports medicine
subcommittee for both organizations.

Reference(s):

1. Gelb AF, Tashkin DP, Epstein JD, et al: Exercise-induced bronchodilation
in asthma. Chest 1985;87 (2):196-201
2. Spector SL: Update on exercise-induced asthma. Ann Allergy
1993;71(6):571-577
3. Pierson WE, Voy RO: Exercise-induced bronchospasm in the XXIII summer
Olympic games. N Engl Reg Allergy Proc 1988;9(3):209-213
4. Anderson SD: Issues in exercise-induced asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1985;76(6):763-772
5. Anderson SD: Exercise-induced asthma: the state of the art. Chest
1985;87(Suppl):191S-195S
6. Mahler DA: Exercise-induced asthma. Med Sci Sports Exerc
1993;25(5):554-561
7. Kobayashi RH, Mellion MB: Exercise-induced asthma, anaphylaxis, and
urticaria. Prim Care 1991;18 (4):809-831
8. McCarthy P: Wheezing or breezing through exercise-induced asthma. Phys
Sportsmed 1989;17(7): 125-130
9. Rice SG, Bierman CW, Shapiro GG, et al: Identification of
exercise-induced asthma among intercollegiate athletes. Ann Allergy
1985;55(6):790-793
10. Rupp NT, Guill MF, Brudno DS: Unrecognized exercise-induced
bronchospasm in adolescent athletes. Am J Dis Child 1992;146(8):941-944
11. Rupp NT, Brudno DS, Guill MF: The value of screening for risk of
exercise-induced asthma in high school athletes. Ann Allergy
1993;70(4):339-342
12. Anderson SD, Schoeffel RE, Follet R, et al: Sensitivity to heat and
water loss at rest and during exercise in asthmatic patients. Eur J Respir
Dis 1982;63(5):459-471
13. Anderson SD: Is there a unifying hypothesis for exercise-induced
asthma? J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984;73(5 pt 2):660-665
14. McFadden ER Jr: Hypothesis: exercise-induced asthma as a vascular
phenomenon. Lancet 1990;335 (8694):880-883
15. Brudno DS, Wagner JM, Rupp NT: Length of postexercise assessment in the
determination of exercise-induced bronchospasm. Ann Allergy 1994;73(3):
227-231
16. McFadden ER Jr: Exercise and asthma, editorial. N Engl J Med
1987;317(8):502-504
17. Dahl R, Molgaard Henriksen J: Development of late asthmatic reactions
after allergen or exercise challenge tests. Eur J Respir Dis
1980;61(6):320-324
18. Belcher NG, O'Hickey S, Arm JP, et al: Pathogenetic mechanisms of
exercise-induced asthma and the refractory period. N Engl Reg Allergy Proc
1988; 9(3):199-201
19. Boner AL, Sette L, Piacentini G, et al: Exercise-induced biphasic
responses and methacholine reactivity in asthma. Ann Allergy
1990;65(4):284-286
20. Mussaffi H, Springer C, Godfrey S: Increased bronchial responsiveness
to exercise and histamine after allergen challenge in children with asthma.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;77(1 pt 1):48-52
21. Noviski N, Bar-Yishay E, Gur I, et al: Exercise intensity determines
and climatic conditions modify the severity of exercise-induced asthma. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1987;136(3):592-594
22. Wiens L, Sabath R, Ewing L, et al: Chest pain in otherwise healthy
children and adolescents is frequently caused by exercise-induced asthma.
Pediatrics 1992;90(3):350-353
23. Eggleston PA: Methods of exercise challenge. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1984;73(5 pt 2):666-669
24. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: International Consensus
Report on Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda, MD: National
Institutes of Health; 1992. NIH publication 92-3091
25. Reiff DB, Choudry NB, Pride NB, et al: The effect of prolonged
submaximal warm-up exercise on exercise-induced asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis
1989;139 (2):479-484
26. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Asthma Education
Program, Expert Panel on the Management of Asthma: Guidelines for the
Diagnosis and Management of Asthma: Expert Panel Report. Bethesda, MD:
National Asthma Education Program, Office of Prevention, Education, and
Control, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of
Health, US Dept of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; 1991.
Publication 91-3042
27. AAP issues statement of exercise-induced asthma in children. Am Fam
Physician 1989;40(4):314, 316
28. Hendrickson CD, Lynch JM, Gleeson K: Exercise induced asthma: a
clinical perspective. Lung 1994;172(1):1-14
29. Morton AR, Fitch KD: Asthmatic drugs and competitive sport: an update.
Sports Med 1992;14(4):228-242
30. Morgan DJ: Clinical pharmacokinetics of beta-agonists. Clin
Pharmacokinet 1990;18(4):270-294
31. Kemp JP, Dockhorn RJ, Busse WW, et al: Prolonged effect of inhaled
salmeterol against exercise-induced bronchospasm. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1994;150(6 pt 1):1612-1615
32. Serevent prescribing information. Allen & Hanburys, 1995
33. Boulet LP: Long- versus short-acting beta 2-agonists: implications for
drug therapy. Drugs 1994; 47(2):207-222 [published erratum in Drugs 1994;
48(2):326]
34. Grove A, Lipworth BJ: Bronchodilator subsensitivity to salbutamol after
twice daily salmeterol in asthmatic patients. Lancet
1995;346(8969):201-206
35. Sears MR, Taylor DR, Print CG, et al: Regular inhaled beta-agonist
treatment in bronchial asthma. Lancet 1990;336(8728):1391-1396
36. Cheung D, Timmers MC, Zwinderman AH, et al: Long-term effects of a
long-acting beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist, salmeterol, on airway
hyperresponsiveness in patients with mild asthma. N Engl J Med
1992;327(17):1198-1203
37. Ramage L, Lipworth BJ, Ingram CG, et al: Reduced protection against
exercise induced bronchoconstriction after chronic dosing with salmeterol.
Respir Med 1994;88(5):363-368
38. Guidelines for management of asthma in adults. I: Chronic persistent
asthma. Statement by the British Thoracic Society, Research Unit of the
Royal College of Physicians of London, King's Fund Centre, National Asthma
Campaign. BMJ 1990;301(6753):651-653 [published erratum in BMJ
1990;301(6757):924]
39. Inhaled beta 2-adrenergic agonists in asthma. The Executive Committee
of the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1993;91(6):1234-1237
40. Finkelstein FN: Risks of salmeterol? letter. N Engl J Med
1994;331(19):1314
41. Asthma deaths tied to error in use of drug. New York Times 1994;Nov
8:B11
42. Patel KR, Berkin KE, Kerr JW: Dose-response study of sodium
cromoglycate in exercise-induced asthma. Thorax 1982;37(9):663-666
43. Kunig P: The use of cromolyn in the management of hyperreactive airways
and exercise. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984;73(5 pt 2):686-689
44. Shaw RJ, Kay AB: Nedocromil, a mucosal and connective tissue mast cell
stabilizer, inhibits exercise-induced asthma. Br J Dis Chest
1985;79(4):385-389
45. Novembre E, Frongia G, Lombardi E, et al: The preventive effect of
nedocromil or furosemide alone or in combination on exercise-induced asthma
in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1994;94(2 pt 1):201-206
46. de Benedictis FM, Tuteri G, Bertotto A, et al: Comparison of the
protective effects of cromolyn sodium and nedocromil sodium in the
treatment of exercise-induced asthma in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1994;94(4):684-688
47. Henriksen JM, Dahl R: Effects of inhaled budesonide alone and in
combination with low-dose terbutaline in children with exercise-induced
asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128(6):993-997
48. Furukawa CT: Other pharmacologic agents that may affect bronchial
hyperreactivity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984;73(5 pt 2):693-698
49. McFadden ER Jr: Calcium-channel blocking agents and asthma, editorial.
Ann Intern Med 1981;95(2): 232-233
50. Makker HK, Lau LC, Thomson HW, et al: The protective effect of inhaled
leukotriene D4 receptor antagonist ICI 204,219 against exercise-induced
asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147(6 pt 1):1413-1418
51. Ahmed T, Garrigo J, Danta I: Preventing bronchoconstriction in
exercise-related asthma with inhaled heparin. N Engl J Med
1993;329(2):90-95


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

NECK INJURIES
Urgent Decisions and Actions

By:
John Wiesenfarth, MD, MS; William Briner, Jr, MD
Emergencies Series Editor: Warren B. Howe, MD

In brief: When a neck injury is suspected, the on-site physician must first
provide basic trauma care, which includes establishing an airway as
necessary, assessing breathing, and checking circulation and neurologic
compromise. A few targeted questions during history taking and a directed
physical exam will help rule out serious cervical injuries, which are
uncommon. More common are minor injuries, such as ``burners.'' Team
physicians must also be well-versed in immobilizing and transporting the
patient, administering a thorough neurologic exam, and establishing when
the athlete can return to competition.

Of the 6,000 to 10,000 spinal cord injuries reported each year, motor
vehicle accidents account for 35% to 45%, and falls for 25% to 30%.1
(Reference) Most of the rest are related to sports, especially football,
rugby, ice hockey, soccer, diving, gymnastics, and wrestling.2-4
(Reference) Nevertheless, catastrophic neck injuries are infrequent in
sports, with a prevalence of less than 2/100,000 neck injuries.3
(Reference) One sport has especially reduced the incidence: Fewer than 10
football players each year have sustained permanent injury to the cervical
spinal cord since 1977.5 (Reference)
   Less serious sports-related neck injuries, in contrast, are fairly
common. Moreover, it is often difficult to differentiate a stable neck
injury from an unstable one, so physicians must be proficient in assessing
and managing all neck injuries. Three priorities must be considered in the
emergency medical management of a patient with a spinal cord injury: (1)
ensure patient survival, (2) preserve spinal cord function, and (3) allow
the highest possible chance for an injured spinal cord to recover.

On-Field Evaluation
   First, do no harm! Do not move the patient except from immediate danger
or for basic trauma management. An estimated 50% of neurologic deficits are
created after the initial traumatic insult.6,7 (Reference) Furthermore, it
is difficult to determine immediately if a neck injury is stable or
unstable.
   If the athlete has fallen on the field, have him or her lie there until
a brief initial evaluation is completed (figure 1). An unstable neck injury
must be assumed in the following instances: an unconscious athlete, an
awake athlete who has numbness and paralysis, and a neurologically intact
athlete who has neck pain or pain with neck movement.
   When a neck injury is suspected, institute the ABCDEs of trauma care
(airway, breathing, circulation and cervical spine, disability, and
exposing an injury for evaluation). Here is a modified version that can be
used for possible neck trauma.
   Trauma care basics. Airway management is of primary importance. The jaw
thrust technique has been shown to be the safest method for opening the
airway in patients with suspected neck injury.8 (Reference) In this
technique, the caregiver places his or her fingers behind the angle of both
sides of the patient's jaw and lifts up, bringing the mandible forward. If
this technique is inadequate, the modified jaw thrust-head tilt, in which
the jaw is pulled upward and the head tilted back as little as possible,
can be used.
   In a football player with a suspected neck injury, do not remove the
helmet initially because the jostling may cause severe neurologic
complications if the patient has an unstable fracture. If an airway access
is necessary, the face mask may be cut using a sharp knife or a device
called a Trainer's Angel (Trainer's Angel, Riverside, California). Trained
personnel can remove a face mask in less than 30 seconds using a Trainer's
Angel.
   Breathing problems in a patient with a neck injury may signal more
severe injury. For example, apnea may mean that the patient has sustained
damage to the brain stem. Once the airway is secure, artificial respiration
may be necessary.
   In assessing circulation, first check for a carotid pulse. If it is
absent, begin chest compressions in accordance with basic life support
guidelines. It is important to remember that spinal shock can cause
hypotension, paradoxical bradycardia, and warm, dry skin. However, consider
all causes of shock in an athlete who might have multiple fractures. A
tension pneumothorax, especially in tall, thin athletes, may also cause
hypotension with paradoxical bradycardia.
   It is also important to gauge cervical tenderness by palpating the
spinal processes for tenderness and the paraspinal musculature for
tenderness and spasm.
   To evaluate disabilities, it is important to perform a motor and sensory
assessment (table 1). This can also be done on the sideline. Clinically,
there are two classes of spinal cord injury: complete and incomplete.
Complete injury renders the patient without motor power or sensation below
the level of injury. Incomplete injury leaves the patient with some
preserved motor or sensory function. Although rare, a complete injury
results in a poor outcome in almost all cases. Spinal shock may appear to
be a complete lesion; however, it usually resolves within 24 hours.9
(Reference)
   Finally, if a serious injury is visually obscured, it may be necessary
to expose the area by removing clothing or equipment without moving the
patient.
   History. If the patient is alert, the history is at least as important
as the physical exam. History taking can be included during initial trauma
management or be done immediately afterward. How the athlete responds to
questions can help in further assessing the level of consciousness. If he
or she can respond verbally without any problems, chances are the airway is
patent. Important questions to ask are:

    -- How did the injury happen?
    -- Are you having any weakness, numbness, or tingling?
    -- Are you feeling any pain?
    -- Does it hurt to move your neck?
    -- Have you had a neck injury before?
    -- Do you think you can go back into the game?

   Most sources agree that severe neck injury is usually accompanied by
pain and sometimes neurologic symptoms.10-13 (Reference) An athlete without
pain and neurologic symptoms has a very low probability of having a severe
neck injury and therefore can be helped off the field for further
evaluation. A patient with neck pain should have his or her cervical spine
immobilized and be placed on a backboard for transport to the sideline en
route to an emergency facility.

Transportation to the Sideline
   It is essential that proper equipment be available for transporting the
patient from the field safely. If the clinical picture is unknown, it is
best to treat all neck injuries as unstable by immobilizing the neck. If a
cervical collar is available, apply it until a cervical-spine injury is
ruled out.14 (Reference) A backboard is necessary to prevent further injury
while moving the athlete (figure 2). Once the athlete is on the backboard,
immobilize his or her head and torso. Use sandbags or other padding to
sandwich the head as it is taped to the backboard (figure 3). Ammonia or
smelling salts should be avoided in the dazed or unconscious athlete
because a reaction of jerking away from this stimulus may cause neurologic
compromise.

Off-the-Field Management
   Further assessment and initial treatment can be initiated once the
patient is on the sideline. If there is time, patients on backboards can be
assessed while waiting for emergency transportation.
   When an unstable injury is possible, it is important to determine the
nature and severity of the injury and have the patient further evaluated at
an appropriate medical facility. Stable cervical sprains and strains, in
contrast, rarely require extensive treatment and generally resolve without
incident. All possible neck injuries, however, require a thorough
neurologic examination off the field.
   The sideline neurologic exam includes a quick assessment of motor,
sensory, and reflex pathways. Have the patient move his or her fingers and
toes. Assess grip strength by having the athlete squeeze your fingers with
each hand simultaneously; be alert for asymmetry. Look for asymmetry when
the athlete dorsiflexes and plantar flexes his or her feet. Check for gross
sensation in the upper extremities by simultaneously touching similar parts
of each arm. If the situation allows, check for reflexes and for asymmetry
of reflexes.
   Also, assess the cranial nerves. Nerves II through XII should be quickly
assessed in all patients who have acute neck injuries. This evaluates brain
stem function. Finally, active range of motion (ROM) should be included so
that the patient can stop if the movement becomes painful. A patient who is
asymptomatic and has full ROM can usually return to play.
   The most common neurologic cervical injury is a unilateral neurapraxia
of the cervical nerve roots and brachial plexus, often called a ``burner.''
Key historical features of this condition are quick recovery from the
resulting paresthesia or weakness in the extremities, accompanied by full
ROM without pain. Return to activity is permitted when the paresthesia has
subsided and full muscle strength and full, pain-free ROM have
returned.15,16 (Reference) Neurapraxias that are multiple or bilateral may
warrant further diagnostic workup. If this is an athlete's first
neurapraxia or if the condition involves the lower extremities, he or she
needs a full workup and should not return to play.

Be Prepared
   The best way to handle cervical spine injuries is to be prepared for
them. It is important to have a game plan, with all equipment inspected and
readily accessible, and all personnel involved trained to use it.
Communication among all members of the emergency medical team should be
established before the competition. Transportation to an emergency medical
facility should be immediately available as well. Proper preparation can go
a long way in avoiding serious long-term sequelae.

The authors thank Scott Raub, DO, for his assistance in preparing this
manuscript.

   Address correspondence to John Wiesenfarth, MD, MS, Dept of Emergency
Medicine, William Beaumont Hospital, 3601 W 13 Mile Rd, Royal Oak, MI
48073.


Table 1. Motor and Sensory Innervation of the Cervical Spine Nerve Roots

Root Level  Muscles             Function Lost               Sensory Level

C-2         Anterior            Neck flexion and rotation   Occiput
             vertebral neck
C-3,C-4     Trapezius           Shoulder elevation          Base of neck

C-4         Diaphragm           Respiration                 Shoulder tops

C-5,C-6     Biceps              Forearm flexion             Thumb (C-6)

C-7         Triceps             Forearm extension           Long finger

C-8         Flexor digitorum    Finger flexion              Little finger


Illustration(s):
Figure: 1. An easy-to-remember algorithm can help physicians assess neck
injuries on the field.

Figure: 2. To move an athlete to a backboard, a person should be assigned
to the injured athlete's head to hold it in a neutral position (a). Three
other helpers--one each at the shoulders, hips, and legs--assist in rolling
the athlete onto his or her side (b) as the board is slid underneath the
athlete by a fifth helper. The person assigned to the head should lead the
maneuver.

Figure: 3. When securing a patient's head onto a backboard, the idea is to
immobilize the neck in relation to the rest of the spine and not to fasten
only the neck to the backboard. Therefore, place a sandbag or rolled towel
on either side of the head. Tape the head and sandbags to the backboard
with at least one piece of tape across the forehead and one piece across
the chin. Also, fasten down the trunk.

About the Author(s):

Dr Wiesenfarth is a resident in the Department of Emergency Medicine at
William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Michigan. Dr Briner is the director
of the Primary Care Sports Medicine Fellowship at Lutheran General Hospital
in Park Ridge, Illinois. He is a fellow of the American College of Sports
Medicine. Dr Howe is a team physician at Western Washington University in
Bellingham, Washington, and a member of the editorial board of THE
PHYSICIAN AND SPORTSMEDICINE.

Reference(s):

1. Little NE: In case of a broken neck. Emerg Med 1989; 21(9):22-32
2. Anderson C: Neck injuries: backboard, bench, or return to play? Phys
Sportsmed 1993;21(8):23-34
3. Torg JS, Vegso JJ, O'Neill MJ, et al: The epidemiologic, pathologic,
biomechanical, and cinematographic analysis of football-induced cervical
spine trauma. Am J Sports Med 1990;18(1):50-57
4. Tall RL, DeVault W: Spinal injury in sport: epidemiologic
considerations. Clin Sports Med 1993;12(3): 441-448
5. Bailes JE, Hadley MN, Quigley MR, et al: Management of athletic injuries
of the cervical spine and spinal cord. Neurosurgery 1991;29(4):491-497
6. Torg JS, Wiesel S, Rothman R: Diagnosis and management of cervical spine
injuries, in Torg JS (ed): Athletic Injuries to the Head, Neck, and Face.
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982, pp 181-209
7. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Sports Medicine and Fitness:
Head and neck injuries, in Dyment PG (ed): Sports Medicine: Health Care for
Young Athletes, ed 2. Elk Grove Village, IL, American Academy of
Pediatrics, 1991, pp 236-249
8. Cummins RO (ed): Textbook of Advanced Cardiac Life Support. Dallas,
American Heart Association, 1994
9. Hockberger R, Kirshenbaum K, Doris P: Spinal trauma, in Rosen P, Barkin
RM, Braen CR, et al (eds): Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical
Practice, ed 3. St Louis, CV Mosby Co, 1992
10. Vegso J, Torg JS: Field evaluation of cervical spine injuries, in Torg
JS (ed): Athletic Injuries to the Head, Neck, and Face, ed 2. St Louis,
Mosby Year Book, 1991
11. Fourre M: On-site management of cervical spine injuries. Phys Sportsmed
1991;19(4):53-56
12. Marks MR, Bell GR, Boumphrey FR: Cervical spine fractures in athletes.
Clin Sports Med 1990;9(1):13-29
13. Sweeney TA, Marx JA: Blunt neck injury. Emerg Med Clin North Am
1993;11(1):71-79
14. Mangiardi J, Moser F, Spitzer D, et al: Spinal injuries, in Schwartz
GR, Cayten CG, Bircher NG, et al (eds): Principles and Practice of
Emergency Medicine, ed 3. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992, pp 955-985
15. Vereschagin K, Wiens JJ, Fanton GS: Burners: don't overlook or
underestimate them. Phys Sportsmed 1991;19(9):96-106
16. Hopkins TJ, White AA III: Rehabilitation of athletes following spine
injury. Clin Sports Med 1993;12(3): 603-619


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

EXERCISING--OR NOT--WHEN YOU ARE SICK

By:
William A. Primos, Jr, MD, with James R. Wappes

   You're not feeling great. You have a sore throat, stuffy head, and runny
nose. But you feel like you could maybe log a few road miles. Should you?
   Whether you're a low-key exerciser or a competitive athlete, knowing
when to work out if you don't feel well can be difficult. When you have an
infection such as a cold, ``stomach flu,'' or contagious skin condition,
you (and, often, your doctor) need to decide how exercise might affect your
health, your performance, and the health of others. Of course, it's also
good to avoid infection in the first place.

Should You Play On?
   The first question to ask your infected body is if you need to push it.
When your body is fighting an infection, your performance and fitness
benefits will likely be less than optimal, so why bother? Missing a few
days of training is not the end of the world--and it may even be a better
option. And if you're a competitive athlete, taking yourself out may be the
best thing for the team.
   Sometimes, though, physical activity helps you feel better. For example,
working out can sometimes temporarily clear a stuffed-up head when you have
a cold.
   So if you think exercise might help, or if you can't bear to miss a
workout, do a ``neck check'' of your symptoms.1 (Reference) If your
symptoms are located ``above the neck''--a stuffy or runny nose, sneezing,
or a sore throat, for example--then exercise is probably safe. But start at
half speed. If you feel better after 10 minutes, you can increase your
speed and finish the workout or game. If you feel miserable, though, stop.
   On the other hand, your ``neck check'' may reveal ``below-the-neck''
symptoms. Avoid intense physical activity if you have any of these
symptoms: muscle aches, hacking cough, fever of 100 degrees F or higher,
chills, diarrhea, or vomiting. Exercising when you have below-the-neck
symptoms may mean, at best, that you'll feel weak and dehydrated. Worse,
you may risk such dangerous conditions as heatstroke (dangerously high body
temperature) and heart failure.
   You can resume exercising when ``below-the-neck'' symptoms subside.
However, when recovering from an illness that prevented you from working
out, it's important to ease back into activity gradually. A good rule of
thumb is to exercise for 2 days at a lower-than-normal intensity for each
day you were sick.

Stop the Spread
   If you're on a team, an additional concern is whether you will infect
others. And if you're healthy, you may wonder about someone else infecting
you. For common illnesses like the cold, practice commonsense hygiene like
washing your hands frequently and directing coughs and sneezes away from
others.
   Some infections, though, are readily spread in sports and require
athletes to be sidelined while they are contagious. Two such conditions are
measles and herpes simplex (a virus that often causes cold sores or
blisters and is transmitted via skin-to-skin contact, as in wrestling). If
you may have such an infection, see a doctor for treatment and information
about when to resume sports.
   Other conditions can also spread readily. So in addition to regular
hygiene, athletes need to refrain from sharing water bottles and towels.
Infections have been known to pass to other athletes via both routes.
   You should also be properly immunized against diseases such as measles,
mumps, tetanus, and rubella. Also, some athletes may benefit from an
influenza vaccine. Ask your doctor what immunizations you need.

Common Cold, Common Sense
   As is often true, deciding to exercise when you are sick largely
involves common sense. Taking precautions about spreading infection and
listening to your body can go a long way in getting you back into action
without serious problems.

   Remember: This information is not intended as a substitute for medical
advice. If you have concerns about your health, consult a physician.


About the Author(s):

Dr Primos practices primary care sports medicine in Charlotte, North
Carolina, and is a charter member of the American Medical Society for
Sports Medicine. James R. Wappes is an associate editor of THE PHYSICIAN
AND SPORTSMEDICINE.

Reference(s):

1. Eichner ER: Infection, immunity, and exercise. Phys Sportsmed
1993;21(1): 125-135

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

AN IRREGULAR PULSE IN A SKYDIVER

By:
John D. Cantwell, MD

   A 29-year-old man was referred to a cardiologist after an irregular
heartbeat was found on a preemployment physical examination. He had no
cardiac or pulmonary symptoms.
   Past illness or surgery included only several operations for ocular
strabismus. He took no medications. His weekly alcohol intake included six
beers, two shots of hard liquor, and six or seven glasses of wine. He
averaged one-fourth pack of cigarettes per day over the past 9 months, but
had not smoked previously.
   His exercise habits included skydiving (two to five jumps per weekend),
running 6 miles three times per week, and lifting weights for 1 hour two to
three times per week. His father was hypertensive. There was no family
history of early coronary disease, arrhythmia, or sudden death. The systems
review indicated a single syncopal episode 6 years earlier while lifting
weights after having donated blood.
   On physical examination the patient's blood pressure was 115/82 mm Hg,
and his pulse was 54 per minute and irregular. Neck and chest evaluations
were normal. The heart was not enlarged. A grade 1/6 short systolic
ejection murmur was heard at the upper and midleft sternal border, and
diminished with Valsalva's maneuver and with standing. His first heart
sound quieted progressively on an intermittent basis in cycles of three or
four. The complete blood count and biochemical profile were normal. His
total cholesterol level was 135 mg/dL and his HDL was 45 mg/dL.
   His resting electrocardiogram (ECG) is shown in figure 1. His Bruce
protocol treadmill test was normal; he had a duration of 16 minutes,
stopping because of fatigue.

   Why did his first heart sound soften progressively and cyclically? Based
on your interpretation and diagnosis, do you think he should be hired for a
demanding job that involves a certain amount of emotional stress?

Diagnosis
   The resting ECG shows 5:4 Wenckebach second-degree atrioventricular (AV)
block (figure 2). The loudness of the first heart sound is inversely
related to the length of the PR interval on the resting ECG. A longer PR
interval allows the AV valves more time to drift closer to the closed
position, resulting in a softer sound. The exercise ECG is normal (figure
3); the PR intervals usually become regular as the athlete exercises.

Discussion
   In 1906, the noted Dutch physician Karel Frederik Wenckebach first
reported periodic prolongation of the PR interval with dropped ventricular
beats.1 (Reference) Wenckebach had previously discovered that extrasystoles
were seen in healthy individuals as well as in those with cardiac disease.
   Wenckebach AV block (also referred to as Mobitz type I AV block) can be
normal in a highly-trained athletic person such as this patient. It is
probably related to an increase in resting vagal tone and subsides during
the stress of exercise when blood catecholamine levels rise.
   We advised the company that the young man was healthy and recommended
that he be hired. We added that his maximum oxygen uptake was 54.7
mL/kg/min, placing him in the high fitness category for men his age.

   Address correspondence to John D. Cantwell, MD, 340 Boulevard NE, Suite
200, Box 413, Atlanta, GA 30312.


Illustration(s):
Figure: 1. A resting ECG from an athletic 27-year-old man undergoing
evaluation for an irregular heartbeat.

Figure: 2. The patient's resting ECG shows 5:4 Wenckebach second-degree
atrioventricular block; every fifth P wave is a dropped beat (arrow) (ie,
not followed by a QRS complex). The loudness of the first heart sound is
inversely related to the PR intervals.

Figure: 3. The patient's exercise ECG shows a normal ST segment response
and regularization of the PR interval.

About the Author(s):

Dr Cantwell is director of preventive medicine and cardiac rehabilitation
at Georgia Baptist Medical Center and clinical professor of medicine at
Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta. He is a member of the editorial
board of THE PHYSICIAN AND SPORTSMEDICINE and chief medical officer of the
1996 Olympic Games.

Reference(s):

1. Fye WB: Karel Frederik Wenckebach, 1864-1940. Clin Cardiol
1990;13(2):146-148


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

NONTRAUMATIC HIP PAIN IN ACTIVE CHILDREN
A Critical Differential

By:
Lynda F. Gerberg, MD; Lyle J. Micheli, MD
Pediatrics Series Editors: Barry Goldberg, MD, and Elliott B. Hershman, MD

   In brief: A case report of an 8-year-old baseball player who was
diagnosed with Legg-Calve-Perthes (LCP) disease gives an opportunity to
consider the many nontraumatic causes of hip pain. Possibilities include
slipped capital femoral epiphysis, septic arthritis, transient synovitis,
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, and bone tumor. Radiographs and bone scans
are used to document and stage LCP, and to evaluate the effectiveness of
treatment. Though the aggressiveness of treatment depends on the disease
stage, the treatment of choice is generally nonsurgical containment of the
femoral epiphysis with a cast or orthosis.

   When an active young person presents with a limp and hip pain, an injury
should of course be considered; however, it is also important to think
about the many nontraumatic entities with similar presentations.
   Our case report of a patient who had Legg-Calve-Perthes (LCP) disease
(avascular necrosis of the femoral head) demonstrates the importance of a
thorough exam and referral when necessary.

Case Report
   An 8-year-old Little League baseball player presented with a history of
intermittent pain in his left hip over the past 6 months. It had begun
gradually and was initially most noticeable during baseball practice.
Crutches and activity restriction, prescribed after a recent exacerbation,
had provided no relief, and he was referred to our orthopedic sports
medicine clinic.
   There was no history of acute trauma. He had been experiencing pain with
all activities. He had no history of illness.
   On physical exam, the patient walked with an antalgic limp. He otherwise
appeared to be in good health with appropriate height and weight for his
age. He was afebrile. There were no gross deformities in his legs or hips
and no differences in temperature or girth between the limbs. He had marked
discomfort to palpation over the entire left hip region. Internal rotation
and hip abduction caused significant pain. When compared with the opposite
side, decreases were noted in hip range of motion in abduction, internal
rotation, and flexion.
   A full laboratory work-up included complete blood count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, and Lyme
titer. There were no significant findings. Plain radiographs demonstrated a
``moth-eaten'' radiolucency suggestive of osteopenia of the femoral
epiphysis and neck (figure 1a). The femoral epiphysis was shortened. A bone
scan (figure 1b) demonstrated evidence of avascularity of the left femoral
epiphysis consistent with LCP disease.
   The patient was placed in a Petrie spica cast with the hip in 30 degree
abduction and 30 degree internal rotation. A follow-up x-ray (figure 1c)
demonstrated proper containment of the femoral epiphysis within the
acetabulum.
   The patient was pain free 2 weeks after cast application. After cast
removal at 6 weeks, physical therapy was instituted to restore full range
of motion and strength to the hip, and three-point partial weight bearing
was begun. Anteroposterior and frog lateral radiographs taken after 1 month
of physical therapy demonstrated continued containment and no fragmentation
of the femoral epiphysis. The patient remained pain free, and hip range of
motion improved. He was sent home on crutches for another 12 weeks after
which crutch use was tapered. Nine months after initial diagnosis he was
taken off crutches completely and was asymptomatic.
   Anteroposterior and frog lateral x-rays taken 1 year after initial
presentation (figure 1d) demonstrated that the femoral epiphysis had
remodeled within the acetabulum with a good spherical shape. Mild sclerotic
changes had not progressed and the joint space was preserved. The patient
returned to sports without difficulty.

More on Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease
   LCP disease may present between ages 2 and 12; the majority of cases
occur when patients are between 4 and 8 years old. In boys the incidence is
1:750; in girls it is 1:3,700.1 (Reference)
   Initially pain free, this condition often presents as a limp after
activity. The limp usually worsens, and eventually the patient may complain
of pain in the hip, groin, inner thigh, or occasionally the knee. Muscle
spasm and synovitis can limit motion, particularly abduction and internal
rotation. Though various triggers of LCP disease have been hypothesized,
including trauma, synovitis, and hypercoagulability, the pathogenesis these
hold in common is interrupted blood supply of the growing femoral
epiphysis.2 (Reference)
   The natural history of LCP disease occurs in the following stages:
   (1) Edema develops at the synovial membrane and capsule over 1 to 6
weeks.
   (2) Necrosis of the femoral epiphysis occurs, and can last from several
months to 1 year.
   (3) Regeneration/resorption lasts 1 to 3 years. Granulation tissue
invades the necrotic bone, leaving isolated areas of bone sequestered.1
(Reference) Invasion by connective tissues leads to resorption and
replacement by new immature bone. This may result in weakening of
subchondral support.
   (4) Repair occurs when new, normal bone replaces dead bone. The outcome
is related to the percentage of epiphysis involved, the patient's age, and
the promptness of the diagnosis.3 (Reference)
   Catterall3 (Reference) classified LCP disease into four stages based on
radiographic findings of percentage of involvement of the epiphysis (figure
2). Plain radiographs of our patient's hip showed changes that were clearly
consistent with LCP disease (Catterall stage 2); however, further imaging
is indicated if there is a strong suspicion of LCP disease despite normal
plain films. We confirmed our diagnosis with a bone scan, which is highly
accurate once symptoms have presented. New developments in nuclear medicine
such as the pinhole camera and computerized axial techniques allow even
earlier diagnosis of ischemic necrosis.4 (Reference) Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is extremely effective in detecting early and preclinical or
asymptomatic avascular necrosis, and it localizes and identifies the extent
of the ischemia. Because of cost, MRI should be reserved for early
identification when less expensive tests are negative or inconclusive.4
(Reference)

Other Nontraumatic Hip Disorders
   The differential diagnosis in the work-up of a patient with apparent LCP
disease takes on added significance because one of the
possibilities--slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE)--is an orthopedic
emergency and requires immediate referral. Several other hip disorders
resemble LCP disease.
   Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. SCFE is the most common nontraumatic
hip problem in adolescents, and its presentation is similar to that of LCP
disease. In SCFE, the epiphyseal plate weakens during rapid growth. The
stress of the patient's body weight disrupts the attachment of the femoral
neck and the femoral epiphysis, with the femoral neck moving upward and
forward on the femoral epiphysis.
   Clinically, patients who have SFCE are either obese or tall and thin.
The condition usually occurs in children who are slightly older (11 to 16
years) than those who have LCP disease. The physical presentation is
similar, but the pain is usually worse. The patient is unable to touch the
abdomen with the thigh because the hip externally rotates with flexion.
Radiologic studies help differentiate SCFE from other hip disorders. It
must be kept in mind that SCFE is an emergency, and requires
non-weight-bearing treatment as soon as it is diagnosed.5 (Reference)
   Septic arthritis. In our patient, septic arthritis was quickly ruled
out. He appeared healthy, with no fever or other clinical or laboratory
signs of sepsis, and the physical exam of his hip did not correlate with
the picture of a septic joint.
   Though septic arthritis is seen in all age groups, it is most common in
infants and children ages 1 to 2 years. Patients often have a history of
recent injury or infection such as otitis media. The usually acute onset of
septic arthritis is accompanied by fever, apprehension, and loss of
appetite. The joint is warm, swollen, and held in flexion. Active and
passive range of motion are limited by extreme pain. Physical and
laboratory signs of sepsis should prompt quick referral for immediate
aspiration of the joint under appropriate conditions.
   Transient synovitis. Transient synovitis can resemble LCP disease;
however, the patient may have a history of a recent upper-respiratory
infection and may have a slight fever, usually no higher than 100 degrees F
(37.7 degrees C) to 101 degrees F (38.3 degrees C). Transient synovitis is
the most common cause of hip pain in children under age 10. Patients
present with pain in the anteromedial aspect of the thigh and knee and walk
with a limp. Motion is limited, and a flexion contracture of the hip may be
present. Hematologic tests are negative with no signs of sepsis. On
radiographs, capsular bulging is evident; no changes in bone are seen,
which helps rule out avascular necrosis. Transient synovitis is a
self-limited benign condition. Weight-bearing is limited, and radiographs
are repeated in 2 to 3 months to rule out LCP disease, which may develop
after an episode of transient synovitis.
   Rheumatoid arthritis. The hip is the third most common joint to be
involved in pauciarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Children with
pauciarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis do not present with systemic
systems. The insidious onset is accompanied by swelling, stiffness, and
minimal pain on motion. Effusion is palpable, and soft-tissue and bony
changes are seen on radiographs.
   Tumors. Tumors involving the hip joint must also be kept in mind. The
physical exam and radiographic studies will help detect or rule out a bone
tumor.

Restoring Hip Function
   LCP disease requires individualized treatment; factors include age at
onset, change in range of motion, stage of the disease, and Catterall
group. Age at onset is a significant prognostic factor--results are
significantly better in younger children. Therefore, early diagnosis is the
most important factor in preventing long-term complications. The main
treatment objectives are to relieve muscle spasm, regain range of motion,
and contain the femoral epiphysis within the acetabulum to minimize
deformation of the femoral head.
   Historically, there have been four methods of treatment:1 (Reference)
observation, bed rest, nonsurgical containment with ambulation, and
surgical containment. Currently, observation is chosen only when the
patient has no decreased range of motion and meets Catterall's stage I
criteria. The child is allowed to continue with regular activities of daily
living. Bed rest is rarely used today because it requires lengthy
hospitalization.2 (Reference) However, bed rest with hip abduction has
shown satisfactory results in 70% to 80% of patients.1 (Reference)
   If surgery is required, the goals are the same as for nonsurgical
treatment: to regain adequate range of motion, minimize deformity, and
relieve muscle spasm.5 (Reference) The femoral head is repositioned via
femoral osteotomy or the acetabulum repositioned via pelvic innominate
osteotomy. The goal is to place the femoral epiphysis deep within the
acetabulum, therefore preventing or minimizing deformation. Surgery should
be reserved for patients who have or are progressing to femoral head
deformity, but who cannot or will not accept orthoses.
   The current treatment of choice is ambulatory management with
nonsurgical containment of the femoral epiphysis. This method has been used
with extremely favorable results.6 (Reference) and allows the child to
continue most activities of daily living. Good results have been observed
in 60% to 70% of patients. Without containment, the femoral epiphysis may
become deformed and extrude from the acetabulum during the
revascularization stage of LCP disease, particularly if the hip is allowed
to maintain adduction and external rotation. Placing the femoral epiphysis
within the acetabulum and maintaining abduction and internal rotation
reduces forces on the epiphysis, allowing it to remodel properly.
   Methods of ambulatory containment include the Petrie spica cast and
removable devices such as the Newington A-frame orthosis, the Scottish Rite
abduction orthosis,7 (Reference) and the Toronto brace. It has been our
experience that ambulatory casting gives excellent results along with good
compliance by the patients and their families.
   Long-term prognosis. Long-term outcomes are good in the majority of
patients.1,2,5 (Reference) Approximately 9.5%, however, develop
deteriorating symptoms and degenerative arthritis in late adolescence and
early adulthood. The development of degenerative arthritis is not related
to sports participation after initial treatment.5 (Reference) These
patients often require surgery before age 35. Studies5 (Reference) have
shown that the abduction extension osteotomy yields the best results,
relieving pain, improving range of motion, and correcting any leg length
discrepancies.

A Full Return to Activity
   Early recognition and intervention can help patients with LCP disease
avoid deformity and disability that might otherwise lead to lifelong
impairment of activity. Indeed, the long-term prognosis for complete
recovery and sports participation after treatment is excellent, and most
patients can return to activity without restrictions.

   Address correspondence to Lynda F. Gerberg, MD, Schneider Children's
Hospital, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Department of General
Pediatrics, 269-01 76th Ave, New Hyde Park, New York, 11040; e-mail to
P.Bals@Rational.com


Illustration(s):
Figure: 1. An anteroposterior radiograph (a) of the pelvis of an 8-year-old
boy who presented with left hip pain demonstrates shortening of the left
femoral epiphysis (bracketed area) caused by trabecular fracture.
Irregularity of the bony contours of the femoral epiphysis is also noted
(arrow), along with fullness about the left hip suggestive of an effusion.
``Moth-eaten'' radiolucencies (arrowheads) suggest osteopenia of the
femoral epiphysis and neck. On a bone scan of the patient's left femoral
epiphysis (b), decreased uptake is consistent with the avascular necrosis
of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (arrow). Films taken shortly after Petrie
casting (c) indicate proper containment of the femoral head within the
acetabulum. The legs have been placed in 30 degrees of abduction and 30
degrees of internal rotation bilaterally. Note the presence of mild
flattening of the left femoral epiphysis (arrow). A follow-up frog lateral
view (d) taken 1 year after treatment with a Petrie spica cast demonstrates
proper joint space preservation. The left femoral epiphysis remains well
seated within the acetabulum. Mild flattening and sclerosis (arrows) show
no further progression.

Figure: 2. Catterall classified Legg-Calve-Perthes disease into four
stages. In stage 1, necrosis is present at the anterior aspect of the
femoral head as noted by the dotted areas. Lysis is present, but there is
no bony sequestration. In stage 2, bony sequestration is present as noted
by the central areas of radiopacity. A medial and lateral column of normal
bone protects the central area from collapse. In stage 3, extensive bony
sequestration diminishes support and increases the chance of residual
deformity. Metaphyseal cyst formation is noted by the line-slashed areas.
In stage 4, total involvement produces significant residual deformity shown
by the jagged areas that indicate sclerosis and decreased size of the
femoral head.

About the Author(s):

Dr Gerberg is director of sports medicine at Schneider Children's Hospital
in New Hyde Park, New York, and an assistant clinical professor of
pediatrics at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in Bronx, New York. Dr
Micheli is director in the Division of Sports Medicine at the Children's
Hospital in Boston, an associate clinical professor of orthopedic surgery
at Harvard Medical School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and a fellow of the
American College of Sports Medicine. Dr Goldberg is director of sports
medicine at Yale University Health Services and a clinical professor of
pediatrics at Yale University School of Medicine in New Haven, Connecticut.
Dr Hershman is assistant director of orthopedic surgery at Lenox Hill
Hospital in New York City. Dr Micheli and Dr Goldberg are editorial board
members of THE PHYSICIAN AND SPORTSMEDICINE.

Reference(s):

1. Schoenecker PL: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Orthop Rev
1986;15(9):561-574
2. Herring JA: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease: a review of current knowledge.
Instr Course Lect 1989;38:309-315
3. Catterall A: The natural history of Perthes' disease. J Bone Joint Surg
(Br) 1971;53(1):37-53
4. Bassett LW, Gold RH, Reicher M, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging in the
early diagnosis of ischemic necrosis of the femoral head: preliminary
results. Clin Orthop 1987;Jan(214):237-248
5. Catterall A: Adolescent hip pain after Perthes' disease. Clin Orthop
1986;Aug(209):65-69
6. Fackler CD: Nonsurgical treatment of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Instr
Course Lect 1989;38:305-308
7. Meehan PL, Angel D, Nelson JM: The Scottish Rite abduction orthosis for
the treatment of Legg-Perthes disease: a radiographic analysis. J Bone
Joint Surg (Am) 1992;74(1):2-12


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

GOING ONLINE: SPORTS MEDICINE AND MORE

By:
Ann Harste, Minneapolis
psm@mill2.millcomm.com

   You say you don't have time to search online for lively sports medicine
debate and helpful medical resources. But you have Internet access at the
clinic or at home, and you find yourself craving some high-tech
professional connectedness. How you access the different areas of the
Internet will depend on the type of connection you have, but once you're
on-line, here's a quick tour of the Net to get you started.
   World Wide Web. A good starting point on the Web is Yahoo
(http://www.yahoo.com), a hip and definitive directory of some of the best
sites indexed by subject. Yahoo offers hundreds of links under the health
category. Another site is the highly acclaimed Virtual Hospital
(http://indy.radiology.uiowa.edu/), a digital health sciences library
administered by the University of Iowa. You'll find patient simulations,
journals, clinical practice guidelines, multimedia textbooks, and teaching
files.
   To get a quick handle on the medical journals and newsletters available
online, visit MedWeb: Electronic Newsletters and Journals
(http://www.cc.emory.edu/WHSCL/medweb.ejs.html), a directory that provides
many direct links to journals' tables of contents and, in some cases,
abstracts and full-text articles.
   Medical Matrix: Guide to Internet Clinical Medicine Resources
(http://www.kumc.edu:80/mmatrix/) is a project of the American Medical
Informatics Association's Internet Working Group. In addition to being rich
in links to other sites, Medical Matrix provides an overview of existing
Internet medical resources and news on resources in development.
   Finding epidemiologic information is a whole lot easier now that the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a Web site for the Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (http://www.cdc.gov/epo/mmwr/mmwr.html). The
site features full-text retrieval, and users can search past issues by
topic--no more thumbing through that prolific stack of skinny reports. The
National Library of Medicine's HyperDOC Home Page (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/)
is the place to go for links to the institution's vast collection of
clinical resources.
   A must-visit stop on your Web rounds is Dr Bil's Cool Medical Site of
the Week (http://www.hooked.net/users/wcd/cmsotw.html). William C. Donlon,
DDS, exhaustively searches the Web's medical sites and crowns his pick of
the week. Visitors are also asked to submit their suggestions.
   Gopher servers. Even though the Web is getting the lion's share of the
attention these days, there are also many valuable resources on Gopher
servers. The University of Southern California offers links to
medicine-related Gopher servers all over the world. Their Gopher address is
cwis.usc.edu; once connected, select: Other Gophers and Information
Resources/Gopher-Jewels/Health, Medical, and Disability/Medical
Related/Medical Related (misc).
   News groups. News groups are discussion groups devoted to specific
topics; they are similar to bulletin board systems found on commercial
online services or private dial-up services. There are hundreds of topics
to choose from. To get a thumbnail sketch of what other physicians are
doing with their technology tools, consider browsing through
sci.med.telemedicine. It's a convenient source of medical software reviews,
an announcement board for other online medical resources, and a sounding
board for physicians' experiences with clinical information systems.
   E-mail lists. Like news groups, electronic mailing lists provide an
exchange of information among users interested in a particular topic.
Subscribers receive the discussion directly to their e-mailbox through
e-mail postings from other members of the group. The American Medical
Society for Sports Medicine's AMSSMNet is available to its members and
other interested parties. To subscribe, AMSSM members can send an e-mail
message to listserv@msu.edu. In the first line of the body of your message
type: SUBSCRIBE AMSSMNet Your Name. Nonmembers can request e-mail
information about joining AMSSMNet from Dave Jenkinson, DO, at
13460DJ@msu.edu or Randy Pearson, MD, at 13460RP@msu.edu.
   The ATHTRN-L e-mail list contains topics in sports medicine along with
discussions on the roles and certification of athletic trainers. To
subscribe, send an e-mail to listserv@iubvm.ucs.indiana.edu . In the first
line of the body of your message type: Subscribe ATHTRN-L Your Name.
   A vital source for family medicine practitioners is Fam-Med, an e-mail
list that focuses on use of computer and telecommunication technology in
the teaching and practice of family medicine. Fam-Med also offers a
resource area that includes access to file archives, a Gopher server, and a
Web index. The resource area and instructions for subscribing to the
discussion group can be found on the Web at http://apollo.gac.edu/.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

RELIEF FOR EXERCISE INCONTINENCE

By:
Carol Potera, Great Falls, Montana


   Stress incontinence often puts a damper on a woman's resolve to
exercise. Up to a third of women--even young, conditioned
athletes--experience stress incontinence.1 (Reference) Treatment options
have included tampons, pessaries, diaphragms, and, for severe cases,
surgery. The bladder neck support prosthesis (BNSP) is a new option.
   A study1 (Reference) on the effectiveness of two incontinence
options--tampons and pessaries--recently came out in favor of tampons. The
researchers found that 8 of 14 women with mild incontinence (less than 15 g
of urine loss) remained dry while wearing a tampon during aerobic exercise,
while a standard pessary kept only 5 of 14 women dry. Urine loss was
measured by weighing an absorbent pad before and after exercise.
   The tampon is worn during exercise or other activities that produce
stress incontinence, says Ingrid Nygaard, MD, the study's author and
assistant professor in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the
University of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City. Tampons have no side
effects when worn for less than a day, she says. Nygaard advises patients
to moisten the tip of the tampon with water beforehand to make insertion
and removal more comfortable.
   Most women, and even some gynecologists, have never heard of pessaries,
Nygaard says. There are many types of pessaries: The ones specifically
designed to treat stress incontinence resemble a diaphragm but have a
protrusion on the ring that helps elevate the urethra, thus blocking urine
leakage. When worn only for short periods of time during activities that
produce incontinence, pessaries produce no side effects and do not
decondition pelvic floor muscles, Nygaard says.
   A new vaginal device designed especially for active women debuted in
October. The flexible, ring-shaped BNSP has two blunt prongs on one end
that laterally support the urethra. The BNSP (Johnson and Johnson Medical,
Inc, Arlington, Texas) rests on the pelvic floor muscles and reinforces
their function during exercise. ``This is the same thing we accomplish with
surgery,'' says urogynecologist Willy Davila, MD, of the Colorado
Gynecology and Continence Center in Denver. When tested on runners, hikers,
and other active women, the BNSP kept 24 of 30 patients dry; 6 were
improved but still had mild incontinence.2 (Reference) Benefits were
greatest in those who had severe incontinence. All participants rated the
device satisfactory.
   To provide a custom fit, BNSPs come in 25 sizes, varying in ring size
and prong length. The BNSP appears to be relatively free of side effects,
says Davila. One patient in the study developed a bladder infection;
however, he says bladder infections are not unusual in patients who have
stress incontinence. Pelvic floor muscle deconditioning is not an issue,
Davila says. In fact, he says muscle function seems to improve: Pelvic
floor contractions during activity are partially responsible for the
device's support function.
   Physicians can routinely help women open up about their problems with
incontinence by telling patients that many active women notice urine
leakage while exercising, says Nygaard. Advising women about simple,
nonsurgical treatments such as tampons, pessaries, and pelvic floor
exercises can minimize incontinence and keep women exercising, she says.
   A traditional pessary costs about $50, and the BNSP costs about $300,
says Nygaard. Some active women report that the BNSP is more comfortable
than the traditional pessary, says Davila. ``The BNSP fits in loosely and
is designed to be dynamic; it moves with the woman,'' he says. ``A
traditional pessary fits in tightly and supports prolapsed tissues.''
However, Nygaard says many of her patients who are runners have been
satisfied with comfort of traditional pessaries.

Reference(s):

1. Nygaard I: Prevention of exercise incontinence with mechanical devices.
J Reprod Med 1995;40(2):89-94
2. Davila GW, Ostermann KV: The bladder neck support prosthesis: a
nonsurgical approach to stress incontinence in adult women. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1994;171(1):206-211

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

EXPEDITE ANKLE EVALUATION

By:
Aaron Rubin, MD, Fontana, California

   When making return-to-play decisions for players who have just injured
their ankles, a good screening test if you're busy on the sidelines is to
ask them to squat. If they are unable to squat because of pain or have
difficulty rising, they are probably unable to resume play.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

IMPROVE YOUR GOLF GRIP

By:
Ty Wadsworth, MD, St Louis

   A new exercise to develop grip strength was developed by Dale Boggs, a
golf professional who was recovering from an upper-extremity injury. The
exercise requires an old telephone book. To begin, open the phone book with
the binding facing away. The fingertips should be slightly moist. With one
hand use pressure from the fingertips to rip, crumple, then discard the
first page from the phone book. Repeat the exercise until fatigued,
typically 15 to 30 pages for the dominant hand and 10 to 20 pages for the
nondominant hand. The page numbers can be used to keep up with repetitions,
which are increased over time.
   This exercise is useful for increasing grip strength and endurance,
wrist flexor strength, and fine motor control. It is useful for injury
rehabilitation and for performance enhancement because it promotes a firm,
relaxed grip throughout the golf swing.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

EARLY ASTHMA DETECTION

By:
William W. Dexter, MD, Lebanon, New Hampshire

   Exercise-induced asthma (EIA) presentation can be subtle, especially in
children. Parental reports of a child lagging on the playground or seeming
unduly fatigued after competition warrant further investigation: These can
be signs of EIA, even if the child is not coughing or wheezing.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

ESTABLISHING TEAM CONFIDENCES

By:
David Garner, PhD, Bowling Green, Ohio

   As a clinical psychologist in Toledo and an adjunct professor of
psychology at Bowling Green State University, I've worked with teams that
have players with eating disorders. I've found that it's useful to build an
independent relationship with the team--one that is not connected to the
coach. This may enable team members to open up to you and be more honest.
At the same time, I discourage enlisting the help of players to identify
eating disorders in teammates. This practice only serves to establish an
atmosphere of paranoia on the team.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

WOUND CARE FOR AQUATIC ACTIVITIES

By:
Stephen Fuzie, PT, ATC, Pittsburgh

   In water sports such as water polo, there are times when an athlete
needs to wear a bandage to prevent bleeding or to cover stitches. Regular
athletic tape loses adherence in the water and presents a target for
opposing players. Covering a flesh-colored bandage with clear Tegaderm
transparent dressing with label (3M Corp, St Paul) or a similar product
will keep the wound dry and prevent bleeding. The thinness of the material
minimizes the edge so that the bandage can't be easily removed by friction
or contact. This bandaging technique is also helpful when athletes sweat
heavily.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1

STRENGTHENING THE HIP ABDUCTORS

By:
Michael Ross, MSEd, PT

   Many common exercises, like partial squats, involve movement mainly to
the front and back. Such exercises are good conditioners for activities
like bicycling and using stair machines and treadmills, which primarily
require back-and-forth motion. But most sports and many daily activities
require side-to-side motion. To prepare your body for a variety of
stresses, you need to build strength for those motions, too.
   The muscles most responsible for sideways leg motion are the hip
abductors on the sides of your hips. These muscles help move your legs out
and away from each other. They play a large role in steadying forward
movements, not to mention their importance in sports like tennis and golf
that require a lot of side-to-side motion or stability. Including
hip-abductor strengthening in your exercise regimen will help with daily
activities and sports and will lower your injury risk. These strengtheners
are especially good for people who have had hip or low-back pain.
   The exercises in figures 1 through 3 help strengthen your hip abductors.
These exercises are simple and don't take much time, so you can easily fit
them into your training.
   For each exercise, build up to three sets of 20 repetitions, 3 to 4 days
per week, if possible. Go slowly, and rest only long enough between sets to
let your muscles recover from the slight burning sensation they will
experience. As the exercises become easier over time, you can add ankle
weights in 1- to 2-lb increments as long you have no pain.

   Remember: This information is not intended as a substitute for medical
treatment. Before starting an exercise program, consult a physician.

   The opinions expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the US Department of Defense, the US
Air Force, or other federal agencies.


Illustration(s):
Figure: 1. To do the sideways leg raise, lie on your side. Flex the muscles
on the outside of your thigh and lift your leg 12 to 15 inches while
keeping your back still. Hold for 3 to 5 seconds. Repeat with the other
leg.

Figure: 2. For the hip hiker, stand with one foot on a stable 4- to 6-inch
object (a). Slowly raise yourself by straightening the upper knee and hip
(b). Hold for 3 to 5 seconds, then slowly lower the foot back to the floor.
If you find it hard to balance, stand in front of a sink or table and place
your hands on it for support. Repeat on the other side.

Figure: 3. Start the squat and slide by standing. Slightly bend one knee as
you slide the opposite foot to the side as far as is comfortable without
bending that leg. Hold for 3 to 5 seconds, then return. Repeat with the
other leg. For better balance, place your hands on a sink or table.

About the Author(s):

Mr Ross is the director of physical therapy services with the 39th Medical
Group of the United States Air Force at Incirlik Air Base, Turkey. He is a
member of the Orthopaedic and Sports sections of the American Physical
Therapy Association.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>