
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-226</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033604 text/html 38824
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:03 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:46 GMT
Content-length: 38637
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
May 20, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>ONDCP PRESSURES HHS&nbsp;FOR INTERPRETATION OF LAB RULE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1051 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>TWO GROUPS REACH PACT FOR&nbsp;STANDARD MRO CERTIFICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(451 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DOT WEIGHS ZERO TOLERANCE&nbsp;POLICY ON ALCOHOL TESTING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(690 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>ROADSIDE TESTING PROJECT&nbsp;COULD BE AHEAD OF SCHEDULE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>OMB APPROVES STANDARD&nbsp;CHAIN-OF-CUSTODY FORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>NIDA ALLOWS MRO'S TO REQUEST&nbsp;CODEINE LEVEL BELOW CUTOFF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(648 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ONE IN FOUR LAW AGENCIES&nbsp;TESTED APPLICANTS IN 1990</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(399 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Congressional conferees approved legislation May 12 that</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Workplace drug testing is an important tool in drug</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>The American Association for Clinical Chemistry will hold</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>The Drug Enforcement Administration has placed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(59 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*COURT DECISIONS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>LAST-CHANCE AGREEMENT CITED&nbsp;IN DENIAL OF WORKER'S BENEFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(431 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>COURT UPHOLDS DRUG TEST&nbsp;OF GUARD WITHOUT POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

ONDCP PRESSURES HHS
FOR INTERPRETATION OF LAB RULE

The Office of National Drug Control Policy has called on
the Department of Health and Human Services for a quick
resolution to the controversy over the potential
regulation of private sector drug testing in the
department's new clinical laboratory rule, DRUG DETECTION
REPORT has learned.

The request came outside of the formal comment process on
HHS's final rule implementing the Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA) and was meant to
draw HHS Secretary Louis Sullivan into the dispute over
CLIA's application to drug testing, according to a
federal official familiar with the letter.

The letter made no demands on HHS about how to apply the
CLIA rule but asked for "an expedited legal
interpretation" of its application to drug testing, said
the official, who asked not to be identified. ONDCP
Director Bob Martinez is not involved in the CLIA issue
at this point but could enter the fray once ONDCP
receives an answer from HHS, the official said.

Mr. Martinez' involvement would not be necessary if HHS
decides not to apply CLIA to private sector drug testing,
but HHS officials maintain that, as of now, such testing
is covered by the rule. CLIA requires that all labs
conducting clinical tests "for the assessment of health"
be certified by HHS. Based on a number of comments so far
made public, there is a widespread belief that
application of CLIA to private sector drug testing could
inhibit on-site testing and result in higher costs to
employers.

The ONDCP letter was written by Bruce M. Carnes, ONDCP's
director of planning, budget, and administration, to Mark
Barnes, Sullivan's special counsel on drug abuse policy.
Through a spokesman, Mr. Carnes declined to release the
text of the letter or to comment on its contents. Mr.
Barnes also declined to comment directly on the letter,
but acknowledged that ONDCP had "communicated to us
within the normal process of interagency communications"
about CLIA.

However, Barnes indicated that HHS is unlikely to
expedite a resolution of the drug testing question,
saying that the department will publish a "final final
rule" by Sept. 1, the date CLIA is to take effect.
Another HHS official confirmed the Sept. 1 target date
for resolution of the drug testing issue and indicated
that officials and agencies within HHS are not in
agreement on whether and to what extent CLIA should
regulate drug testing.

One potential resolution under consideration, according
to officials within HHS, would be to redefine private
sector drug testing as "forensic" in nature. As published
Feb. 28, the CLIA rule exempts from coverage forensic
testing, defined as tests conducted to determine the
subject's legal status rather than health condition.
However, drug testing advocates and regulators, including
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, routinely refer to
all drug testing as forensic. Adopting the broader
definition could be a relatively easy way to settle the
question.

Any change in the department's current interpretation of
CLIA will most likely be published in the Federal
Register, HHS officials said. However, one official
refused to rule out the possibility that the rule could
be reinterpreted without a formal published notice.

In addition to the letter from Carnes, ONDCP submitted
formal comments on CLIA to the Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA), the HHS agency implementing the
rule. In the comments, Frank M. Kalder, director of the
budget and legislative review staff, chided HHS for not
consulting ONDCP about CLIA's potential application to
drug testing and warned that the rule could adversely
affect drug treatment programs and small employers.

"It appears that under the CLIA interpretation of
permissible drug testing, alcohol and drug treatment
facilities would be prohibited from conducting routine
on-site drug testing to monitor patient drug use," Mr.
Kalder wrote. "In addition, we also are concerned that
these rules will make the process very complex and
expensive, and thus, may cause many employers to
discontinue their drug testing programs."

Kalder asked HCFA to explain why an exemption of
employment and insurance screening contained in a
November 1991 draft of the rule was dropped in the
published document, and said "ONDCP believes the
exemptions should be reinstated."

He also asked for a "legal interpretation" of CLIA's
applicability to drug testing and its definition of
"forensic testing," and asked for an assessment of the
cost to businesses that would need certification should
HHS continue to apply CLIA to drug testing.

In other comments, Byron Lee Jr., president and chief
executive officer of the Nuclear Management and Resources
Council (NUMARC), a group of nuclear power companies,
expressed concern that CLIA might cover on-site testing
under the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's
fitness-for-duty program. He said the tests should fall
under CLIA's definition of forensic because they are
conducted to detect violations of law.

"During the past two years, over one-half million urine
samples have been collected by the nation's nuclear
utilities for these testing purposes only, not for
clinical treatment, medical diagnosis, health assessment,
or disease prevention," Lee wrote. "Nuclear power
industry drug testing should be considered forensic
testing since it is performed to determine if a federal
regulation has been violated."

Dr. Brock Wisenberger, director of corporate employee
health for Abbott Laboratories in Abbott Park, Ill.,
agreed. "The assessment of abused and/or illegal
substances as part of a Corporate Drug-Free Workplace
program is identical in purpose to drug testing performed
by law enforcement agencies to determine whether there
has been a violation of the law," he said.

Rep. Bill Lowery (R-Calif.) requested that all private
sector drug testing be exempted from CLIA. "It is my
belief that the purpose of drug testing for employment
purposes is not to provide results for diagnosis or
treatment of an individual, but to comply with corporate
drug abuse policies," he wrote. Regulating drug testing
through CLIA would "seriously impede" the Bush
Administration's drug control strategy, he said.

Not every comment on drug testing was opposed to its
regulation by CLIA. The American Hospital Association's
senior vice president for policy, Dr. James D. Bentley,
said employment and insurance screening should be covered
by CLIA because they are for "assessment of health."

And the American Clinical Laboratory Association
recommended that enzyme immunoassays (EIA) be
reclassified from moderately complex to highly complex.
Such a change would impose more stringent standards and
personnel requirements on EIA tests.

-- Dave McIntyre



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

TWO GROUPS REACH PACT FOR
STANDARD MRO CERTIFICATIONS

Two medical professional organizations have reached a
tentative agreement to create a standardized
accreditation process for medical review officers,
according to officials of both organizations.

Once carried out, the agreement would avoid a potentially
confusing situation in which competing organizations
would be promoting their own ethical standards and
certifying processes for MROs, who review test results in
federally mandated drug testing programs.

The agreement was reached May 4 by representatives of the
American College of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, a physicians' group established in 1916, and
the American Association of Medical Review Officers,
established last year to promote MRO standards. AAMRO
began conducting certifying examinations for MROs in
March, and ACOEM was scheduled to begin its own testing
program this fall.

Under the agreement, a new organization (yet to be named)
will be formed to administer the MRO certifying process.
The two organizations still need to negotiate a "common
document" of MRO standards, but have agreed to pool
questions from their own certifying exams to create a new
test, according to Dr. Kent Peterson, treasurer of ACOEM
and chairman of its MRO training course. "It's going to
be a tough exam," he said.

Initially, the organization will be governed by
representatives of both ACOEM and AAMRO, but other
medical groups will be invited to participate, Dr.
Peterson said. The new organization will be located at
ACOEM's headquarters in Arlington Heights, Ill., and
should begin operating by July 1, he added.

The agreement firmly establishes the fledgling AAMRO in
the ranks of professional medical organizations. Dr.
Peterson said AAMRO "showed leadership" on the issue of
establishing MRO standards and certification procedures.
He denied reports that ACOEM had been reluctant to work
with AAMRO, saying only that "ACOEM's position has always
been that the credentialing of physicians should be in
the hands of a professional organization."

Dr. Steven St. Clair, AAMRO's executive director, said
the negotiations "were not tense, though there was a lot
of misunderstanding about what each other was doing"
about MRO certification. "Once we sat down at the table,
the misconceptions were dealt with pretty easily," he
said.

Dr. St. Clair said federal drug testing officials, many
of whom sit on AAMRO's federal advisory board, "have
expressed uniform enthusiasm" about the agreement. "This
effort was largely created because of concerns expressed
by federal regulators and individual MROs about the
possibility of having more than one standard that might
have developed had the two organizations continued
separately."

Dr. Peterson echoed that point. "We felt the benefits of
a common procedure far outweighed the tendency of both
groups to pursue their own programs," he said.

Dr. St. Clair said MROs already certified by AAMRO will
automatically receive certification by the new
organization.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

DOT WEIGHS ZERO TOLERANCE
POLICY ON ALCOHOL TESTING

Federal officials are debating what cutoff levels the
Department of Transportation should use for its alcohol
testing regulation, with some pushing for "zero
tolerance" and others arguing that a hard-line approach
could be perceived as a "witch hunt," according to a
senior DOT official.

Some officials favor penalizing transportation workers
who are found to have any traces of alcohol in their
systems, while others propose pegging the department's
regulation with standard drunk driving cutoffs, which are
usually 0.08 percent or 0.1 percent blood-alcohol
content, according to Dr. Donna R. Smith, senior program
analyst in DOT's drug enforcement and program compliance
office.

The department is developing the alcohol testing rule to
implement the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
of 1991, signed by President Bush last October.

Dr. Smith discussed DOT's rulemaking deliberations at a
May 16 meeting of the Substance Abuse Program
Administrators Association in Crystal City, Va., and in
an interview with DRUG DETECTION REPORT.

She said some DOT officials--supported by the National
Transportation Safety Board, an agency independent of
DOT, and the National Institute on Alcoholism, part of
the Department of Health and Human Services--favor a
"zero tolerance" approach. Other officials fear the
American public might see such a tough line as a "witch
hunt" or "a new Prohibition" and advocate adopting the
more tolerant drunk driving standard to minimize the risk
of legal challenges, she said.

The department is sensitive to the political issues
because "alcohol is America's favorite legal drug," and
believes that because alcohol consumption is legal, the
cutoff levels should be tied as closely as possible to
impairment, Dr. Smith said. "We can't necessarily prove
that mere presence of alcohol causes risks," she said,
explaining potential drawbacks to a zero cutoff.

"We cannot say that a person who consumes alcohol by that
very consumption is a risk in a safety-sensitive
position," Dr. Smith said. "We can say a person who
drinks while or just before performing safety-sensitive
duties is a risk. We need to establish a nexus of
impairment."

Because of the perceived need to link alcohol testing to
impairment, cutoff levels of 0.04 percent or 0.02 percent
are also under consideration because of research
indicating measurable impairment at those levels, she
said.

The Bush Administration has not taken a position in the
debate, and the Office of National Drug Control Policy is
not advocating a particular cutoff level, she said.

The decision on which cutoff level to use will affect
more than the public's perception of the alcohol testing
program--it will also influence the department's choice
of testing methodology, Dr. Smith said. That choice has
been a tough one for department officials because each
potential method--saliva, blood, breath, and urine--has
its own advantages and drawbacks, she said.

For example, a zero cutoff would effectively rule out
saliva testing, which is potentially effective at 0.04
percent but not sensitive enough at zero, she said. At
the higher cutoff, saliva tests could be an easy and
cost-efficient screening device, but they have no
forensic track record, have not withstood court
challenges, and the connection between alcohol content in
a person's saliva and a person's blood remains
"theoretical," she said.

Blood is "the gold standard" in forensic testing, able to
detect trace amounts of alcohol, "but in workplace random
testing, blood is unattractive" because it is invasive
and expensive, Dr. Smith said. Breath testing meets
forensic standards but "is by no means cheap," she said.

In addition, breath testing combines in one device and
one operator the specimen collection, laboratory
analysis, and medical review functions the department
purposely separates in its drug testing program to
maintain objectivity.

Finally, urine testing for alcohol has the same potential
drawback as the zero cutoff level--it cannot demonstrate
that the person is impaired at the time of the test.

The decisions on cutoff levels and testing methods must
be made soon, for Transportation Secretary Andrew Card
plans to have a final rule in effect before the Oct. 28
deadline, Dr. Smith said. The department still hopes to
publish its proposed rule before the end of June, she
added.

-- Dave McIntyre



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

ROADSIDE TESTING PROJECT
COULD BE AHEAD OF SCHEDULE

The Department of Transportation's pilot project on
roadside drug and alcohol testing could begin as early as
late August, more than three months ahead of schedule,
according to Dr. Donna R. Smith, senior analyst with
DOT's drug enforcement and program compliance office.

The department recently chose four states--Utah,
Minnesota, Nebraska, and New Jersey--to implement the
program, which is meant to discover if random testing
that is not employer-based can be conducted in an
effective and cost-efficient manner, Dr. Smith told DRUG
DETECTION REPORT. Congress mandated the one-year, $5
million project as part of the Omnibus Transportation
Employee Testing Act of 1991, but the project is
proceeding independently of the department's rulemaking
on that legislation.

According to the legislation, implementation of the pilot
programs is to begin no later than January 1993. However,
Dr. Smith said, some of the states have indicated they
could begin testing as early as August.

Dr. Smith said each of the four states will develop its
own testing plan, including locations and methodology of
testing, so the department will have four separate
experiences to evaluate. She said the programs could
include on-site drug and alcohol screening or traditional
specimen collection, depending on what the states
propose. DOT is considering whether to have the states
contract individually with laboratories to perform the
tests or to have all four programs use one laboratory
selected by the department, she said.

Employers could save a lot of money if the responsibility
for drug testing is taken over by states, and Dr. Smith
indicated that one important objective of the pilot
program is to calculate the expense of roadside testing.
However, interest in roadside testing is not great among
state governments--only six submitted applications for
the pilot program, Dr. Smith said.

The department is particularly concerned that truckers
might easily be able to avoid the tests, she said. State
implementation plans will have to address means of
preventing truckers from informing each other about test
times and locations, taking alternate routes to avoid
testing sites, or "congregating at previous truck stops"
to avoid areas where tests are being conducted, she said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

OMB APPROVES STANDARD
CHAIN-OF-CUSTODY FORM

Federal agencies conducting urine drug testing programs
will soon be required to use a standardized
chain-of-custody form, according to Dr. Joseph H. Autry
III, director of applied research at the National
Institute on Drug Abuse.

NIDA and the Department of Transportation developed the
standardized form to simplify the specimen collection
process and reduce the number of errors that cause tests
to be canceled. Currently, the government specifies what
information is to be contained on chain-of-custody forms
but allows labs and agencies to develop their own
documents. That has led to confusion among
collection-site personnel, who frequently must use
several different forms depending on which agency or lab
was doing the testing.

The standard form received approval from the Office of
Management and Budget early this month, Dr. Autry told
DRUG DETECTION REPORT. Agencies will be notified of the
new requirement in a Federal Register notice, and any
agency wishing to use a different form will need OMB
approval, he said.

The form will also be required in all DOT-regulated drug
testing, according to Dr. Donna R. Smith, senior analyst
with the department's drug enforcement and program
compliance office. The form includes a notice that the
test is conducted according to federal guidelines and
regulations, as well as a Privacy Act statement for
federal employees, she said. The Privacy Act statement
will not apply to DOT testing.

Dr. Smith said OMB so far has approved the form only for
federal employee testing, but that the department will
submit the requirement as part of its proposed rule on
the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991.
Since OMB has already approved the form once, the
department expects no problems getting it through OMB
again, she said.

Companies will not be authorized to use the form for
testing not conducted under DOT regulations because the
form certifies that the test was conducted "in accordance
with applicable Federal regulations." However, companies
could adapt the form as a model for their own programs,
Dr. Autry said.

"I'd like to see the private sector take that form and
strip off the Privacy Act part and the federal identifier
and use that as a uniform document for all drug testing.
That would make life a lot easier for the labs."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

NIDA ALLOWS MRO'S TO REQUEST
CODEINE LEVEL BELOW CUTOFF

Medical review officers may request from labs the
quantitative levels for codeine on specimens reported
positive for morphine only, the National Institute on
Drug Abuse informed laboratories in April. The additional
information could help MROs determine whether positive
morphine tests received from labs should be reported to
employers as positives.

NIDA's instructions on MRO's receiving the codeine
information were contained in an April 9 advisory sent to
directors of NIDA-certified laboratories and all
inspectors within the National Laboratory Certification
Program.

MROs are normally not allowed to request quantitative
data below the cutoffs, but information on the presence
of codeine could help the MRO determine whether the test
subject was perhaps using codeine legitimately, according
to Dr. Donna Bush, chief of NIDA's drug testing section.
This is because codeine metabolizes to morphine in the
body, but some codeine is often found in the urine as
well, she said.

"What the MRO is looking for is any evidence of codeine
to try to support use of codeine as opposed to morphine
by itself," she explained.

Laboratories are authorized to release quantitative
codeine levels below cutoffs only in writing after
receiving a written request from the MRO, and only when
the codeine level is above the lab's limit of detection
and limit of quantification criteria, the advisory said.

In the advisory, NIDA also urged inspectors to "avoid
confrontation" and "maintain objectivity" in their
dealings with laboratory officials.

This was at least the second attempt by NIDA to defuse
tensions within its certification program. An Oct. 18,
1991, advisory referred to "an occasional emotional
moment" caused by "over-aggressive inspector behavior"
and reminded inspectors to "practice the highest
standards of professionalism and objectivity."

Tensions arise because inspectors--many of whom are
themselves laboratory officials--often have very definite
views about how best to fulfill NIDA's mandatory
laboratory guidelines, Dr. Bush said. These views will
differ, she said, because the guidelines establish
minimum standards without specifying how they are to be
met.

The latest advisory reminds inspectors that they are
"fact finders" who should "focus on adequacy, not
excellence; maintain objectivity; gather information;
inspect, do not suggest; ask questions when clarification
is needed; respect proprietary rights; handle conflicts;
[and] avoid confrontation."

One contentious issue during inspections has been which
lab personnel should have access to the area where the
lab receives and processes urine specimens, the advisory
indicated. NIDA said there is "no definitive answer" to
that question because laboratory size, staffing, and
workloads differ.

"It appears that this will be a dynamic and arguable
area," the advisory said. "Inspectors must continue to
make objective observations and assessments...and clearly
express their evaluation in the report. This is one area
where preconceived opinions are not desirable. This is
also an area where [inspection] team discussion and
explanation by the laboratory staff is usually
beneficial."

The advisory also contained several points regarding
chain-of-custody documentation for NIDA-regulated drug
testing. Improperly completed forms are the leading cause
of drug tests being canceled, according to federal
officials.

* Copy 3 of the chain-of-custody form, which goes from
the collection site to the MRO, must not pass through the
laboratory, even in sealed envelopes.

* Laboratories must document the condition of specimen
bottle seals on Copy 2 of the chain-of-custody document
(from lab to the MRO). If the lab reports to the MRO
electronically via computer, it may not use default
settings indicating the seal was intact, since an
oversight could improperly inform the MRO that the seal
was acceptable. A separate entry must be made for each
seal.

* Although "brevity and simplicity are desirable" in
chain-of-custody documentation, the record must "present
a clear picture of the location of the specimen/aliquot
at all times to third parties. Only then does a
[chain-of-custody] document fulfill the definition and
serve its purpose for review, scrutiny, or challenge."

-- Dave McIntyre



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

ONE IN FOUR LAW AGENCIES
TESTED APPLICANTS IN 1990

One-quarter of the nation's police and sheriffs'
departments required drug tests of all applicants for
sworn officer positions in 1990, but only 2 percent
required tests of all regular field officers, according
to a new report from the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

The report, which included 1990 data from 11,800 local
law enforcement agencies, found that drug testing was
more common in police departments than sheriffs'
departments, and in departments serving large populations
than smaller ones. For example, 79 percent of police
departments serving populations of 1 million or more
people required drug tests of all applicants, while only
14 percent of police departments serving 2,500 or fewer
did so.

Random testing of regular field officers was required by
4 percent of all local agencies, but by 21 percent of
police departments serving 1 million or more people. The
survey said 17 percent of all sworn police officers and
12 percent of sworn sheriffs' officers were subject to
random testing. Random testing was most common for
officers in drug-related positions employed by police
departments serving a population of 1 million or more (36
percent).

Reasonable suspicion tests were more common. One in every
10 agencies conducted such tests, covering 50 percent of
sworn police officers and 31 percent of sheriffs'
officers. Of civilian personnel, 45 percent in police
departments and 30 percent in sheriffs' departments were
subject to reasonable suspicion testing.

Sixty-three percent of the local agencies listed
dismissal as the most serious discipline for a first
positive drug test, with 14 percent listing suspension.
After two positives, 94 percent listed dismissal as their
most serious sanction, and only 2 percent said they stop
at suspension.

Nearly half (47 percent) of the agencies said they offer
nonprobationary officers treatment after a positive drug
test. However, the larger police departments (1 million
or more population) were least likely to offer treatment
(20 percent).

Nearly 40 percent of the local police and sheriffs'
departments reported that at least some of their
arrestees were tested for illegal drugs. Such testing was
most common in police departments serving populations of
500,000 or more (56 percent) and in sheriffs' departments
serving 1 million or more (60 percent).

"Drug Enforcement by Police and Sheriffs' Departments,
1990," (NCJ-134505), a 10-page report, is available
through the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,
Box 6000, Rockville MD 20850. (800) 732-3277; (301)
251-5500.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

Congressional conferees approved legislation May 12 that

Congressional conferees approved legislation May 12 that
would dissolve the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
Administration. Under the bill (S. 1306), ADAMHA's
research institutes, including the National Institute on
Drug Abuse, would become part of the National Institutes
of Health.

ADAMHA's service functions, including administration of
block grant programs, would continue under a new
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMSA), comprised of the Center for Substance Abuse
Prevention, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, and a
Center for Mental Health Services.

NIDA officials said the reorganization should have little
or no impact on the federal drug testing and laboratory
certification programs. The legislation would also
authorize new grant programs to encourage drug treatment
in the criminal justice system, treatment training,
capacity expansion, and the development of employee
assistance programs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

Workplace drug testing is an important tool in drug

Workplace drug testing is an important tool in drug
prevention and user accountability, according to two new
documents from the Office of National Drug Control
Policy.

In a "white paper" entitled "Understanding Drug
Prevention" and a bulletin on "User Accountability,"
ONDCP hailed the drug testing programs of Texas
Instruments and Motorola for including all employees,
from the chief executive officer on down. It did not
mention the National Labor Relations Board's ruling last
year that Motorola had illegally prohibited employees
from distributing literature criticizing the drug testing
policy. For copies, contact ONDCP at (202) 467-9890.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

The American Association for Clinical Chemistry will hold

The American Association for Clinical Chemistry will hold
its 44th national meeting in Chicago, July 19-23.
Half-day sessions include one on substance abuse testing
for laboratories thinking about entering the drug testing
business or with limited drug testing experience, and one
on emergency and workplace drug testing.

In addition, breakfast and lunch roundtable discussions
will address workplace alcohol testing, drug testing
regulation and accreditation, serum and urine testing for
benzodiazepines, drug testing regulations of the College
of American Pathologists, emergency room drug testing,
processing and analyzing urine specimens, and screening
for perinatal drug exposure.

For more information, contact AACC, 2029 K Street NW, 7th
Floor, Washington DC 20006; telephone (202) 857-0717 or
(800) 892-1400.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

The Drug Enforcement Administration has placed

The Drug Enforcement Administration has placed
methcathinone, an amphetamine analog, on Schedule I under
the Controlled Substances Act. DEA has found five
clandestine laboratories producing methcathinone, a
stimulant that produces amphetamine-like symptoms.
Methcathinone is distributed under the street name "cat"
in powder form, and it is inhaled. The DEA action was
announced May 1 in the Federal Register.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

LAST-CHANCE AGREEMENT CITED
IN DENIAL OF WORKER'S BENEFITS

A worker fired for a positive drug test has lost his bid
for unemployment benefits because his drug use violated
a last-chance agreement with his employer and therefore
was "misconduct" under state unemployment law, a
Washington appeals court has ruled. (Crain v. Employment
Security Department, Washington Court of Appeals,
Division One, No. 27826-6-I, April 13, 1992.)

Although the drug test alone was insufficient evidence to
prove misconduct, it could be considered along with the
worker's job performance and his agreement with the
employer, the court said.

Larry B. Crain tested positive for cocaine and marijuana
in April 1987 and was suspended from his job as a
production worker. The company agreed to reinstate him
provided he complete a drug treatment program and agree
to follow-up drug tests. Under the agreement, a second
positive test would result in Crain's firing.

Soon after returning to work, Crain received verbal
warnings from his supervisors for following improper
procedures. In October 1987, Crain's failure to properly
clamp part of a 200-ton machine caused "considerable
damage" to the equipment. Crain denied he was again using
drugs, but the company ordered him to submit to a test
because of the series of warnings he had been issued
since returning to work. He tested positive for marijuana
and was discharged.

The state Employment Security Department denied Crain's
application for unemployment benefits, but an
administrative law judge overturned that decision, ruling
that the department's policy prohibited using drug test
results to show that an employee was "under the
influence."

According to the department's Unemployment Procedures &
Methods Handbook, revised Oct. 30, 1986, "The results of
drug testing may not establish impairment or indicate
(with precision) when an illegal drug was used; such
results can only demonstrate the likelihood of prior drug
use. Therefore, discharging an employee based solely on
the employee's refusing to take or failing a drug test,
absent adverse job performance, is not misconduct."

The department commissioner, however, reversed the ALJ's
decision, finding instead that Crain's violation of the
last-chance agreement qualified as misconduct.

The appeals court agreed. Although drug test results are
"hearsay" evidence, and Washington employment law does
not allow misconduct to be proved exclusively by hearsay,
the court said the company relied on other evidence in
discharging Crain. Specifically, the court cited the
series of incidents involving Crain's work.

"Because this other evidence of drug impairment supported
the Commissioner's finding that Crain had violated his
re-entry agreement to remain drug-free, the Commissioner
did not err by also considering the test results to find
disqualifying misconduct," the court ruled.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

COURT UPHOLDS DRUG TEST
OF GUARD WITHOUT POLICY

Louisiana corrections officials properly ordered a guard
to take a drug test based on allegations that the guard
had used drugs at a crack house, even though the
Corrections Department had no drug testing policy in
place at the time, a state court has ruled. (Banks v.
Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Louisiana
Court of Appeals, First Circuit, No. CA 91 0136, April
10, 1992.)

Department officials received a tip from the Baton Rouge
sheriff's department that one of their corrections
officers, Simmie Banks, had allegedly been observed
smoking crack in a crack house that was under
surveillance. Department officials contacted the juvenile
detention facility where Banks worked and ordered the
supervisor to send Banks to a laboratory for a drug test.
Banks refused to take the test without first consulting
an attorney, and was fired.

At the time (September 1989), the department did not have
a drug testing policy in place. The court ruled, however,
that the department was within its rights to order a drug
test because it had reasonable suspicion to believe Banks
had used drugs and because corrections officers are
subject to bodily searches as conditions of employment.
Banks was therefore properly disciplined for refusing a
legitimate order, the court ruled.

The court relied on the U.S. Supreme Court's rulings in
Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives' Association and
National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, which it
said implied that "a governmental employer's order to an
employee to submit to a drug test on the basis of
individualized suspicion of drug use is constitutionally
valid in certain circumstances." The circumstances in
this case included the government's interest in
maintaining order at detention centers and in keeping
drugs away from prisoners. Guards who use drugs "may be
much more likely to be involved in the introduction of
contraband into a correctional facility," the court said.

The lack of a written, announced drug testing policy did
not invalidate the order to Banks, the court said.
"Although Mr. Banks stated that at no time during his
employment at the [facility] was he informed that he
would be subject to drug testing, he did admit that he
knew as a condition of his employment he was subject to:
a bodily search or `shake-down' on a random basis,
vehicle shake-down, and possibly a strip search. Mr.
Banks admitted that he knew the Corrections Services
Rulebook prohibited employees from violating state or
federal law and that to do so could result in
termination."

In addition, "an employee's refusal to obey a direct
order is conduct which, by its very nature, impairs the
efficient operation of the public service for which he
was employed."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>