
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B03-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B048-119</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it113.html 205.156.212.5 19970122022535 text/html 40121
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:23:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:47 GMT
Content-length: 39934
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it113.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet <BR>
July 11, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI> BRAZIL: CARDOSO DECREES EXPORT INCENTIVES AS REFORMS LANGUISH IN CONGRESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(419 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI> BRAZIL: LAND: CARDOSO THREATENS TO HALT INVASIONS: BUT AT SAME TIME RHYTHM &nbsp;OF EXPROPRIATIONS IS PICKING UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(492 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI> BRAZIL: EMPLOYMENT: TWO MILLION JOBS LOST IN SEVEN YEARS: BUT GOVERNMENT &nbsp;INSISTS SITUATION IS IMPROVING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(304 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI> BRAZIL: HEALTH & POLITICS: DEATH TOLL MOUNTS IN HOSPITALS CRISIS: GERIATRIC &nbsp;CLINIC SCANDALS FOCUS SOCIAL POLICY CONCERNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(920 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI> BRAZIL: FOCUS: INDUSTRY FACES TAKEOVER BOOM: M&A OPERATIONS UP 54% IN THE &nbsp;LAST YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(983 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI> BRAZIL: POLITICS & CRIME: WHO SHOT PC IN HIS ALAGOAS HIDEAWAY?: WAS IT &nbsp;CRIME OF PASSION OR DESTRUCTION OF THE EVIDENCE?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1498 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI> BRAZIL: ELECTIONS: SERRA THROWS HAT INTO SAO PAULO RING: MINISTER SEEN AS &nbsp;BEST HOPE OF STOPPING ERUNDINA AND MALUF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(413 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI> BRAZIL: POSTSCRIPT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(934 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: CARDOSO DECREES EXPORT INCENTIVES AS REFORMS LANGUISH IN CONGRESS

 Successive defeats in congress for the government's constitutional reform 
programme appear to have convinced the government that stimulating economic 
growth cannot wait for passage of the amendments to the pension, tax and 
administrative systems. President Fernando Henrique Cardoso has begun to use 
decrees (medidas provisorias) to implement essential reforms, thereby 
skirting the need to secure a two-thirds congressional majority, and without 
putting at risk the stabilisation achieved through the Plano Real.

 For first of these came on 19 June, when Cardoso announced a series of 
incentives for manufactured exports, which have suffered from the Plano 
Real's high interest rates and over-valued currency.

 These were in part a response to heavy pressure from the Sao Paulo 
employers' organisations, which had warned that they were no longer in a 
position to compete. The government was forced to admit that some industries 
had been made to suffer as a result of the stabilisation policies adopted in 
January 1995, and the time had come to help them out.

 The main element of the export incentives is a US Dollars 1bn credit line, 
to be administered by the Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Economico 
(BNDES). Loans will be made over 15 months at interest rates of 5.5% above 
Libor. That will mean a one-third reduction in financial costs, according to 
the new planning minister, Antonio Kandir.

 Ten sectors are to benefit from the new facilities: footwear, clothing, car 
parts, furniture, ornamental stones, ceramics, domestic appliances, 
electronic goods, tools and plastics.

 The shoe, textile and car parts industries are in dire need of 
restructuring to make them competitive with imports in the newly liberalised 
market. 

 The government hopes the stimulus will add some US Dollars 1bn to the US 
Dollars 46.5bn in exports registered last year. Cardoso has pointed out that 
the impressive expansion in Brazil's foreign trade in recent years has still 
not made much impact on overall world trade: Brazil accounts for less than 
1% of the total.

 The Sao Paulo employers' association, Fiesp, has welcomed the measures as 
the equivalent of a devaluation of the Real -which the government has ruled 
out.

 Kandir's appointment in place of Jose Serra (see Page 7, inside), has also 
been welcomed by the private sector as an indication that the privatisation 
programme will be pushed through more energetically than in the recent past. 
Despite his identification with the Collor Plan, with its confiscation of 
private savings, Kandir is a repected technocrat who is expected to get 
things done.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: LAND: CARDOSO THREATENS TO HALT INVASIONS: BUT AT SAME TIME RHYTHM 
OF EXPROPRIATIONS IS PICKING UP

 The strains that continuing conflict in the countryside is putting on 
government policy were demonstrated in mid-June by two apparently 
contradictory developments: President Cardoso warned that land occupations 
would in future be treated as a national security issue, with the army being 
used to evict invaders; and the estate where such an eviction led to a 
massacre in April was expropriated by the agrarian reform ministry.

 Maranhao incident. Cardoso's tougher line with the Movimento dos Sem-Terra 
(MST) was partly explained by an incident in the forests of Maranhao state, 
where three security guards and one landless labourer were killed on 13 June 
when the guards tried to prevent MST members from re-occupying a logging 
estate from which they had previously been expelled.

 Fears that MST tactics would lead to growing violence in the countryside 
have led landowners to recruit private security guards to protect their 
estates, and the government is concerned that local militants may be out of 
the control of the MST leadership.

 These fears appeared to be confirmed on 21 June, when a Para landowner, 
Carlos Alberto Oliveira Neto, blamed the MST for the violent occupation of 
his property near Conceica de Araguaia, in which a foreman was wounded and 
13 workers kidnapped. But the MST said the attack was the work of gumnen 
trying to take advantage of the turbulence caused by pressure for land 
reform.

 MST defiant. The MST gave its answer to Cardoso when, on 20 June, 200 
activists occupied the local government building in Vitoria, state capital 
of Espirito Santo state. They had earlier staged several invasions of 
agrarian reform ministry installations, to the annoyance of minister Raul 
Jungmann.

 He had already announced that the Macaxeira estate in Para, where 19 MST 
members were killed by military police on 17 April, would be taken over and 
distributed among about 600 people. The agrarian reform institute, Incra, 
had earlier declined to expropriate the 6,000 hectare estate, after its 
owners claimed it was properly and productively run. Another Incra 
inspection subsequently established that this was not true.

 On 24 June, President Cardoso ordered the expropriation of 21 properties 
totalling 31,600ha for distribution to 1,239 families belonging to the MST 
and the moderate small farmers' association, Contag, in Para, Bahia and 
Minas Gerais.

 This operation brought the total area of land taken over (with payment to 
the owners) since Jungmann took over at the end of April up to 427,937ha, 
for distribution to 11,340 families.

 Contag leader Francisco Urbano said, however, that he did not believe the 
government would meet its target of 180,000 families settled on their own 
land over the next three years.

 ARAGUAIA BODIES SEARCH

 A team of Argentine forensic anthropologists has joined the search for 10-
15 bodies of the so-called 'Araguaia guerrillas', allegedly tortured and 
killed during the 1972-76 campaign in Para (see RB-96-05). Operations began 
in the Maraba area on 29 June.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: EMPLOYMENT: TWO MILLION JOBS LOST IN SEVEN YEARS: BUT GOVERNMENT 
INSISTS SITUATION IS IMPROVING

 The news that manufacturing industry in Sao Paulo state had created 503 new 
jobs in the second week of June (see Pages 4-5) was of scant comfort to the 
unions that have been counting the cost of recession and restructuring in 
Brazil's industrial heartland. It was certainly not enough to persuade the 
trade unions that called the first general strike for five years on 21 June 
to drop plans for another such day of action.

 IBGE figures. Figures from the national statistical institute, IBGE, in 
late May, indicated that unemployment had increased by 38.62% over the 
previous year, and by 6.03% in April alone. That at least was lower than the 
6.38% registered in March, but well up on the 4.35% in April 1995. More than 
half of all lay-offs over the past year were in Sao Paulo.

 The unions' own statistical department, Dieese, calculated in mid-June that 
more than 2m people were unemployed in April in five of the main cities: Sao 
Paulo, Porto Alegre, Belo Horizonte, Curitiba and Brasilia. Unemployment in 
Sao Paulo was a record 15.9% in that month, Dieese reported.

 This figure was disputed, however, by presidential spokesman Sergio Amaral, 
who preferred to lump Sao Paulo in with five other big cities. The overall 
unemployment figure for those was 5.7% in February and 6.38% in March, he 
said. Since then unemployment had begun to fall, he added, as government 
job-creation programmes began to work.

 The ministry of labour reports that 2.1m jobs have been lost over the past 
seven years. It attributes the phenomenon to a combination of economic 
stabilisation, technological change and the high cost to employers of taking 
on workers.

 These job losses took place during a period in which the economically 
active population increased from 64m to 71m, the ministry noted.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: HEALTH & POLITICS: DEATH TOLL MOUNTS IN HOSPITALS CRISIS: GERIATRIC 
CLINIC SCANDALS FOCUS SOCIAL POLICY CONCERNS

 Growing unease among government supporters about its social policies -or 
lack of them- has found a focus in a series of scandals and disasters in the 
health service. Health minister Adib Jatene, a leading heart surgeon, 
threatened to resign when it was rumoured that incoming planning minister 
Antonio Kandir would veto his pet scheme for funding public hospitals with 
an earmarked tax on financial transactions. This tax, known as the CPMF, 
could raise up to US Dollars 6bn a year.

 Clinic closed. The scale of the problems was underlined at the beginning of 
June when Jatene was forced to order the closure of a Rio geriatric 
hospital, Santa Genoveva, where 93 old people had died since April as the 
result of bacterial infections caused by contaminated water, decomposing 
food and out-of-date medicines. They were also found to be suffering from 
malnutrition. One patient told O Globo that they were sometimes given meals 
containing dog food.

 Jatene also ordered the transfer of 300 other patients considered to be at 
risk, and promised to begin civil and criminal proceedings against the 
owners of the clinic, which he described as in a disastrous state after a 
personal visit. The proprietors of Santa Genoveva, two wealthy businessmen 
with interests in 10 other geriatric and psychiatric clinics in Rio de 
Janeiro, were subsequently arrested in late June.

 The health ministry and local authorities ordered an immediate inspection 
of 37 other geriatric hospitals in Rio state -suggesting that such 
supervision has been absent in the past.

 The use of substandard and unsupervised private hospitals is one of the 
many widespread problems in the over-stretched and under-funded Brazilian 
health system. 

 Contaminated water was also found to be the underlying cause of a disaster 
at a renal dialysis clinic in Pernambuco, where 55 people had died by the 
beginning of June.

 An investigation by Veja magazine revealed that the Instituto de Doencas 
Renais (IDR) in Caruaru, in the arid outback of the state, had been using 
water contaminated with blue algae supplied by tanker lorries that cut 
corners in the purification process. It was found that the IDR's internal 
procedures for checking filters were inadequate, and regulation by the 
health authority was non-existent.

 It is clear from the above that not all the health service's problems 
derive from insufficient resources. Further criticism came in a May report 
prepared by two Brazilian consultants for the Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB), which estimated that the government wasted at least US Dollars 
2bn last year through a combination of poor management and corruption. It 
pointed to a conspiracy by hospital administrators and health ministry 
officials to divert public funding into their own pockets.

 One of the favourite wheezes, according to the report, is for hospitals 
linked to the federal health system, SUS, to claim funding for non-existent 
patients, or for services that are not provided.

 Ageing population. Brazil's problems with geriatric care can only become 
more severe. Old people are the fastest-growing sector of the population 
(53% since 1980, compared with 44% for the population of working age). By 
the year 2000 the country will have 8.6m people over the age of 65 and 18m 
by 2020. As a World Health Organisation report notes, it does not have the 
infrastructure needed to look after them.

 On the contrary: the WHO notes that the number of geriatric hospital beds 
fell from 508,704 in 1994 to 503,461 in the following year.

 Infant mortality down. The Cardoso government's health policies can claim 
some successes, however. At the other end of the age scale, Brazil has 
managed, over the past couple of years, to reduce neo- and peri-natal 
mortality by almost a third. A church children's commission report found 
that the mortality rate in the first year of life had gone down by 28.4% in 
the first quarter of this year, in comparison with the same period last 
year: from 24.8 per 1,000 live births to 17.8. The improvement was most 
striking in the poor north and northeast.

 The church report attributes the improvement mainly to price stability 
under the Plano Real, which has enabled the poor to plan their expenditure 
more effectively.

 An example singled out by the report is that of Jaramataia, a town of 4,700 
inhabitants in the interior of Alagoas. In 1994 its infant mortality rate of 
359 per 1,000 births was one of the highest in the world. Last year it was 
down to 176, and to only 27 in the first three months of this year.

 INDIAN LIVES GROW SHORTER 

 Life expectancy for Brazil's indigenous population has fallen by 5.5 years 
since 1993, reflecting deteriorating living conditions and an increase in 
the incidence of diseases, according to a report by the IMTM tropical 
medicine institute, published in Folha de Sao Paulo in early June.

 Last year the average expectancy for the 329,000 Indians was 42.5, 25 years 
less than for the population as a whole and comparable to that of Sierra 
Leone. In the Javari valley of Amazonas state the average was 24.3 years for 
the Canamaris, Matis and Mayoruma, and only 21 among the Matubo people.

 Many deaths are the result of malaria and hepatitis brought in by illegal 
loggers, gold prospectors (garimpeiros) and settlers. NGOs reported in May 
that 3,000 garimpeiros using 35 landing strips had re-established themselves 
in the 10m hectare territory of the Yanomami, on the Venezuelan frontier, 
since the authorities stopped patrolling the reserve's boundaries in March.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: FOCUS: INDUSTRY FACES TAKEOVER BOOM: M&A OPERATIONS UP 54% IN THE 
LAST YEAR

 Mid-June brought a small item of encouraging news to Brazil's industrial 
heartland: the regular survey conducted by the Federacao das Industrias do 
Estado de Sao Paulo (Fiesp) showed in the previous fortnight, for the first 
time in thirteen-and-a-half months, a net job-creation figure.

 It was indeed small (503) and industry is still a very long way from 
mopping up the huge numbers of dismissals (98,133 over the past 12 months).

 However, Fiesp experts say that it shows how little an upturn is needed for 
industry to start hiring again. The turnaround is attributed chiefly to the 
steady fall in interest rates; they now average about 15% in real terms, 
compared with twice that much a year ago.

 Takeover threat. The encouragement derived from the employment figures has 
not managed to offset a new round of concern about the effects trade 
liberalisation and 'globalisation' are having on Brazilian industry. Rather, 
this has been heightened by a report from Price Waterhouse which shows that 
in the first five months of this year there were 154 mergers and 
acquisitions, 54% more than in the same period of 1995. In 44% of the cases, 
the operations involved outright buyouts or acquisitions of controlling 
stakes.

 Because not all such transactions are reported, it is estimated that the 
true total of mergers and acquisitions may be up to three times higher.

 Brazilian industry is changing hands, and in an increasing number of cases, 
the buyers are foreigners. In January-May last year, foreigners accounted 
for just over a third of the takeovers; this year their share has risen to 
48%.

 [Brazilians have already been served notice that a new buyer of companies 
is to appear on the market. At the recent signing of the association 
agreement between Mercosur and Chile, President Eduardo Frei announced that 
Chilean investors, after having lined up investment projects totalling US 
Dollars 10bn in Argentina, Peru, Paraguay and Uruguay, are beginning to 
target Brazil.]

 The reasons. Industrialists say that two factors have combined to stimulate 
the rise in takeovers. One is that many middle-ranking Brazilian firms 
lacked the capital to operate in a 'globalised' economy.

 With stockmarkets still too small to do the job, and subsidised lending by 
the Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Economico e Social (BNDES) governed 
largely by an inward-looking approach, companies were forced to rely on 
their own funds, when they had them, or borrow on Brazil's financial 
markets. The astronomic interest rates prevailing until recently either 
deterred companies from expanding, or weakened many of those who tried.

 The other factor is the relative stabilisation of the Brazilian economy, 
which has dispelled many of the reservations held by investors in recent 
years and highlighted again the attractiveness of Brazil as a large, complex 
economy with potential for rapid growth.

 Entrepreneurial talent. One fear is that the wave of takeovers is also 
leading to the withdrawal of valuable local entrepreneurial talent. In late 
June a report published in the Jornal do Brasil identified three 
entrepreneurs who had not only sold out recently but had also pulled out of 
business activity:

 Adhemar de Barros Filho, who sold his interest in Lacta to Kraft Suchard 
Brasil, has turned full-time to his political activities as a federal 
deputy.

 Mario Adler, who relinquished control of Estrela to a management buyout, 
has retreated to his activities as a leader of the local Jewish community.

 Jose Mindlin, who sold his interest in Metal Leve to Mahle, of Germany, has 
turned full-time to his cultural pursuits.

 [The case of Metal Leve is particularly poignant, as it was one of the 
early pioneers of the 'internationalisation' of Brazilian industry, with two 
subsidiaries in the US.]

 Past 'internationalisation'. There is an element of irony in the fact that 
a growing segment of Brazilian industry should succumb to 'globalisation' by 
being bought out. Though Brazil arrived relatively late (end-1980s) to the 
wave of trade liberalisation, it was the country which had previously most 
emphasised the export orientation of its industry.

 Back in 1970, exports of manufactured goods totalled US Dollars 367m. By 
1985 they had expanded thirty-fold, to US Dollars 11.2bn. By 1992 they had 
almost doubled again, to US Dollars 20.5bn. In that same time-lapse, the 
share of manufactures in total exports rose from 15% to 52%.

 Where others, like neighbouring Argentina, often appeared to be engaged in 
a zero-sum debate (either develop manufacturing or go for primary products, 
at best processing the latter), Brazil managed to do both. This emerges 
clearly from the composition of Brazil's manufactured exports, where 
foodstuffs appear as the second-largest item, slotted between metal products 
and chemicals.

 The growing importance of manufactured goods in Brazil's export trade 
appears to contrast with the sector's diminishing share of GDP, from 33.2% 
in 1980 to 24.9% in the early 1990s. This partly reflects the expansion of 
other sectors during a particularly bad period for Brazilian industry: after 
growing at an average annual rate of 9% in the 1970s, its output shrank by 
an average 0.2% a year in the 1980s, and the decline got steeper in the 
first three years of the current decade.

 Since then, however, it has registered at least two years of growth at 
rates similar to those seen in the 1970s.

 During the bad years, Brazilian industry did not only expand outwards 
through exports: in the 1980s it also started investing abroad. It got into 
the apparel industry in Portugal and Spain, and into the production of parts 
for motor vehicles in Portugal and the US.

 Nor has it been absent from the more recent wave of outward investment 
fostered by the creation of Mercosur. In 1994 it is reckoned to have 
invested up to US Dollars 800m in Argentina, where there are already some 
300 Brazilian firms (admittedly not all in the manufacturing sector).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: POLITICS & CRIME: WHO SHOT PC IN HIS ALAGOAS HIDEAWAY?: WAS IT 
CRIME OF PASSION OR DESTRUCTION OF THE EVIDENCE?

 The superstitious think it was the 'curse of the Collors' at work again. 
Those who put more faith in human and supernatural agency detect a political 
conspiracy. And the local police know a crime of passion when they see one. 
But one thing was clear: the murder of Paulo Cesar Farias ('PC') on 23 June 
put an immediate end to 30 pending lawsuits, and removed from the scene the 
key witness in more than 100 other criminal investigations, involving some 
prominent names from the Brazilian social and political elite.

 Man who knew too much. The conspiracy theory is by far the most beguiling, 
and the Brazilian press have gone to town on it. PC was said to have been 
terrified that someone would try to kill him and his family, and had sent 
his two sons to school in Switzerland to keep them out of harm's way.

 He was, after all, a man who knew too much. As the central figure in the 
kick-back and extortion scandals that had finally brought about the downfall 
of President Fernando Collor de Mello in December 1992, Farias knew where 
the bodies were buried and the money was stashed. But he had kept his mouth 
shut.

 Less than three weeks before his death, the federal police had submitted to 
attorney-general Geraldo Brindeiro the results of an exhaustive four-year 
inquiry into the scams and scandals of the Collor era, involving the 
examination of more than a quarter of a million documents. The report came 
up with the names of more than 400 alleged beneficiaries of PC's 
extraordinary fund-raising talents.

 Former ministers named. Among them were some important figures, not least 
Collor himself and his wife, Rosane. Ten of his cabinet ministers were also 
mentioned in the police document, including former finance minister Zelia 
Cardoso de Mello and presidency minister Marcos Coimbra (Collor's former 
brother-in-law).

 On the strength of this evidence, Brindeiro was reported to be preparing 
106 further indictments. The authorities had high hopes of pinning something 
at last on Collor, who had been acquitted of all charges by the supreme 
court in December 1994 (see RB-95-01).

 To stand any chance of securing convictions, the prosecution needed to put 
Farias in the witness box, as they had found no smoking gun in Collor's hand 
in all the thousands of documents. PC and Jorge Bandeira de Mello, a pilot 
he had used to ferry cash out of the country, were the only two participants 
in the so-called 'PC Scheme' to be convicted and jailed in 1994. Surely, 
once the new evidence started coming out in court, PC would want to set the 
record straight.

 He could throw light, among other things, on the favours that big 
contracting companies might have received in return for the millions of 
dollars they poured into PC's bewildering network of front companies and 
phoney bank accounts (see Zelia box).

 So his death could be regarded as highly convenient for a large number of 
prominent people who might have something to hide. The elimination of a key 
witness is not, after all, an unusual event in Brazil ...

 Rough politics. Besides, they have always played hardball in northeastern 
politics. Fernando Collor's own father, Arnon de Mello, shot a colleague 
dead in the senate in the 1960s; he had been aiming at a political opponent, 
but missed. And in neighbouring Paraiba, current senator Ronaldo Cunha Lima 
was elected in 1994 after riddling a rival with bullets in a restaurant.

 The conspiracy theorists were jubilant when, on 25 June, the company that 
claimed to have made the murder weapon, a .38 revolver, said it had been 
supplied to the Alagoas military police.

 If that were proved to be so, it would scotch the crime-of-passion theory 
right away. And the most enthusiastic proponents of that hypothesis, apart 
from the Farias family, are ... the Alagoas police.

 Crime of passion? As far as the forensic medicine department in Maceio, 
capital of Alagoas state, is concerned, it is an open-and-shut case. The 
body of the 51-year-old businessman was found in bed in his beach house a 
few miles from Maceio. He had a single bullet wound in the heart. Beside him 
was the body of his 28-year-old girlfriend, Suzana Marcolino da Silva, who 
also had a bullet wound in the chest. (Earlier reports, oddly, suggested she 
had taken poison or hanged herself.)

 Tests showed she had recently fired a gun, and the wound in PC's body 
suggested he had been shot by a non-expert, certainly not a hired assassin. 
(Police insisted, though, that the gun was hers.) Moreover, there were no 
signs of an intruder or a struggle. Domestic staff had heard the couple 
quarrelling violently early on the morning of their deaths (but curiously 
had not heard the gunshots).

 PC had recently told an interviewer that he had no intention of marrying 
again, but was thinking of entering politics, standing in the 1998 
congressional elections. Suzana was rumoured to be pregnant, and there were 
reports that PC had refused to acknowledge the child as his own; he was said 
to have had a vasectomy.

 The police are not the only people in Alagoas who subscribe to the crime-
of-passion theory. PC's lawyer, Nabur Bulhoes, insists that nobody could 
have had any interest in silencing his late client, as he had already told 
all he knew. And PC's brother, federal deputy Augusto Farias, said on 24 
June that his brother had recently confided in him that Suzana had tried to 
commit suicide a couple of months earlier.

 That is emphatically denied by the dead woman's family, who say she would 
have been the last person to take her own life.

 Curse of the Collors. As for the curse of the Collors, the evidence is as 
persuasive as that produced in support of rival hypotheses -so far. Ill-
fortune does indeed appear to stalk the superficially glamorous Collors and 
their allies.

 Fernando's younger brother, Pedro, who first denounced the corrupt 
practices he saw going on around him, developed brain cancer and died soon 
after his brother's acquittal. Their mother, Leda, suffered a stroke in 1992 
-allegedly brought on by the stress of her children's feud -fell into a coma 
and died three months after Pedro.

 PC's life had also been marked by tragedy. His wife, Elma, died suddenly, 
apparently from a heart attack, in July 1994, at the age of 44. She had 
always insisted that Collor, not her husband, was the mastermind behind the 
network of corruption.

 Her view, shared by many other Brazilians, was that Collor's inner circle 
of Alagoas politicans and hangers-on were intent on accumulating vast 
amounts of money to invest in expanding the family's regional media empire 
and constructing a dynasty that would remain in power for decades.

 Ministry's suspicions. The justice ministry has made clear where its 
suspicions lie. And it does not trust the Alagoas gumshoes to get to the 
bottom of things. Minister Nelson Jobim ordered the federal police to assist 
the local force with their inquiries within hours of the bodies being 
discovered. 'As Paulo Cesar Farias was involved, we cannot rule out the 
possibility that this was an attempt to destroy evidence,' said federal 
police commissioner Vicente Chelotti.

 COLLOR CLEARED

 Collor was cleared by the supreme court on 20 June of any part in a Farias 
racket, in which the Credicard company paid more than US Dollars 800,000 
into a fictitious bank account in return for PC's help with the renewal of a 
contract with the state-owned Caixa Economica Federal savings bank.

 ZELIA SUMMONED

 Former finance minister Zelia Cardoso had been summoned by the supreme 
court, STF, to give evidence in a case involving PC two weeks before his 
death.

 Zelia was suspected of accepting a US Dollars 800,000 bribe from the 
national bus operators' association, Rodonal, in return for decreeing a 
17.4% increase in bus fares on 14 September 1990. According to federal 
police documents, the US Dollars 800,000 was deposited in an account opened 
under a false name by PC on 13 September.

 A Rodonal official, Jose Augusto Pinheiro, told the police that the 
association paid Farias US Dollars 1m, but was told that, unless more was 
forthcoming, it would have problems with securing fare increases. The police 
think that the total amount paid out by the transport lobby during the 
Collor administration was more like US Dollars 3m.

 ROSANE'S EXTRAVAGANCE

 Rosane Collor used money from a charity she headed to fly her couturiers, 
doctor and spiritual adviser to Brasilia while her husband was President, 
according to a report from the social security department's legal advisers, 
submitted to the federal accounts tribunal, TCU, on 4 June.

 According to the report, she should be required to return US Dollars 15,300 
to the Legiao Brasileira, a social works foundation traditionally headed by 
the First Lady.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: ELECTIONS: SERRA THROWS HAT INTO SAO PAULO RING: MINISTER SEEN AS 
BEST HOPE OF STOPPING ERUNDINA AND MALUF

 The decision of Jose Serra, one of the Cardoso government's heavyweights, 
to resign from the planning ministry and run for mayor of Sao Paulo is 
evidence of just how seriously the government and President Cardoso's PSDB 
party are taking the October local elections. They can be seen both as a 
plebiscite on their performance so far and the first shots in the 1998 
campaign.

 Stop Erundina ... Serra's immediate mission is to stop the candidate of the 
left-wing Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT), former mayor Luiza Erundina, who 
is well ahead in the opinion polls. But throwing him into the contest put 
yet more strain on the unstable congressional coalition of the PSDB, Partido 
da Frente Liberal (PFL) and Partido Progressista Brasileiro (PPB).

 The right-wing PFL is committed to backing Celso Pitta, candidate of the 
incumbent, Paulo Maluf (PPB). The PFL immediately withdrew its support for, 
and participation in, the administration of PSDB governor Mario Covas.

 On the positive side, Serra moved into second place within a week of 
announcing his candidacy, with 22% support against Erundina's 27% in a Vox 
Populi poll. As the senator who secured the highest number of votes in the 
country in the last national elections, he stands a better chance than 
anyone else of overhauling Erundina. If he does well, the governorship of 
Sao Paulo could be his next objective, in 1998. According to Veja, he might 
even go for the presidency.

 ... And Maluf. His other immediate task is to stop the presidential 
ambitions of Paulo Maluf getting off to a flying start. Maluf is said to 
have decided to support Pitta as PPB candidate, as the latter has no 
previous links with local government (he has a private sector background). 
His squeaky-clean image will do no harm to Maluf's plans to run for 
President in 1998. Part of his strategy is to portray the PPB as modern, 
innovative and open and Pitta, a black businessman, is seen as the epitome 
of such values.

 The political coordination minister, Luiz Carlos Santos, noted that 
'without [Serra] in the campaign, Maluf, Erundina, perhaps even Orestes 
Quercia would move into fill the space.'

 The mention of Quercia, former governor of Sao Paulo, was a reference to a 
split in the Partido do Movimento Democratico Brasileiro (PMDB) in the 
state, where a rebel group has defied the local leadership, dominated by 
Quercia, and put up deputy Jose Aristodemo Pinotti as its candidate for 
mayor.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BRAZIL REPORT  via NewsNet
July 11, 1996

 BRAZIL: POSTSCRIPT

 INEQUALITY/ Worst in the world. Brazil has the most uneven distribution of 
wealth in the world, according to a United Nations report. It says that the 
richest 10% of Brazilians hold 65% of the nation's wealth, while the poorest 
40% have only 12%.

 The UN's human development index, which attempts to put a figure to the 
standard of living, also varies substantially from one region to another. 
Brazil as a whole scores 0.797, only fractionally below the highly developed 
country threshold of 0.8. However, Rio Grande do Sul state stands at 0.871, 
while Paraiba registers only 0.466, comparable to the poorest countries in 
Africa.

 BANKS/ Riskiest in Latin America. A report published by credit ratings 
agency Standard and Poor's says that the country's banking system is now the 
riskiest in the region, because of loose regulations and an end to the 
banks' easy money period during hyper-inflation.  Small banks, the agency 
claims, are most at risk, while larger ones are on a par with their 
counterparts in the rest of Latin America. 

 ALCOHOL-FUEL CARS/ Appeal evaporates. The environmentally-friendly and 
economical cars which run on alcohol are becoming obsolete, because no-one 
is buying them. According to figures published by Anfavea, the car makers 
association, only 602 alcohol-fuelled vehicles were sold in May, 85% down on 
the May 1995 level, and for the second month running less than 1% of the 
total number of cars sold. Ten years ago 95% of vehicles in Brazil ran on 
alcohol; the figure is now down to 3%.

 INVESTMENT/ US Dollars 20bn in 1996. President Cardoso has predicted that 
long-term investment will total US Dollars 20bn this year. Figures released 
to date indicate that foreign direct investment in the first five months of 
the year had reached US Dollars 3.3bn, a 10% year-on-year increase; FDI is 
forecast to reach US Dollars 8bn by year-end. 

 TELECOMS/ Satellite service. Four companies have formed a joint venture 
called Globalstar do Brasil to offer telephone services via satellite to 
regions that lack them, starting in 1998. The new company comprises 
Brasilstar and Globalstar of Brazil, Loral Corp of the US and Germany's 
Daimler-Benz. Investment worth US Dollars 180m has been earmarked for the 
project.

 MEDIA/ Journalist dies. Julio de Mesquita Neto, editor since 1969 of the 
Sao Paulo newspaper O Estado, has died of cancer at the age of 74. He was 
one of the strongest critics in the press of the military regimes which 
governed between 1964 and 1985.

 CRIME/ Hard graft. Hasmany Ramos, the famous plastic surgeon turned super 
criminal who threatened to join the IRA to learn the art of bomb-making, has 
been recaptured by the police. Ramos, who was serving a 22 year sentence for 
murder and extortion, had escaped from prison after his 11th attempt. He was 
arrested by Minas Gerais detectives while attempting to collect a ransom 
payment from the family of an abducted businessman. The authorities, 
however, did not realise it was Ramos until they took his finger prints.

 NUCLEAR POWER/ New member. Brazil has been granted full membership of the 
Nuclear Suppliers Group. The association, which consists of thirty countries 
who have adopted policies to control the export of goods and technology in 
the nuclear sector, promotes the use of nuclear power for peaceful means.

 OIL/ Argentine imports. Argentina has overtaken the Arab countries for the 
first time ever as Brazil's leading oil supplier, according to a report by 
the state company Petrobras. Brazil currently imports 135,000 bpd from 
Argentina, compared with 125,000 bpd from Saudi Arabia and 90,000 bpd from 
Venezuela. The report adds that Venezuela is likely to overtake Saudi Arabia 
before the end of the year. Brazil imports a total of 700,000 bpd and 
produces marginally more itself, some 750,000 bpd.

 Petrobras search. The state oil copmany is looking for private sector 
associates to help it develop the rich natural gas reserves that are thought 
to exist in Amazonia, according to Gazeta Mercantil. The Urucu and Juru 
reserves are estimated to hold 82bn cubic metres of natural gas, making them 
the second most important in the country, after Campos in the state of Rio 
de Janeiro. Petrobras lacks the resources to build a 270km pipeline linking 
the reserves to the city of Coari, from where the gas could be distributed.

 The state company's overtures towards the private sector reflect its 
concern over potential competition from foreign multinationals in 1998, when 
Petrobras's monopoly in the hydrocarbon sector will end.

 TRADE/ May surplus. A trade surplus of US Dollars 268m was recorded in May, 
giving a US Dollars 31m surplus for the first five months of the year. 
Brazil exported US Dollars 4.5bn worth of goods and imported US Dollars 
4.2bn in May, the finance ministry says. In May 1995 a trade deficit of US 
Dollars 690m was sustained. 

 Paraguayan contraband. Between 1 May and 10 June 350 tonnes of goods 
smuggled into the country from Paraguay were seized by the authorities. The 
products included food, household appliances, tobacco and alcohol, and were 
valued at US Dollars 4m. Customs officials said they confiscated 50 tonnes 
of cigarettes, enough to supply 82,000 smokers for a month. Most of the 
products were destined for Brasilia's informal market.

 CONSUMPTION/ Spirits rise. Falling inflation and lower import tariffs led 
to a 25% rise in alcohol sales last year, to US Dollars 23bn, according to 
the weekly Veja. Wine, champagne and whiskey consumption rose by an average 
of 34%; beer and rum by 21%. Sales of cachaca, the country's most popular 
spirit, rose by 1%.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>