
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B14-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000621-B040-299</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ts04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122053910 text/html 59893
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:37:02 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:54 GMT
Content-length: 59706
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ts04.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* THIS WEEK'S LEAD STORIES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>NATIONS SEEK 'PRIVATE' FUNDS&nbsp;FOR LYON-TURIN HSR ROUTE </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>AMTRAK SCALES BACK&nbsp;NEC ORDER SIZE;&nbsp;FEBRUARY DECISION DUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1026 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>AMTRAK DEFENDS &nbsp;DECISION TO DROP &nbsp;ABB TRACTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* GOVERNMENT WATCH *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>DG VII SHIFTS FOCUS&nbsp;FROM RAIL IN 2ND CALL,&nbsp;BUT TASKS STRESS HSR  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1137 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>RAIL TASKS IN EC TRANSPORT DIRECTORATE'S&nbsp;FOURTH FRAMEWORK SECOND CALL FOR PROPOSALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(434 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* MAGLEV *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>GIRDERS AND PROPULSION&nbsp;CHANGES AS TRANSRAPID&nbsp;PREPARES FOR MORE TESTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(772 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* IN THE FIELD *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>1995: NEW WORKS AND&nbsp;R&D RISE IN EUROPE;&nbsp;NORTH AMERICA FADES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1565 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* OPPOSING FORCES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>FRA SUMMARY FINDS&nbsp;MAGLEV DISMISSED,&nbsp;HSR PREFERRED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(981 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* BULLETS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>  * The decision on which of the two remaining bidders will </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(212 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>  * The Italian transport engineering firm Ansaldo Trasporti </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>  * Neil Kinnock, the European transport commissioner, has </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* CALENDAR *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>January 24-26</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(197 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* ANNOUNCEMENTS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>CALL/FAX TO START YOUR RISK-FREE SUBSCRIPTION TODAY!&nbsp;LOGISTICS TECHNOLOGY NEWS:&nbsp;INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(331 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>TURN THIS YEAR'S MARKETING PLAN&nbsp;INTO A SUCCESS STORY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(178 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

NATIONS SEEK 'PRIVATE' FUNDS
FOR LYON-TURIN HSR ROUTE 

  French and Italian authorities reinforced their support 
for the proposed high speed rail link between Lyon and Turin 
this month. The two governments have established an 
intergovernmental commission to push the project forward 
this year. Project officials claim the planning is currently 
on schedule, with an estimated completion date for the 
entire link of 2002.

  The intergovernmental commission "will study the 
possibility of financing the project," explains Maurizio 
Cavagnaro, president of Alpetunnel, the European economic 
interest group set up at the end of 1994 to coordinate the 
main tunnel section of the Lyon-Turin rail link. The group 
now involves representatives of seven ministries from each 
of the two countries, he says.

  As well as the strengthening of the commission from both 
sides, the project was highlighted by the French transport 
ministry (Ministere de l'Equipement, des Transports et du 
Tourisme, or METT) earlier this month as a possible lead 
candidate for private financing. In an interview with Le 
Monde, Anne-Marie Idrac, a junior French transport minister, 
suggested that the finance for the high speed line 
construction between Lyon in southern France and Turin in 
northern Italy may be the best option available for private 
investors to get involved in rail infrastructure projects.

  Up until now, the French government has resisted almost 
all calls from the European Commission (EC) and others to 
encourage private investors to support major rail -- or any 
other -- infrastructure projects. Idrac's assertions earlier 
this month were brought on in part as a result of the strike 
by French national railways (Societe Nationale des Chemins 
de Fer, or SNCF) late last year. Whatever the prompt, her 
remarks have been greeted with relief in Brussels.

  But how far is the French government prepared to go with 
private financing? This is a confusing issue, partly because 
"private" in the private finance term does not have the same 
meaning or implication in each European country, notes one 
senior rail industry observer. "The word is used very 
loosely" in France, he adds.

  When the French ministry and SNCF say private finance, 
they mean "a contribution from the interested regions who 
would get guaranteed bank loans," the observer explains. For 
the French side of the Lyon-Turin link, this would primarily 
involve the Rhone-Alpes region. They would then be able to 
"capture the development benefit directly," he adds.

  Cavagnaro, who splits his time between the Italian 
Railways (Ferrovie dello Stato, or FS) facility in Rome and 
the Alpetunnel offices in Chambery, France, is not surprised 
by the move to consider private finance for transport 
projects. Transport ministry officials from France and Italy 
"said at a meeting one year ago" that there were financial 
constraints at the two national rail operators, he says. As 
a result, that meeting concluded that for the trans-Alpine 
link, "construction of the new line will be in a concession 
in order to involve private money," he adds.

  But "that's only a first indication," Cavagnaro says. "Now 
the question will be studied by the intergovernmental 
commission and be studied by Alpetunnel to examine all the 
possibilities of the private and public partnership," he 
adds.

  The exact model to be used for financing the project has 
yet to be finalized. The whole project is expected to cost 
approximately ECU13.55 billion ($17.3 billion), of which 
more than ECU3 billion will be for the main tunnel section 
(see HST News, Nov. 13, 1995). The "Eurotunnel idea" is one 
option under consideration, Cavagnaro says.

  But given the financial fiascos surrounding the Channel 
Tunnel initiative since its inception, it would seem 
unlikely if this model were followed too closely for the 
Alpine project. Indeed, a document published by Alpetunnel 
draws comparisons with the Channel Tunnel. The so-called 
Tunnel de Base under the Alps "shall be slightly longer than 
the tunnel under the Channel," it notes. But "in spite of a 
geological site far more complex than that of the Channel, 
the provisional cost of the tunnel is less."

  "The intergovernmental commission will be operating now in 
January, and I think the end of this year it will be 
possible to report to the two governments" on the 
recommended financing model to follow, Cavagnaro says. 
Assuming it is a concession, as initially concluded by 
representatives from the two governments, "the concession 
will be in place maybe in 1998," he adds.

  The French transport ministry is still only lukewarm at 
best on the possibilities of private investors wanting to 
get involved in track construction projects. Idrac has 
indicated that the government may help out SNCF on some 
construction projects, while leaving the private finance 
door ajar.

  Within the French ministry, "there is a subset of young 
Turks who try to loosen things up" with regard to financing 
options, the rail industry observer comments. But if SNCF 
and the METT are to go down the private investment track, 
"there is a legal step" necessary in France in order to 
"loosen the shackles," he adds.

  The Lyon-Turin high speed rail project is one of the 14 
European transport priority projects. It is described in EC 
documents as one of the "key links" in the European high 
speed network, primarily connecting Lyon through Turin, 
Milan and Venice to Trieste in the north east of Italy. For 
the key link, however, the majority of the work is required 
on the French side of the project.

  The new line in France -- a dedicated passenger rail 
facility -- will link Lyon with Montmelian. Clearly the most 
expensive sections of the project will be the Belledonne 
Tunnel from Montmelian to St Jean de Maurienne, and then the 
main 54 km (33 mile) Tunnel de Base continuing on to Susa 
over -- or rather under -- the Italian border, capable of 
taking freight and high speed passenger rail services in 
parallel.

  "The project is going ahead" and some of the first main 
construction decisions are already being made, Cavagnaro 
says. "The first problems are the decisions for construction 
of the test tunnels. These are very important works," he 
stresses. "There are three test tunnels to study the 
geology," he explains. Two of these will be in France, with 
the other in Italy. "We have started the project of the 
civil works" for the test tunnels. "At the end of this year 
will be the start of construction of the test tunnels," he 
adds.

  The French and Italian governments approved an FF800 
million ($200 million) study program for the Alpine tunnel 
at the end of 1994. Approximately one quarter of this was 
allocated for work carried out last year. In addition, the 
EC has granted the Lyon-Turin project ECU9.0 million for 
feasibility study support.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

AMTRAK SCALES BACK
NEC ORDER SIZE;
FEBRUARY DECISION DUE

  Bending to the constraints caused by a lack of capital 
funding in fiscal year 1996, Amtrak's Board of Directors has 
approved plans to order just 18 high speed train sets for 
the Northeast Corridor (NEC), with an option for two 
additional fossil-fuel units.

  Amtrak has repeatedly insisted it had no plans to reduce 
the number from 26 train sets, despite reports from sources 
inside the company that it would be forced to do so (see HST 
News, Nov. 13, 1995).

  Amtrak officials decline to say whether pressure from the 
two competing consortia triggered any reduction in the 
proposed purchase.

  The Board of Directors now is expected to select a winning 
consortium next month, choosing either Siemens 
Transportation Systems or the GEC Alsthom/Bombardier team. 
ABB Traction was dismissed by Amtrak from further 
negotiations last month (see HST News, Dec. 25, 1995).

  Amtrak spokeswoman Erin Clarke acknowledges that the 
company now hopes to obtain just 18 train sets. "The number 
of train sets is 18, and we're in final negotiations," 
Clarke says. "We'll be awarding the contract in February." 
Amtrak expects an initial delivery of 12 HSR trains by 
October 1999, and "two of those 12 would be prototype train 
sets that would be delivered in 1998 for testing."

  Fiscal constraints finally forced Amtrak to reduce its 
projected equipment order, Clarke acknowledges. "Of course, 
Congress has been very supportive of the train set program, 
but has not appropriated funds for it this year [fiscal year 
1996]," Clarke notes. "We've had great support -- but 
support doesn't buy train sets." Amtrak must move ahead 
using previous federal appropriations and possible vendor 
financing, she says.

  The prototypes must be tested at the Association of 
American Railroad's (AAR) Transportation Test Center (TTC) 
in Pueblo, Colo. Asked if TTC delays could postpone the 
introduction of the new trains on the NEC still more, Clarke 
says it's not likely. "A lot of the testing will take place 
in Pueblo," she says, but delays are unlikely because "so 
many folks" will be involved. Paradoxically, the range of 
tests, including anything from noise to the comfort of 
internal amenities, will be so intense "that we don't 
anticipate any problems."

  Clarke unveiled Amtrak's revised plan Jan. 7 to a sparsely 
attended session on high speed rail during the recent 
Transportation Research Board (TRB) annual meeting in 
Washington, D.C., whose attendance was severely impacted by 
blizzard-like weather. "There were almost no presenters from 
our group, except myself," she quips.

  Clarke adds that, contrary to rumors that surfaced at TRB, 
Amtrak is still exploring the purchase of non-electrified 
fossil fuel alternatives to HSR. "The fossil fuel train sets 
-- the two -- remain in as an option, and we'll exercise 
that contingent on funding," she says.

  Not all TRB members are reassured by Clarke's pledge. 
George Haikalis, a New York City-based consultant, says the 
fossil fuel order now falls "at the end of the option, not 
at the end of the initial order. That puts it in jeopardy, 
puts it at risk.

  "The number of trains, whether 24 or 18, is fine, but they 
ought to all be fossil fuel, to get something up and running 
right now," Haikalis observers. "We're talking three million 
person hours of delay just to accomplish what we could 
accomplish sooner, at lower cost and less inconvenience."

  Haikalis says Amtrak is correct to focus its resources on 
one HSR project, rather than spread a limited pool of funds 
across the country, diluting any impact. But using the NEC 
for fossil-fuel R&D, he says, not only is better and more 
cost-effective, "but they'd be advancing a technology that 
would have widespread application throughout the U.S. in the 
'Accelerail' program."

  "Amtrak and FRA may want to be sacrificing this to reduce 
the credibility of alternatives to electrification," 
Haikalis charges. "Everything must be sacrificed on the 
altar of electrification."

  Amtrak rejects Haikalis's accusations. "If Mr. Haikalis is 
correct, why is 90 percent of Europe's highly acclaimed 
passenger rails system electrified?" says Amtrak director of 
media relations Clifford Black. "And why aren't they 
instituting fossil fuel replacements?"

  Adds Clarke, "Most of our trains are running on non-
electrified territory; we have every interest in developing 
a train that would be appropriate. We certainly haven't 
abandoned the fossil-fuel option," Clarke declares. "But in 
the entire nation, this [the NEC] is the market where we can 
truly dominate."

  Amtrak still may add to its order of 18 trains, Clarke 
points out. "We got approval from the Board to move forward 
with 18 train sets, but I don't think that means Amtrak 
won't obtain 19, 20, 21 sets or whatever."

  Efforts on Capitol Hill are still underway to secure a 
dedicated capital funding source for the railroad, though 
the proposal has been stymied by the budget debate. "If we 
get the half-penny gas tax, the number of equipment sets 
could change," says Black. "Regardless of our near-term 
capital situation, it can be assumed that a successful 18 
set order could be easily expanded, if warranted and if 
money is available."

  Black says the initial order of 18 sets will be sufficient 
to serve the entire NEC adequately, once electrification is 
extended from New Haven, Conn. to Boston. He also says the 
decision date for awarding a contract, which has slipped 
repeatedly through 1995 is now firm. "The Board will make 
its decision in February," Black says.

  "There continues to be give and take between Amtrak and 
the remaining vendors on various details of the contract, 
including but not limited to financing and servicing 
requirements. We concede that it has been a very long 
siege," Black says. "The process has proved more complicated 
than anticipated."

  NEC electrification, also repeatedly delayed, is now set 
to begin under a new contractor team headed by Balfour 
Beatty Power Construction, Inc. and Massachusetts Electric 
Construction Co. Amtrak had planned to hold a groundbreaking 
ceremony in early spring, with full construction underway by 
summer. "We're still planning a June 1996 groundbreaking 
with full mobilization at the same time. But I don't think 
we're planning a ceremonial groundbreaking."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

AMTRAK DEFENDS 
DECISION TO DROP 
ABB TRACTION

  Partisans of X-2000 tilt train technology have protested 
Amtrak's decision last month to discontinue negotiations 
with ABB Traction, Inc., one of three finalists vying for 
Amtrak's NEC equipment order. Amtrak reportedly dropped ABB 
from consideration due to higher cost estimates.

  But Amtrak director of media relations Clifford Black says 
Amtrak's decision was not, in and of itself, a rejection of 
the X-2000. "We're frustrated in dealing with the continued 
belief, and myth, that this is somehow a competition between 
the X-2000, as we know it, the ICE train as we know it, and 
the TGV as we know it," Black says.

  Black notes "we have received letters from people 
protesting [dropping the X-2000] because those people 
thought it was an excellent train. We liked it too, and 
thought it was an excellent train." But Amtrak's 
specifications call for a distinct product tailored to U.S. 
needs. "We're not buying an off-the- shelf train."

  Some letters addressed to Amtrak suggest "we have cast off 
an American-made X-2000 and are now negotiating with German 
and Canadian companies. The irony is, regardless of who is 
awarded the contract, the provision calling for substantial 
American content remains the same," Black says.

  "This is not a vote of no-confidence for the X-2000. This 
is an Amtrak train designed to incorporate features and 
characteristics that we feel will best suit our needs."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

DG VII SHIFTS FOCUS
FROM RAIL IN 2ND CALL,
BUT TASKS STRESS HSR  

  Rail research has moved right down the priority list for 
the second Fourth Framework call for proposals from DG VII 
at the European Commission (EC). The transport directorate 
in Brussels is looking to allocate around ECU4.5 million 
($5.7 million) to selected rail research bids due to be 
submitted by the March 15 deadline.

  The low figure this time round is partly due to the 
success of rail companies in bidding for funds on offer in 
the first call for proposals. Rail has been allocated 16 
percent of the program's overall budget of ECU256 million 
for projects running in the period 1995 through 1998 (see 
HST News, Jan. 23, 1995). But rail bids secured over two 
thirds of this allocation from the first round of bidding -- 
primarily thanks to the coordination of most of these by 
Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer (UIC) -- leaving 
just ECU13 million for rail projects in the second and third 
calls.

  Despite the low budget on offer, there are 30 tasks 
directly related to rail which are open for DG VII's second 
call for proposals, issued on Dec. 15 (see chart page 8). 
But while rail proposers are likely to have to fight over 
just ECU4.5 million, there are other sections of the program 
which should have some rail elements.

  The strategic research section of DG VII's program 
accounts for 20 percent of the overall budget. In the second 
call, this program section is in line for approximately 
ECU11.71 million; representing the largest share of the 
ECU48 million expected to be on offer.

  In addition, the program section covering integrated 
transport chains -- with a budget for this call of 
approximately ECU4.47 million -- also has a high rail 
content. All seven tasks in this section were open in the 
first call, but the transport directorate is still accepting 
bids on these during the second call for proposals.

  The transport chains section addresses primarily freight 
operations. It aims to improve freight facilities both on 
individual modes and in the interoperability between modes. 
The program section divides into tasks relating to transport 
terminals and networks. One of the main priorities 
identified in the work program relates to improved access 
for freight to rail infrastructure.

  DG VII approved 111 projects for funding from the first 
call for proposals (see HST News, Dec. 25, 1995). But, with 
some contracts not yet signed, officials from the transport 
directorate have not released details of these. The only 
exception is the integrated transport chains projects.

  Given that bids for the second call will have to make sure 
they do not overlap with those approved from the first, DG 
VII has released the list of the three projects already 
approved for funding in this section of the program, 
explains Simon Mordue, an official in the transport 
directorate. The current plan is to publish brief summaries 
of all projects -- assuming the contracts are signed -- in 
March, he adds.

  "One result of the first call was three projects on 
integrated transport chains," Mordue says. INRETS (Institut 
National de Recherche sur les Transports et leur Securite) 
in Paris is leading the IQ (Intermodal quality) project. The 
consortium is planning four field trials which will aim to 
improve "operational and control functions within the 
network and the terminals," according to the additional 
information documents released by DG VII as part of the work 
program.

  The Impulse (Interoperable modular pilot plants underlying 
the logistics systems in Europe) project, led by the German 
firm Krupp Fordertechnik, will address "trans-shipment 
facilities and the related terminal organization." PLS 
Consult, based in Arhus, Denmark, is the coordinator of the 
Freia (Towards the networking of European freight villages) 
project which is concerned with the role of smaller firms in 
intermodal transport.

  Of the 30 tasks currently open in the rail section of the 
program, eight have an element of high speed rail. The task 
description included in the work program for Task 37 
stresses the need for interoperability of high speed rail 
systems. "When analyzing the cost benefits of inter- 
operability in order to find reasonable levels one must not 
only consider the short term views but also the longer term 
effects especially taking account of the fact that inter- 
operable advanced (telematics) technology is very cost 
effective," it states.

  Seven tasks under the title "future rail freight and 
passenger management" are included in the current call for 
proposals, all with reference to high speed rail. DG VII 
officials indicate that "all the tasks 44 to 50 could form 
one project or they could be split up on a few different 
projects."

  "With the construction of high speed rail lines the 
possible use of these lines also for freight services should 
be considered," says the work program, which has had some 
minor modifications since it was first issued in December 
1994, states.

  The set of tasks on "future" issues ends with a pragmatic 
assessment of the potential for high speed rail. The task 
"is intended to deal with finding the optimum solution in 
the area of compromise between speed, comfort and costs on 
lines which are not obvious candidates for dedicated high 
speed services," according to the work program.

  The majority of the 111 projects selected in the first 
wave of DG VII's new program have finally got down to work 
this month. Proposers hoping for a share of the second call 
budget can expect to have to start work in autumn, at which 
time DG VII is currently planning to release its third and 
final call for proposals in the Fourth Framework.

  DG VII has pushed its open information policy in setting 
up the new program -- its largest Framework R&D effort by 
far. As well as having sent out paper-based information 
packs to tens of thousands of prospective proposers over the 
last year, the directorate's information has been available 
electronically. Close to 5,000 sets of documents have been 
distributed in this way, Mordue says.

  Up to date information will soon be available via an on-
line service. "We're just finalizing a home page on the 
World Wide Web," Mordue says. Until this is established, 
further details on DG VII's Fourth Framework plans can be 
accessed through http://www.cordis.lu.
------------------------------------------------------------
              EC TRANSPORT DIRECTORATE FOURTH 
               FRAMEWORK FUNDING ALLOCATIONS

                          Est      Remain   Overall   % of
                 Budget   Budget   Budget   Budget    Whole 
Program Area     1st Call 2nd Call 3rd Call Plan     Program

Strategic        17.32    11.71    22.17    51.20      20
Rail             27.95     4.50     8.51    40.96      16
Transport chains  5.00     4.47     8.45    17.92       7
Air              20.25     7.16    13.55    40.96      16
Urban            12.70     5.35    10.11    28.16      11
Waterborne       21.96     9.23    17.45    48.64      19
Road             11.92     5.62    10.62    28.16      11
SME awards        0.08       --       --       --      --

Total           117.2     48.0     90.8    256.00     100%

Source: DG VII



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RAIL TASKS IN EC TRANSPORT DIRECTORATE'S
FOURTH FRAMEWORK SECOND CALL FOR PROPOSALS

B - SAFETY
2.2.2 - The safety aspects of human management
30      Analyze the national safety rules and procedures (24 
        months)
31      Define safety rules and procedures for planned 
        cross-border railway lines (24 months)
32      Select methods for human reliability analysis (24 
        months)

C - INTEROPERABILITY
2.3.1 - Management and infrastructure
33      Analyze rail transport and compare with other modes 
        which are now deregulated (24 months)
34      Analyze pros and cons in the way national 
        authorities are implementing the directive (24 
        months)
35      Analyze the existing infrastructure (24 months)
36      Analyze the cost of using the infrastructure (24 
        months)
37      Analyze the appropriate degree of interoperability 
        for different types of rail lines (24 months)

2.3.3 - External effects
41      Survey the present situation with emphasis on noise 
        and vibration (24 months)
42      Identify and catalog the various contributions to 
        noise and vibration (24 months)
43      Propose corrective measures (24 months)

D - ECONOMIC, ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIAL ASPECTS OF RAIL
2.4.1 - Future rail freight and passenger management
44      Analyze the opportunity of utilizing high speed rail 
        network for passengers and freight (36 months)
45      Increase reliability and safety in high speed 
        freight transport (36 months)
46      Identify strategies for reduction of the global cost 
        of freight transport (36 months)
47      Study the requirements for high speed rail freight 
        transport (36 months)
48      Evaluate the effects of shared utilization of the 
        high speed network (36 months)
49      Assess the effects of high speed rail freight 
        transport on the European network (36 months)
50      Assess investment balance between advanced rolling 
        stock and construction of new track (36 months)

2.4.2 - Profitability of rail transport and adaptability of 
        railways
51      Analyze the positive and negative factors for rail 
        transport (24 months)
52      Make an inventory of the various concepts being 
        implemented by rail (24 months)
53      Compare these concepts with other transport modes 
        (24 months)
54      Identify successful concepts and propose to apply 
        these to rail transport (24 months)
55      Analyze the current adaptability of railways (24 
        months)
56      Propose short and long term activities for 
        improvement (24 months)

2.4.3 - Support for socially necessary services
57      Survey the present situation (24 months)
58      Compare with other transport modes (24 months)
59      Analyze the current trends (24 months)
60      Suggest further action at European or national level 
        (24 months)

2.4.4 - Electric traction power systems
61      Survey the present situation (24 months)
62      Recommend requirements for efficient and cost-
        effective energy supply for railways (12 months)

Source: DG VII Transport RTD Revised Work Program Additional 
Information (Rail Transport), December 1995



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

GIRDERS AND PROPULSION
CHANGES AS TRANSRAPID
PREPARES FOR MORE TESTS

  Officials from the Transrapid consortium are completing a 
series of upgrades to the high speed maglev facility in 
Emsland, Germany. One of the main changes concerns the 
propulsion system for the Transrapid. The "new generation" 
currently being installed should now stay the same through 
to installation on the Berlin-Hamburg line.

  Testing of the new propulsion system is scheduled to start 
in March or April, says Rudiger Fuerst, the project manager 
for Siemens AG Transportation Systems Group within 
Transrapid in Erlangen, Germany. The modifications have 
required "new inverters and new rectifiers. This is now the 
type we want to use in the project Berlin-Hamburg," he adds.

  To accommodate the synchronous motors required by the 
Transrapid, "we have to construct a special power supply," 
Fuerst explains. Since the system works by varying the 
current and the frequency, "we have to use inverters" which 
can change the frequency between zero and 270 Hz. "To use 
this inverter, we need rectifiers to convert" from the 50 Hz 
mains supply to DC.

  But it is not just the propulsion system which is being 
modified following the initial tests on the 31.5 km test 
track. "The test facility has been upgraded," notes Manfred 
Wackers, head of marketing and system applications at 
Transrapid International in Munich. Since the first phase of 
testing, "the system has been further improved," he adds.

  With prototype Transrapids being tested at speeds in 
excess of 400 km/h, there have been reports of wear and tear 
on some sections of the guideway. That is "right and wrong," 
Wackers observes. "We have different types of girders" 
holding up the guideway along the test track for evaluation 
purposes. It was planned from the outset that "not all of 
these would be used in construction," he adds.

  Officials from Transrapid -- a joint venture of ABB 
Daimler-Benz Transportation Systems, Siemens and Thyssen 
Henschel Maglev Transportation Technology (Magnetfahrtech- 
nik) -- have identified three girder types which could be of 
use on different sections of the Berlin-Hamburg route. These 
are constructed from "concrete, steel as well as a combined 
technology," Wackers says.

  While the new propulsion tests will not start for a few 
months, the Emsland track is currently being used to assess 
passenger comfort issues. Transrapids have been running on 
the track at speeds of up to 425 km/h with passengers on 
board, Wackers says. "Even those who are opposed to the 
system, they are convinced" once they have been on a test 
run, he claims.

  For the Berlin-Hamburg line, "construction will start in 
1998," as planned, says Wackers, originally from the Thyssen 
side of the Transrapid group. "The legal planning phases" 
are continuing, but "we are making progress," he notes. The 
intention is that this "will be accomplished by the middle 
of 1996."

  The whole consortium is involved in carrying out the 
necessary assessments, Fuerst says. These cover issues such 
as energy consumption, noise levels, and land requirements 
both for the track and for the power supply facilities.

  Some of the tests as part of this assessment have 
indicated that in a few situations Transrapid can meet noise 
regulations "without building a noise wall, even if the 
guideway is only a couple of meters away, at speeds of 200 
km/h," Wackers says. A more typical spacing may be closer to 
10 meters.

  The proposed route is "nearly 300 km in length, so you 
need three to four years in the planning process," Wackers 
notes. "Planning for Berlin-Hamburg is now in the detailed 
planning phase," he says. It has reached the stage where the 
local and national authorities are trying "to find the right 
locations for the stations in the cities. Different 
alternatives are being evaluated," he adds.

  The decision on whether the line will extend to the 
proposed new airport in Berlin has still to be finalized 
(see HST News, June 12, 1995). This is "an option," Wackers 
says. But the authorities still "don't know where the 
location [of the airport] might be." This should finally be 
sorted out some time later this year. The next stage in the 
planning process will aim to compile some "concrete cost 
findings into the economics of the whole project again," he 
says.

  While the main testing should be completed within the next 
year, the test track will not be closed down. "We think we 
will need this test facility until the project Berlin-
Hamburg works," Fuerst says. This is likely to be eight 
years from now.

  In addition to Siemens, Thyssen Henschel Magnetfahrtechnik 
and ABB, the Transrapid group also includes Dyckerhoff 
Widmann, Hochtief, Philipp Holzmann and Deutsche Bahn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

1995: NEW WORKS AND
R&D RISE IN EUROPE;
NORTH AMERICA FADES

  Squabbles over the formation of European Union (EU) often 
obscured the substantial ongoing progress within Europe's 
rapidly expanding high speed transport network. As 1995 
began, several HSR route additions were being constructed, 
more were being planned, most were assured of some funding 
support, and even one high speed commercial maglev project  
-- the world's first -- made substantial gains.

  Among Asian nations, South Korea looked to add two more 
HSR lines to supplement its initial route, while Malaysia 
worked to attract European equipment manufacturers. Japan 
intensified its efforts to market its well-tested Shinkansen 
HSR technology for export, and evaluated that technology's 
performance after a devastating earthquake shook Kobe Jan. 
17. West Japan Railways (WJR) service was disrupted, but WJR 
infrastructure held up better than nearby highway elevated 
construction and equipment damage was judged to be minor.

  Though no comparable earthquake jolted North America, both 
Canada and the United States fell further behind in HST 
development. Both Florida and Washington state advanced 
individual HSR programs to compensate for the lack of 
interest within the U.S. federal government. Canada's long-
delayed HSR study, finally released, suggested North 
America's largest nation would play no part at all in the 
HSR universe.

  Fiscal woes surrounding the Channel Tunnel's business 
operations all but overshadowed the steady presence of its 
everyday rail operations, including the rise of Eurostar HSR 
service as a dominant carrier between London and Paris. As 
the summer arrived, Le Shuttle tourist trains through the 
Chunnel also began attracting increased passenger loads, 
although Le Shuttle's on-time performance struggled to meet 
targeted projections.

  Eurostar's marketing success highlighted the triumph of 
one more TGV variant manufactured by HSR leader GEC Alsthom. 
But the Paris-based company faced some tough competition in 
1995, as more nations joined the HSR club, and many chose 
technology other than top-speed TGV designs.

  Early in the year, Norwegian State Railway (Norges 
Statsbaner) opted for 16 electric multiple-units (EMUs) 
modifications of ABB Traction, Inc.'s X-2000 tilt train. The 
order was the first equipment export success for Vasteras, 
Sweden-based ABB, though it dominates its own domestic 
market. (ABB's tentative dismissal by Amtrak later last year 
only increases the corporation's stake in the Norwegian 
order.)

  Siemens AG Transportation Systems Group, the Berlin-based 
maker of InterCity Express (ICE) equipment, also scored its 
first export sales triumph, and also through a neighboring 
country -- the Netherlands. Netherlands Railways 
(Nederlandse Spoorwegen) officials opted for six new Siemens 
ICE 2/2 lightweight HSR train sets to link Amsterdam with 
Frankfurt and Berlin.

  Savigliano, Italy-based Fiat Ferroviaria had its own 
export success, as Finnish State Railways (Valtiorautatiet) 
accepted two Pendolino S200 tilt train sets for that 
nation's first HSR route, a 150 km (94 mile) line between 
Helsinki and Turku. Valtiorautatiet initiated HSR service 
late in the year, following conventional service upgrades 
and HSR testing along the route.

  In a joint effort, both Siemens and Fiat Ferroviaria 
combined forces with two Czech firms to supply 10 HSR EMU 
train sets to Czech Railways (Ceske Drahy). The order 
bolstered Fiat's role as the dominant supplier of tilt train 
technology within Europe, and highlighted the Siemens/Fiat 
partnership being applied to other projects, including 
Amtrak's Northeast Corridor (NEC). The order also added the 
Czech Republic to the potential list of HSR nations, making 
the nation potentially the first former East Bloc country to 
join the European HSR club.

  Siemens' 1995 success was not limited to just HSR, as it 
and several other domestic firms continued to advance 
Germany's long-range plan for the world's first high speed 
commercial maglev service. Revised plans in 1995 added city 
center access to Berlin as part of the mix, with officials 
of Transrapid Planning Corporation GmbH scouting several 
through-city rights-of-way for use to and through the 
nation's capital. The extension of the original DM8.9 
billion ($6.3 billion), 283 kilometer (175 mile) route could 
open up better intermodal opportunities with Berlin's U-Bahn 
and S-Bahn services, as well as steel-wheel HST operations. 
Transrapid's current Hamburg-Berlin route has been 
criticized by industry observers for its inferior Berlin 
terminus at Westkreuz (West Cross) Station, which offers 
skeletal intermodal links.

  In midyear, officials from the state of Brandenburg added 
another proposal to the maglev project: a connection to a 
new international airport now being proposed for the city. 
Berlin city officials were skeptical of the proposal, which 
would recycle Sperenberg Air Base south of the city, 
recently closed at part of the withdrawal of the Soviet army 
following Germany's unification.

  The European Commission (EC), struggling to make itself 
effective, continued advancing two directorates in the 
transport field last year, with HSR high on the list of 
priorities. Estimates produced in Brussels last year point 
to a spend of ECU240 billion ($303 billion) for the 
infrastructure and rolling stock required to complete the 
high speed rail sections of the trans-European transport 
network. The EC's transport directorate (DG VII) has lined 
up ECU2.05 billion for the period 1993-1999, but there are 
other options through, for example, the European Investment 
Bank.

  On the research side, DG VII selected 111 projects for the 
first phase of its new ECU256 million program within the 
Fourth Framework. Overall, rail is expected to receive 16 
percent of this budget over the next four years, with the 
European Rail Transport Management System (ERTMS) high on 
the agenda. Also on the transport side, DG VII approved 
ECU240 million in 1995 to support the 14 priority transport 
projects, many of which concern high speed rail.

  Elsewhere at the Brussels administration, the telematics 
directorate (DG XIII) garnered less attention within the 
rail community. DG XIII targets more funding to roadways 
than rail, but several rail proposals survive, including the 
Railway Open System Interconnection Network (Rosin). 
Nonetheless, roads remain the dominant mode within DG XIII, 
according to former director generale Michel Carpentier.

  Amtrak ended 1995 just as it began it: preparing to order 
train sets to provide high speed rail service to its 
Northeast Corridor (NEC) between Washington, D.C. and 
Boston. Amtrak began 1995 hoping to select one of three 
competing consortia "in the spring." By year's end, the 
railroad had effectively eliminated ABB Traction, Inc. from 
the competition, but still had to choose between two 
consortia led by Siemens Transportation Systems and GEC 
Alsthom/Bombardier Corp., respectively. Amtrak's newest 
deadline for the decision is set for February, with industry 
observers becoming weary marking the delays.

  Meanwhile, leadership within the new Republican Congress 
gave Amtrak a two-pronged message: (1) do more with less; 
and (2) don't emphasize the NEC and HSR at the expense of 
other long-distance intercity services.

  Amtrak also marked time in extending electrification of 
the NEC north of New Haven, Conn. to Boston, in part due to 
the withdrawal of Morrison-Knudsen Corp. as the prime 
contractor for the project.

  Though Florida's Department of Transportation (FDOT) 
finally pulled the plug on the ill-fated Orlando maglev 
project in early January, FDOT moved aggressively to attract 
private sector interest for an HST network linking Miami, 
Orlando and Tampa. By year's end, five consortia -- three 
HSR entries and two maglev proposals -- were submitted to 
the state, seeking to tap FDOT's guarantee of $70 million in 
state funds available each year for the next 25 years.

  A more modest $40 million program in Washington State was 
advanced to establish incremental HSR between Portland, 
Ore., Seattle and Vancouver, B.C., using leased Talgo 
passive tilt train equipment. Washington DOT officials 
released their own request for proposals late in the year to 
lease/purchase two non-electric HSR trains, with Madrid-
based Patentes Talgo, S.A. given the edge in any 
competition.

  If the United States symbolized the downsizing of HSR 
ambitions in North America, Canada represented full-scale 
retreat. The Quebec/Windsor High Speed Rail feasibility 
study, begun in 1992, essentially declared HSR too expensive 
for the nation's needs, and thus unjustified to receive 
federal funds. But controversy surfaced when the 89-page 
study's conclusion, supported by the federal government, was 
disputed by the study's two other partners, particularly the 
province of Quebec.

  Critics also noted the feasibility study predictably 
endorsed TGV HSR service for the route, should the national 
will be found to finance it, and drew a link between the 
endorsement and the role of Canada's Bombardier, Inc. in 
marketing TGV technology for North America. ABB Traction, 
Inc. publicly questioned the study's dismissal of lower-
speed, tilt-technology trains for the route, noting Amtrak's 
NEC plans included tilt-train capabilities.

  North America's HSR travails were mirrored by those of 
associations like the High Speed Rail/Maglev Association 
(HSR/MLA), which tried to remain relevant in spite of 
dwindling federal financial and political support for high-
speed options. HSR/MLA president Joseph Vranich, credited 
with highlighting HST opportunities in the U.S., abruptly 
resigned from his position early in the year, leaving a 
leadership void for much of 1995 and an annual meeting held 
in Boston during the spring that sought to determine what 
the future held for both the organization and North American 
HST.

  By contrast, European HST interests, led by the European 
Commission (EC), the Union Inter- nationale des Chemins de 
Fer (UIC), and others, held the Eurailspeed Second World 
Congress on High-Speed Rail last fall, spotlighting the rise 
of Lille, France, as a high speed rail and intermodal 
transport hub. The attitude was upbeat, reflecting a growing 
belief that European nations, led by the EU, would expand 
HSR opportunities.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

FRA SUMMARY FINDS
MAGLEV DISMISSED,
HSR PREFERRED

  The Federal Railroad Administration's (FRA) High Speed 
Ground Transportation Policy Outreach summary, compiling 
public comment from eight public meetings held in 1995 
throughout the U.S., suggests that incremental improvements 
to passenger rail may be the best policy course, at least in 
the eyes of those who testified.

  Those testifying at the hearings, perhaps predictably, 
were generally in favor of high speed transport, whether HSR 
or maglev, as opposed to continuing existing federal 
priorities which appear to favor road or air. But only one 
of the eight meetings -- in Albany, N.Y. -- registered any 
substantial support for maglev development, according to the 
FRA findings.

  The 23 page (plus appendix) FRA report also touched on 
funding issues, HST as part of a National Highway System 
(NHS), the role of ISTEA in funding HSR, state funding 
options, and the role of Amtrak in any U.S. HST future.

  The HSGT Policy Outreach will be used in conjunction with 
FRA's ongoing Commercial Feasibility Study (CFS), both 
mandated by ISTEA, "to determine where and what types of 
High Speed Ground Transportation makes sense in the United 
States." The CFS study, originally due for submission to 
Congress last September, now is scheduled to be completed by 
this spring (see HST News, July 24, 1995).

  Besides Albany, N.Y., FRA held meetings in Richmond, Va., 
Portland, Ore., Sacramento, Calif., Orlando, Fla., Chicago 
and New Orleans. An eighth meeting was held in conjunction 
with the 12th annual meeting of the High Speed Rail/Maglev 
Association (HSR/MLA) in Boston.

  "While there were several references to 'real high speed 
rail' with speeds of greater than 150 miles per hour, most 
participants focused on the short-term goals of increasing 
speeds to 90, 110 and 125 miles per hour." the FRA report 
says.

  "Maglev was mentioned infrequently," it adds pointedly. 
"The New York State Department of Transportation reported 
that their 'long term goal is to evaluate the feasibility of 
offering very high speed service (up to 300 mph) using 
Maglev technology between major urban centers.' The Florida 
Department of Transportation is open to consideration of any 
HSGT technology, including Maglev, for the Miami-Orlando-
Tampa corridor. Other participants, however, expressed 
reservations about the feasibility of Maglev." FRA notes 
that in New York, the Empire State Passengers Association 
(ESPA), a citizens group, protested the high cost relative 
to the modest cost savings that maglev would offer over HSR 
in the state's Empire Corridor linking Buffalo, Albany and 
New York City.

  In Portland, Ore., one of ESPA's counterparts, the 
Association of Oregon Rail and Transit Advocates, argued 
that "HSGT should be able to directly compete with NHS 
highways in the same corridor for the same Federal funds." 
The FRA report notes speakers from the Pacific Northwest 
enthusiastically supported HSR opportunities for the 
region's Cascadia Corridor, running from Portland through 
Seattle to Vancouver, B.C.

  ISTEA funding for HST was also advocated as a capital 
source. A statement by the National Association of Railroad 
Passengers (NARP) declared "the Federal government should 
provide the same opportunities for investment in high-speed 
(and conventional) rail as it does for aviation and 
highways."

  FRA briefly but crisply notes the "universal agreement 
that the Federal Government needs to take the lead in 
defining safety standards for HSGT and in developing the 
technology of other low cost alternatives to grade 
separation or crossing closures." FRA Administrator Jolene 
M. Molitoris has made safety a priority concern for the 
agency, and has focused on grade crossing safety as an 
essential component of her campaign.

  [In a speech before the Transportation Research Board in 
Washington, D.C. on Jan. 10, Transportation Secretary 
Federico F. Pena included rail grade crossing safety as the 
sole rail component of a nine point plan for Intelligent 
Transportation Infrastructure (ITI). The ITI plan would be 
included in the U.S. Department of Transportation's 
Operation TimeSaver, designed to speed travel in the 21st 
century. Pena cited the October bus/rail collision in Fox 
River Grove, Ill. as "a wake-up call on the importance of 
linking systems." Other rail issues, including HST, were not 
addressed by Pena in the speech, however.]

  Federal priority was also urged to override state and 
local regulations that, by chance or design, preclude HST 
development. FRA notes that even Amtrak's Northeast Corridor 
(NEC), an existing HSR route, has been blocked by opponents 
of electrification; the study says one speaker testified 
that "incentives should be offered to states for eliminating 
restrictive regulations and procedures that slow the 
implementation" of HST.

  Proponents of "gateway technologies," including non-
electric HSR development and positive train control (PTC) 
systems, were well represented at the various sessions. The 
FRA found "widespread support for efforts to develop a new 
non-electric locomotive, a positive train control system, 
and positive barriers for grade crossings. However, there is 
concern that FRA not reinvent existing European and Japanese 
technology in hope of establishing a US rail manufacturing 
industry. Many participants believe that effort to create a 
new industry could unduly delay the implementation of HSGT 
programs. Rather than develop new train set technology, 
participants urged the FRA to facilitate the importation of 
European technology through the establishment of standards 
that are compatible with the International Railway Union 
(UIC) standards."

  But FRA also noted, "Incremental improvements are being 
designed to benefit all potential users of the rail system" 
in each region where it held hearings. "Emphasis is also 
being placed on expanding the reach of the rail systems, by 
linking areas that could feed the high speed rail line. The 
goal behind these efforts, in all cases, is to create a 
stronger market for HSGT by improving the level of service 
currently being offered.

  "Success stories were cited in every region, demonstrating 
savings in travel time and other effects of improving train 
speeds, frequency, and reliability on ridership levels, as 
well as on public support for new rail systems," the summary 
said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

  * The decision on which of the two remaining bidders will 

  * The decision on which of the two remaining bidders will 
be selected for the construction of the U.K. Channel tunnel 
rail link is anticipated within the next few days. Reports 
over the holiday period noted that the announcement by the 
U.K. Department of Transport (DOT) would be expected in 
early February. At press time, DOT officials noted that the 
announcement was expected "shortly."

  The construction plan has already been put back, however, 
with a completion date now set in the early part of 2003, 
six months later than scheduled. The route from London to 
the Channel Tunnel is 68 miles long. The two consortia, one 
of which will also take over the operation of Eurostar, are: 
London and Continental Railways, including Virgin, Ove Arup 
and Partners, SG Warburg and Bechtel; and Eurorail, with 
BICC, Trafalgar House HSBC and National Westminster Bank.

  Contracts should be signed on April 1, with many U.K. rail 
industry observers tipping London and Continental as the 
likely successful bid. But with Eurostar's patronage for 
1995 down more than 60 percent on predictions, that may not 
be the best part of the deal. Along with the contract, the 
successful consortium will secure considerable land, some of 
which could be used for potentially lucrative real estate 
redevelopment.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

  * The Italian transport engineering firm Ansaldo Trasporti 

  * The Italian transport engineering firm Ansaldo Trasporti 
and Union Switch and Signal, Ansaldo's U.S. subsidiary, are 
to supply the signaling and automation systems for the new 
railway between Beijing and Kowloon. The 25 billion pounds 
sterling ($15.8 million) contract is to supply the system 
for the entire 2,500 km line.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

  * Neil Kinnock, the European transport commissioner, has 

  * Neil Kinnock, the European transport commissioner, has 
set out his stall for European transport policy over the 
coming years with the publication of the green paper 
"Towards fair and efficient pricing in transport." The 
report concentrates on proposing methods to level the 
playing field between the costs associated with different 
transport modes, with particular reference to methods of 
charging motorists for roads at the point of use.

  "Measures should be taken to review policies to establish 
fairer competition between modes of transport," Kinnock says 
in the report's introduction. "Both rail and inland 
waterways appear to have much lower cost recovery rates than 
road haulage," the report states in setting out the case 
that road infrastructure costs are not being met. 

  Kinnock's green paper is part of the process the EC is 
going through in addressing the "internalization of external 
costs."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

January 24-26

January 24-26
Colorado Office of Space Advocacy
MagLifter Implementation Planning Meeting
Colorado Springs, Colo.
(719) 628-8916
(719) 528-8991 (FAX)

January 27
Midwest High Speed Rail Association
"High Speed Rail: the City Builder"
Chicago
(312) 409-2029

January 30
Call for Proposals Information Day
European Commission DG VII
Brussels, Belgium
Phone +32 2 295 43 00
Fax +32 2 295 43 49

February 21-23
Integrated Revenue and Ticketing Systems for Rail 
  and Road Passenger Transport
UITP, ATC, Federtrasporti
Bologna, Italy
Phone +32 2 673 6100
Fax +32 2 660 1072

February 27-28
Encouraging Public/Private Partnerships for 
  Trans-European Transport Networks
IBC
Brussels, Belgium 
Phone +44 171 637 4383
Fax +44 171 631 3214

March 25-28
Organization of Economic Coordination and Development (OECD)
Tort Sustainable Transport
Vancouver, B.C.
(819) 953-7815

March 25-28
Pan Asian Information Task Force
Asian Railway Operators Forum
AsiaRail '96
Hong Kong
+85 2 2586 1777
+85 2 2507 5666 (FAX)

March 26
IEE
Transport Telematics in the Fourth Framework
London
+44 171 344 5477
+44 171 240 8830 (FAX)

15-18 April 1996
6th Annual Meeting
ITS America
Houston, Texas
Phone +1 202 484 4847
Fax +1 202 484 3483



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CALL/FAX TO START YOUR RISK-FREE SUBSCRIPTION TODAY!
LOGISTICS TECHNOLOGY NEWS:
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION

  Many technologies used in rail are also finding 
applications in the freight industry.

  If you business develops technology applications or 
depends on the efficient flow of goods, you need to keep up 
with the latest applications of information technology in 
the freight industry. But reliable news and analysis of this 
growing field has been hard to come by. Until now.

  Logistics Technology News is a new bi-weekly newsletter 
that chronicles the increasing use of advanced technologies 
in transportation logistics. Every two weeks, LTN reports 
how shippers, carriers and third party logistics providers 
are putting information technology to work to help them 
better manage the movement of freight. Our coverage features 
timely and objective information about product introductions 
and upgrades from technology vendors, as well as news about 
how the freight industry puts these systems to work.

  LTN provides exclusive coverage of the following 
technologies:

* Bar coding
* Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
* Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
* Mobile Data Communications
* Vehicle Positioning
* Imaging
* Software, applications including:
    Fleet management
    Route planning
    Scheduling
    Load planning
    Rate comparison
    Warehouse management

  Whether you're a carrier, looking to use logistics 
technology as a competitive advantage; a shipper, shopping 
for freight services augmented with the latest in 
information technology; a rail industry vendor involved or 
diversifying into the freight technology industry; or a 
third party logistics firm keeping abreast of the 
competition, Logistics Technology News provides the breaking 
news and informed analysis about the North American market 
that could make the difference in your business.

  Test drive Logistics Technology News today by taking 
advantage of our risk free charter subscription offer. 
Simply phone or fax to start receiving the most up-to-date 
news an analysis about the latest applications of 
information technology for managing freight.

North American Inquiries:
Transport Technology Publishing
Phone: +1 607 770 4075
Fax:   +1 607 770 9435

Europe/Asia-Pacific Inquiries:
Transport Technology Publishing
Phone: +44 171 240 2090
Fax:   +44 171 240 7090



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HIGH SPEED TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

TURN THIS YEAR'S MARKETING PLAN
INTO A SUCCESS STORY

  TTP's newsletter, High Speed Transport News, provides 
vital information to the key decision-makers in the High 
Speed Transport industry. An advertising plan targeting the 
High Speed Transport Industry would not be complete without 
the inclusion of this publication.

  Take advantage of the bonus distribution of High Speed 
Transport News at the most important trade shows and 
meetings throughout 1996 (listed below). Don't miss these 
opportunities to reach not only our subscribers but the 
focused audiences attending these shows.

* IBC, Encouraging Public/Private Partnerships for Trans-
European Transport Networks, Feb. 27-28, Brussels, Belgium

* High Speed Rail Maglev Association, 1996 Convention & 
Exposition, May 12-15, Fort Lauderdale, Florida

* World Conference on Railway Research, June 17-19, Colorado 
Springs, Colorado

* Computer Applications in Transportation Systems (ITC), 
June 24-26, Basel, Switzerland

* 3rd ITS World Congress, Oct. 14-18, Orlando, Florida

  For rate information, closing dates and space 
availability, contact Tanya M. Vlahos in New York, at: 
+1 212 925 6990, Fax: +1 212 925 7585; or in London Fax: +44 
171 240 7090.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>