
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B03-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B046-22</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it112.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021726 text/html 39707
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:15:30 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:47 GMT
Content-length: 39520
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/it112.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet <BR>
August 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI> PERU: PERUVIANS DISAPPOINTED BY THEIR LIMITED STAKE IN TELEFONICA SHARES &nbsp;placement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(449 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI> ECUADOR: POLITICS: BALANCING BANKERS AND INDIANS: BUCARAM WILL HAVE TO &nbsp;DEVELOP  SKILFUL POLITICAL JUGGLING ACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(845 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI> COLOMBIA: PRIVATISATION: FURTHER DELAYS FUEL DOUBTS: 'LACK OF POLITICAL &nbsp;WILL' HALTS US Dollars 731M ASSET SELL-OFF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(745 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI> REGION: FOCUS: HOW GOOD A GUIDE ARE 'THE MARKETS'?: HEADLINES CROWD OUT &nbsp;DEEPER ANDEAN TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(987 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI> VENEZUELA: PRIVATISATION: PETKOFF PLEDGES POLITICAL WILL: AFTER SEVERAL &nbsp;FALSE STARTS, SELL-OFF SHOULD SPEED UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1388 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI> COLOMBIA: VIOLENCE: POLICE ACCUSED OF EXECUTING SUSPECTS: AND CONTRACT &nbsp;KILLING RAISES 'COLOMBIANISATION' FEARS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(505 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI> REGION: POSTSCRIPT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(898 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 PERU: PERUVIANS DISAPPOINTED BY THEIR LIMITED STAKE IN TELEFONICA SHARES 
placement

 The Peruvian government had no hesitation in acclaiming the placement of 
Telefonica del Peru shares on the New York stock exchange at the beginning 
of the month as an unqualified success. The domestic sale of shares was also 
over-subscribed, though as an exercise in 'popular capitalism', it was a bit 
of a let-down.

 The 23.5% holding that the government put up for sale raised a total of US 
Dollars 1.1bn, US Dollars 918m of it in New York, snapped up by around 500 
institutional investors. It was, as the Financial Times noted, the first big 
test for Latin American equities since the Mexican devaluation crisis at the 
end of 1994, and Peru came through it with flying colours.

 The international offering was oversubscribed by five times, even though 
the Peruvian economy had been faltering recently -presumably because 
prospects for second-half growth are generally reckoned to be good.

 The domestic offering was equally successful, with about 263,000 people 
applying for US Dollars 323m worth of shares, payable in instalments, under 
the much-hyped 'citizen's participation' scheme.

 But the international demand was so great that many small Peruvian 
applicants were cut out at the last minute, when it was decided to halve  
their allocation, to only US Dollars 148m. So much for the aim of broadly-
based, share-owning democracy.

 The ombudsman (defensor del pueblo), Jorge Santisteban, called for 'greater 
transparency' with future 'citizen's participation' offers. In an attempt to 
repair some of the damage, President Alberto Fujimori announced on 11 July 
the sale of 3% of the shares still in state hands on the domestic market. 
That will leave the government with only 2%.

 Like CANTV in Venezuela (see Page 6, inside), Telefonica has a monopoly of 
conventional telephony until the end of the century, and it has big 
expansion programmes under way, with investments totalling US Dollars 1.6bn 
by 1998. But, unlike its Venezuelan counterpart, Telefonica is the country's 
biggest company, and is likely to remain so until the Camisea natural gas 
project comes on stream.

 The Peruvian government hopes the Telefonica exercise, coming hard on the 
heels of the letter of intent accord with the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), will usher in a run of international successes for Peru. This should 
culminate in a Brady debt-rescheduling deal before the end of the year, 
which could reduce Peru's US Dollars 10bn commercial bank debt by about 
half.

 First come talks with the Paris Club on Peru's US Dollars 9.65bn bilateral 
debt, beginning in mid-July. The team led by economy minister Jorge Camet 
hopes that Peru will secure as favourable treatment as Russia earlier this 
year, including rescheduling of payments over 20-25 years.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 ECUADOR: POLITICS: BALANCING BANKERS AND INDIANS: BUCARAM WILL HAVE TO 
DEVELOP  SKILFUL POLITICAL JUGGLING ACT

 President-elect Abdala Bucaram announced a few days after his election on 7 
July that he would be flying to New York before his inauguration (10 August) 
to reassure bankers and business leaders about his intentions. This was 
probably a wise move, as his pre-election rhetoric about smashing the 
oligarchy and governing for the poor had caused a certain amount of unease 
in those spheres.

 The presence of a trio of bankers in his economic team (see WR-96-28) was 
expected to reassure his US audiences. And Bucaram adviser Jose Miguel Salem 
promised laws to encourage foreign capital to stay in the country and to 
attract new investors.

 But all this courting of the private sector raises the problem of balancing 
reassurance, on the one hand, with the expectations of Bucaram's other 
supporters, and particularly the increasingly assertive Indian movement, on 
the other.

 Decisive factor. All observers agree that the active or tacit support of 
the Indian organisations that backed Freddy Ehlers' candidacy in the first 
round (see WR-96-19 & RA-96-04) was a decisive factor in Bucaram's run-off 
victory. Indian leaders such as Luis Macas, president of the Confederacion 
de Nacionalidades Indigenas del Ecuador (Conaie) and deputy-elect for Nuevo 
Pais-Pachakutik, have made clear their view that they have earned a voice in 
the new administration commensurate with their growing political importance.

 Both Bucaram and Jaime Nebot had seemed to favour the idea of Macas being 
elected chairman of the 82-seat congress, but that prospect appeared to 
recede in the wake of the second-round voting. 'We have decided not to make 
a pact with any party, but to wait and see what those parties will do and 
what their relations with the government will be, as we intend to maintain 
Nuevo Pais's independence,' said another Indian leader, Jose Maria 
Cabascango, on 11 July.

 Macas said just before the second round: 'Nebot and Bucaram represent two 
economic power groups disputing political power, to consolidate their 
hegemony. They have never identified with our struggles or our proposals in 
the past; on the contrary, they dismissed and suppressed them.'

 New political style. Conaie and other Indian organisations, such as the 
Organizacion de Pueblos Indigenas del Pastaza (Opip), have developed a 
distinctive political style, combining mainstream left-wing causes, such as 
state-ownership of 'strategic' sectors of the economy, with cultural and 
social aspirations, such as the preservation of local self-government and 
resistance to the impact of economic development in the Oriente jungles.

 This complex political articulation of highland and jungle interests adds 
to the instability of Ecuador's party structure, as it creates new 
possibilities for circumstantial alliances and splits with other 
organisations, and greatly increases the fragmentation of the centre-left 
segment of the Ecuadorean political spectrum, which accounts for about a 
third of the seats in the new congress (see box).

 Environmental issues. These factors were reflected in Ehlers' insistence on 
the importance of traditional Indian values in his election campaign, and 
particularly on environmental issues, which coincided with the viewpoints of 
middle-class ecological organisations. And the concepts of multi-culturalism 
and multi-ethnicity have become the common currency of political debate in 
Ecuador, with even the right-wing Nebot paying lip-service to such ideas.

 Two new oil-related projects have already met with fierce Indian 
resistance. Opip complained in late June that a contract with the US company 
Arco to build a 165km feeder pipeline through Indian lands had been signed 
behind their backs; and the Huaorani ethnic group protested in mid-July that 
the drilling by a three-company consortium of a well with potential 
production of 2,200 barrels per day in their territory would exacerbate the 
inflow of settlers on to their lands.

 The Huaoranis threatened to take the law into their own hands unless the 
government acted to remove the 5,000 colonos already there.

 SPECIAL REPORT ON INDIANS

 We predicted as long ago as 1994 that Ecuador's increasingly assertive 
Indian organisations would soon assume a more important political role, and 
would become a factor to reckon with in decisions on the Oriente oil 
industry. See our Special Report, Indians: New Factor on the Latin American 
Scene, June 1994.

 COSTING THE PLEDGES

 Economist Jaime Zeas has attempted to cost the various spending promises 
made by Bucaram during the election campaign. He concluded that they would 
imply expenditure of US Dollars 2.35bn, or almost two-thirds of the 1996 
budget of US Dollars 3.7bn.

 The most expensive items would be:

 Construction of 6,000km of local roads (US Dollars 450m);

 Increases in teachers' salaries and in the health and police budgets (US 
Dollars 422m each);

 Extension of social security coverage to family members (US Dollars 407m);

 Creation of banks for coffee, cacao, handicrafts, small industries and 
foreign trade, plus a ministry for Indian affairs (US Dollars 170m);

 Subsidies for rice, milk, meat and petrol, and 50% reduction in 
agricultural products (US Dollars 55m);

 Cheap medicines and free maternity service (US Dollars 35m)

 Soft credits for house building (US Dollars 20m);

 School breakfasts (US Dollars 13m);




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 COLOMBIA: PRIVATISATION: FURTHER DELAYS FUEL DOUBTS: 'LACK OF POLITICAL 
WILL' HALTS US Dollars 731M ASSET SELL-OFF

 Two more failed attempts to bring the private sector into the running of 
Colombia's public assets have added to the growing scepticism with which 
analysts regard the Samper administration's commitment to its privatisation 
programme. As neither Bogota's communications company (ETB) nor Medellin's 
public companies (EPM) are national, the government has not been blamed 
explicitly, but given its past record - in 1995 only US Dollars 6.5m of a 
planned US Dollars 333m was actually sold off - critics are hardly surprised 
at the latest setback.

 It was Samper's predecessor, Cesar Gaviria, who began the 'apertura' of 
Colombia's economy back in 1989. The ensuing programme of economic 
liberalisation relied partly on extensive privatisation to boost foreign 
investment, which has increased steadily since then to a record US Dollars 
1.6bn last year, excluding petroleum. And even despite the recent political 
crisis, Colombia remains a 'stable economy' for investment, with steady 
growth and controlled inflation.

 So when Jose Antonio Ocampo, the current Director of National Planning, 
recently stated that US Dollars 30.2bn of investment was needed in 
Colombia's infrastructure between 1995 and 1998, and that 40% would come 
from the private sector, it seemed likely that privatisation or at least the 
selling of concessions in the transport, energy and telecommunications 
sectors was on the horizon.

 Reforms subsequently began in the Civil Aviation Authority, the electricity 
generators, parts of Ecopetrol and its gas subsidiaries,  and Telecom, as 
well as various financial institutions including the Banco Popular, to 
prepare them for privatisation.

 The government then scheduled for the end of 1996 the completed sell-offs 
of 4 airports, 5 companies created to transport and manage gas pipelines, a 
nickel production plant, the Banco Popular and two other financial 
corporations. In addition, the bidding processes for between 51% and 60% of 
3 hydro-electric and 5 thermoelectric power stations, as well as for two 
telecommunications' licenses worth US Dollars 150m, were all to be 
completed.

 According to Confis calculations (see graphs), this impressive list of 
envisaged privatisations will net the government US Dollars 725m in 1996. So 
with over half the year gone, critics are becoming increasingly concerned as 
to why not a single peso has to date entered the government coffers.

 While officials put the endless delays down to technical hitches, some 
critics are more blunt. As one observer commented, 'this government has no 
intention of selling because the idea of promoting private participation is 
not in their philosophy.' Clemente del Valle from the Ministry of Finance 
denied this charge, arguing that irrespective of ideology, it was reality 
that would ultimately convince the doubters of the benefits of 
privatisation.

 And to be fair to the government, there have been many setbacks. Not least 
was a constitutional court ruling last year which halted the key Banco 
Popular privatisation until the 'sector solidario' -unions, active or 
pensioned workers, employees' funds- had been guaranteed a stake. The ruling 
stemmed from a law introduced as part of Samper's own social programme which 
sought to 'democratize' state sell-offs, effectively giving first refusal on 
share offers to the 'sector solidario' and thus delaying the whole process 
by up to three months.

 Having received the final go-ahead from the council of Ministers, the Banco 
Popular privatisation is now back on track. But as one hurdle is cleared, 
another appears on the horizon, for now investors are complaining that the 
asking price of US Dollars 318m is grossly inflated.

 Similar variations of to-ing and fro-ing dog most of the government's 
privatisation plans, feeding criticism that the required political will to 
find a way through the upsets is just not there.

 Only 15% of the US Dollars 1.5bn electricity sector sell-off is to go ahead 
this year, Rodrigo Villamizar, the Minister of mines, recently announced, 
because further 'sweeteners' are needed to make it an attractive offer for 
private investors.

 But why had this not been thought of before? One analyst told Semana that 
the government treated privatisation like a simple case of placing a 
classified ad in a newspaper to sell a house, and that it was therefore 
inevitable that all these 'technical hitches' kept arising.

 Whatever the reasons for the delays, the bottom line is that the government 
has no choice but to privatise as it desperately needs the proceeds to 
finance part of its social programme. And having staked his political future 
on this programme throughout his corruption trial, Samper would be well 
advised to succeed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 REGION: FOCUS: HOW GOOD A GUIDE ARE 'THE MARKETS'?: HEADLINES CROWD OUT 
DEEPER ANDEAN TRENDS

 To judge from the performance of the stockmarkets, investors are having no 
easy task figuring out which way the Andean economies are heading. Colombia, 
which at first had seemed impervious to the 'Tequila Effect', began to slide 
last year, and by mid-1996 was the only country in Latin America to register 
a dollar-term decline. Peru, which last year was the only country to 
approximate the high yields of the 'pre-Tequila' years, was in 1996 showing 
a first-half gain of only 16%. Venezuela, whose three-year recession has 
only just bottomed out, was by end-June showing the best results in the 
hemisphere: a dollar-term gain of 56.5%.

 The Colombian decline can be attributed largely to the political 
uncertainty, now somewhat dispelled, about the threat to President Ernesto 
Samper's tenure of office. The other reactions seem linked to 'headline' 
developments: the big privatisation deals in Peru, the imminence of a deal 
between Venezuela and the IMF.

 Despite the proliferation of sources of information about the region, and 
the acceleration of its delivery, investment decisions continue to be 
affected by headlines and news flashes: the grasp of underlying trends 
appears to be weak --indeed a recent survey of 'market operators' conducted 
by our sister service, the on-line Latin American Network, showed an 
alarming number uninterested in anything but last-minute, deal-related news.

 The problem is compounded by the slow emergence of properly analysed 
information on the underlying trends --which in the case of the Andean 
countries continue to show Colombia in the most solid position.

 From a series of recently-published studies (some of them up to two years 
in the making), the following valuable insights emerge.

 The 1980s saw the rising relative cost of capital appear as a strong 
constraint on investment: Colombia is among the few Latin American countries 
where this did not discernibly affect investment.

 In common with most of Latin America, the Andean countries have seen the 
rewards taken by capital rise far more than those of labour. In Venezuela, 
labour's share fell by 10% in 1980-90 while that of capital increased 48%. 
In Bolivia both fell, but labour's fell 1.7 times more than that of capital. 
In Colombia both rose (as also happened in Ecuador).

 Another shared Latin American trend is the declining efficiency of the use 
of capital, as measured by capital-output ratios. But over the past decade 
Colombia's decline has been only half the average for six of the largest 
Latin American economies. Since its best period, in the mid-1970s, the fall 
in efficiency has been almost four times greater in Venezuela than in 
Colombia.

 Over the past decade, Colombia was the Andean country which most increased 
the share of its GDP devoted to research and development: a fivefold rise, 
compared with only 1.2 to 1.4 times in Ecuador, Bolivia and Venezuela, and a 
decline in Peru.

 One area where Colombia compares badly with its neighbours is that of the 
technological upgrading of its exports. Its ITS, an index which measures the 
share of medium- and high-technology products in exports to OECD countries, 
has fallen markedly since 1980, while those of Peru and Venezuela have 
increased.

 This, however, must be seen against the fact that Colombia's export trade 
has the highest share of manufactured goods in the Andean region (indeed, 
the fourth-highest in the whole of Latin America): almost twice as much as 
Peru, two-and-a-half times more than Bolivia, almost three times as much as 
Venezuela, and eight times more than Ecuador.

 Similarly, Colombia's exports are the most diversified in the Andean 
region. Seen from the opposite end of the scale, its 'concentration index' 
has more than halved over the past decade, while those of Bolivia, Ecuador 
and Venezuela have diminished only slightly, and Peru's has remained 
unchanged.

 NOTE ON SOURCES

 The list of the top 100 publicly traded companies in Latin America, ranked 
by sales, has been published by Latin Trade, a Miami-based magazine devoted 
mainly to company news.
Other data for this article came from the following studies:

 Strengthening Development: The interplay of macro- and microeconomics 
(Eclac, 1996).

 The Manufacturing Sector in Latin America and the New Economic Model, by 
Professor John Weeks, in The New Economic Model in Latin America and its 
Impact on Income Distribution and Poverty, edited by Victor Bulmer-Thomas 
(institute of Latin American Studies, London, 1966).

 Sistemas de Innovacion y Especializacion Tecnologica en America Latina y el 
Caribe, by Ludovico Alcorta and Wilson Peres (Eclac, 1996).

 DO COMPANY RANKINGS HELP?

 Which Andean countries have publicly traded companies which rank among 
Latin America's top 100? The question was asked at a recent private meeting 
in London attended by a number of 'operators' in Latin American investments.

 No-one produced the correct answer --only one: Peru [Telefonica del Peru 
ranks 65th, Southern Peru Copper Corporation 72nd].
This position in the overall ranking can be misleading as to the relative 
sizes of big concerns in the Andean region: apart from those two companies, 
no Peruvian firm is big enough to rank among Colombia's top five, and only 
three (La fabril/Pacifico, Peruano Suiza and Gloria) would make Colombia's 
top ten.

 By comparison, two Venezuelan companies (Sivensa and Elecar) are in the 
same range as Colombia's top five, and two more (Vencemos and Mavesa) are 
within the range of Colombia's top ten.

 Colombia's top tier, with sales of US Dollars 246m to US Dollars 665m, is 
roughly comparable to the second tier of big firms in Argentina.

 The inability to pick Peru as the correct answer is unsurprising, but not 
only because that country's top two are in a category of their own: when the 
list of top firms in all three countries was checked against a well-known 
guide to Latin American companies, the 'finds' included only two of 
Colombia's top ten, two of Peru's top 15, and three of Venezuela's top five.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 VENEZUELA: PRIVATISATION: PETKOFF PLEDGES POLITICAL WILL: AFTER SEVERAL 
FALSE STARTS, SELL-OFF SHOULD SPEED UP

 When the proposed sale of the state-owned Aeropostal airline was postponed 
for the sixth time at the end of June, it did not augur well for Venezuela's 
supposedly rejuvenated privatisation programme. Sell-offs peaked in 1992, 
when 10 companies were disposed of; since then the programme has been 
languishing, with only five, six and two sales in the past three years, 
respectively.

 Confidence growing. But the Caldera government is adamant that it is 
serious about giving a boost to the undertaking, now that a deal has been 
successfully struck with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and prospects 
for the Venezuelan economy look more promising than for some time (see WR-
96-292).

 It is ironic that this new departure should take place under the auspices 
of a former left-wing guerrilla. But Teodoro Petkoff, the planning minister, 
has left no doubt that privatisation is a fundamental element of the 
government's economic policies (see RA-96-04), and the political will is now 
there. 

 New York presentation. The privatisation minister, Alberto Poletto (whose 
formal title is president of the Fondo de Inversiones de Venezuela), set out 
his stall in a presentation for potential investors in New York on 26 June. 
The biggest industrial conglomerate still in state hands is the 17-unit 
Corporacion Venezolana de Guayana (CVG); by the time the sell-off is 
completed, only three companies will still be run by CVG.

 The aluminium industry is the jewel in CVG's crown, and pre-qualification 
of bidders was to begin in July. Venezuela's is the world's seventh-largest 
aluminium producer, with an annual output of 630,000 tonnes and exports of 
425,000 tonnes. The government hopes to raise at least US Dollars 2.5bn from 
the industry's sale. Aluminium export revenues average around US Dollars 
800m.

 CVG owns four companies that take part in all stages of bauxite, alumina 
and aluminium production: Bauxilum, Carbonorca, Venalum (415,000 tonnes of 
aluminium a year) and Alcasa (210,000 tonnes). Carlos Ernesto Sanchez, 
president of Alcasa, said at the end of June that he expected the auctioning 
of all four to be completed by the first half of December.

 One of the biggest problems facing the government is to come up with an 
attractive formula for potential buyers, as the four companies have 
accumulated internal and foreign debts totalling more than US Dollars 1.2bn, 
about half of which is owed to the government itself in unpaid taxes. 
Merrill Lynch is advising on possible approaches to this conundrum.

 Sanchez noted that the four companies are now making an operating profit, 
and recent debts have been mainly the result of exchange losses. Reynolds of 
the US has an 8% stake in Alcasa, and a Japanese consortium led by Kobe 
Steel has 20% of Venalum.

 Iron and steel, too. The other CVG units that are being put up for sale, 
notably the Sidor integrated steel operation and the Fesilven iron plant, 
are expected to raise a further US Dollars 1bn, perhaps next year.

 The CVG units that will not be sold are Electrificacion del Caroni 
(Edelca), the power generating company that runs the massive (10,000MW, 
second largest in Latin America) Guri dam; the Ferrominera del Orinoco iron 
ore mine at Cerro Bolivar; and the Minerven gold-mining operation.

 Telephone auction. The government also has high hopes for the sale of the 
49% of shares it still holds in the CANTV telephone company. Petkoff 
announced in mid-July that the auction would take place in November on both 
the Caracas and international stock exchanges -assuming that both the US 
authorities and the Venezuelan congress approve the arrangements.

 He said he expected the sale, which is being organised by the Lehman 
Brothers and S G Warburg investment banks, to bring in between US Dollars 
1bn and US Dollars 1.5bn. Other government sources have put the estimate as 
high as US Dollars 2bn.

 The first 40% tranche of CANTV shares were sold during the administration 
of President Carlos Andres Perez in 1991. A consortium led by GTE of the 
United States bid US Dollars 1.88bn. The remaining 11% were reserved for 
CANTV's employees.

 CANTV has a number of attractive features, not the least of which is a 
monopoly on conventional telephony until the year 2000. The company's 
concession runs for 35 years, renewable for a further 20. It has 2.8m lines 
installed.

 Banks sale. Poletto was accompanied in New York by Ester de Margulis, head 
of the Fondo de Garantia de Depositos Bancarios (Fogade), the state agency 
that has been give the job of reorganising and selling-off the banks 
nationalised in the wake of the 1994 financial crisis.

 Margulis told her audience that the Banco de Venezuela would be the first 
bank to be reprivatised, probably in August. The book value of Venezuela's 
oldest bank is thought to be about US Dollars 60m. Banco Tequendama is to 
follow in September, Banco Consolidado in October, Banco Latino at the end 
of 1996 and Banco de la Republica early next year. Poletto said he hoped 
their sales would fetch between US Dollars 6bn and US Dollars 7bn.

 Among a long list of other assorted enterprises that the government 
proposes to sell off are three regional power companies (Nueva Esparta, 
Enelbar and Enelven-Enelco); the Dianca and Puerto Central shipyards; the 
Monay cement works, and a string of hotels (which includes the cable car 
from Caracas to the coast).

 The big exception to the privatisation rule is the state oil company, 
PDVSA, one of the biggest and most successful in the world, with annual 
sales in excess of US Dollars 26bn. The symbolic importance of PDVSA, 
created after the nationalisation of the oil industry in 1976, is so great 
that no government would dare to suggest it should be sold.

 PDVSA off the agenda. 'The privatisation of PDVSA is not on this 
government's agenda, and those who propose such a move are fundamentalists 
who think that its would solve all the country's problems,' said Petkoff on 
12 July.

 PDVSA president Luis Giusti is among those who have suggested a half-way 
house, selling say 15% of the company's shares to help pay off the US 
Dollars 27bn foreign debt and give a boost to the non-oil sectors of the 
economy. But energy minister Erwin Arrieta made clear that even such a 
compromise was politically inconceivable.

 Over the past few years, however, PDVSA has entered into a number of 
contractual arrangements with foreign oil and gas companies, to attract 
much-needed capital into the industry. Earlier exercises included 
concessions to reactivate marginal fields and to help extract the extra-
heavy oil of the Faja del Orinoco.

 The latest modality of the 'opening' of the oil industry was the signing of 
eight risk contracts with international consortia at the beginning of the 
year (see RA-96-01). The association agreements were finally signed on 10 
July, giving the new PDVSA subsidiary Corporacion Venezolana de Petroleo 
(CPV) and the eight consortia 30 days to set up the operating companies.

 Petrochemicals opening. Petkoff also announced that foreign capital would 
soon be invited to invest directly in the petrochemicals industry, dominated 
by the PDVSA subsidiary Petroquimica de Venezuela (Pequiven). The state 
company turns out 3.2m tonnes of products a year, and a further 2m tonnes in 
a number of joint ventures with domestic and foreign private companies.

 Petrochemical exports are expected to total US Dollars 760m this year. 
Information minister Fernando Egana said on 10 July that up to 200 new 
companies could be created in this sector by the year 2005 -by which time 
exports could reach US Dollars 2.5bn.

 AEROPOSTAL SAGA GOES ON

 As for Aeropostal, a number of airlines, including Avianca of Colombia and 
Delta of the US, showed an interest, but when it came to the crunch none of 
them could put down the US Dollars 2m deposit by 2 July required to enable 
them to proceed to the next stage: an auction with a reserve price of US 
Dollars 28m.

 The airline, founded in 1929, ceased operations in 1994, after a strike, 
with losses of US Dollars 38m. At its peak it had 16 planes and 40% of the 
domestic market -as well as services to Atlanta, Orlando and the Caribbean. 
Its assets were valued at more than US Dollars 60m in 1994.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 COLOMBIA: VIOLENCE: POLICE ACCUSED OF EXECUTING SUSPECTS: AND CONTRACT 
KILLING RAISES 'COLOMBIANISATION' FEARS

 Two events in mid-July summed up the alarming institutional breakdown in 
Venezuela. The Policia Tecnica Judicial (PTJ) published figures indicating 
that there had been 821 murders in Caracas in the first six months of the 
year, 747 of them with firearms; 630 of the victims were between the ages of 
18 and 30.

 And President Rafael Caldera publicly rebuked his justice minister, Enrique 
Meier, for criticising his predecessor's running of the ministry, 
particularly the prison service.

 Fewer murders, but ... The murder rate in Caracas was actually down on the 
same period last year, when 936 people died violent deaths in the capital. 
But PTJ chief Jesus Lazo Ricardi noted that insecurity was very widespread 
in the city, largely as a result of the high levels of drug and alcohol 
consumption.

 Most of the killings were at weekends in the hillside barrios surrounding 
the capital, where the police presence is very low and armed gangs hold 
sway. Another consequence of the absence of police is that lynchings (eight 
in the first six months) and vigilante groups have become commonplace.

 The commander of the Policia Metropolitana (PM), General Rafael Damiani, 
estimates that he would need double the number of officers he has at his 
disposal to provide an adequate service to the capital's 4m inhabitants.

 'Extra-judicial executions.' Not that the poorly trained and paid PM's 
reputation is very high. In mid-June the police managed to stop an armed 
robbery at an ice-cream parlour in the city centre, killing one of the 
attackers, and at the cost of the life of a young policewoman -the first to 
die on active service.

 But sympathy turned to outrage when the two surviving criminals were 
subsequently found dead in a hospital morgue, their bodies riddled with 
bullets. They had earlier been filmed by Radio Caracas Television being 
taken away in handcuffs by the police.

 Here was evidence that the PM were carrying out 'extra-judicial executions' 
-an increasingly frequent occurrence according to human rights 
organisations, such as Provea, which counted more than 270 in Venezuela in 
1994-95.

 The PM was forced to hand over the officers involved in the operation to 
the PTJ, public prosecutor Ivan Dario Badell ordered an inquiry and seven 
policemen were later arrested. RCTV complained that it had received 
threatening phone calls and PM patrol cars had been seen passing in front of 
the building.

 Contract killing. Days later public opinion received a further shock when 
the son-in-law of former presidential candidate Jose Vicente Rangel (now a 
prominent TV commentator) was shot dead as he delivered his daughter to a 
Caracas kindergarten, in what appeared to be a contract killing. This, 
together with the growing frequency of kidnappings, is widely seen as a 
further step towards the 'Colombianisation' of Venezuelan society.

 Meier earned Caldera's wrath by accusing his predecessor, Ruben Creixems, 
of permitting human rights abuses in Venezuela's nightmarish prisons. 
Caldera publicly contradicted him, and called Creixems to the presidential 
palace to offer a formal apology.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ANDEAN GROUP REPORT  via NewsNet
August 1, 1996

 REGION: POSTSCRIPT

 BOLIVIA/ Rural poverty. According to a report by the UN Population Fund, 
94% of rural households live below the poverty line, and the rate for cities 
is 51%. The study identified exceptional poverty in the urban areas of El 
Alto, Trinidad, Oruro and Potosi. 

 Chagas clampdown. The government has requested funds from the World Health 
Organisation to help it implement a five-year, US Dollars 70m programme to 
eradicate Chagas disease and malaria, which are present in 60% of the 
country. The authorities currently spend US Dollars 3m annually on 
fumigation projects in the areas affected by Chagas disease, and coordinate 
activities with Argentina, Peru and Brazil to combat the presence of 
malaria-carrying mosquitoes in frontier regions. A larger proportion of the 
population is affected by the two diseases than anywhere else in the 
Americas.

 Forest protection. After two years of debate congress has passed a forestry 
law aimed at protecting remaining woodland areas, which are deforested at a 
rate of 1,400 square kilometres per year, according to conservation group 
estimates. Under the law the state will grant 40-year concessions on forests 
to the private sector at a cost of US Dollars 1 per hectare per year, on the 
condition that the companies replant new forests. The law has been attacked 
by timber companies, who say the price should be only US Dollars 0.30 per 
hectare, and by Indian groups and the opposition, who say the price is too 
low. 

 COLOMBIA/ Fuel reserves. Oil reserves will last for another 20 years, or 
for 30 if used in conjunction with natural gas, at the current rate of 
consumption, according to the state oil company Ecopetrol. It estimates 
reserves at 2.9bn barrels of oil and 7.6 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, 
though this does not include the fields discovered earlier this year in 
Piedemonte Llanero, whose potential has yet to be calculated.  

 Perry gets WB post. Guillermo Eduardo Perry, finance minister from 1994 
until his resignation three months ago, has been appointed Chief Economist 
for the Latin America and Caribbean Region of the World Bank. Perry studied 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and is specialised in the 
fields of fiscal and energy policy. He held the post of mines and energy 
minister between 1986 and 1988. 

 ECUADOR/ Energy investment. Over the last four years the energy sector has 
attracted investments worth US Dollars 2bn, according to the ministry for 
energy and mines. The oil sector alone attracted around US Dollars 880m in 
the last six months, with Occidental Petroleum planning a further US Dollars 
600m this year.

 PERU/ Petrolube sale delayed. Labour minister Jorge Gonzalez Izquierdo 
announced that the sale of Petroperu's Petrolube plant, due to take place 
later this month, will be postponed until October. The lubrications branch 
is the second of Petroperu's subsidiaries due to be privatised, following 
the sale of the La Pampilla refinery in mid-June.

 Agricultural export growth. The value of agricultural exports will reach US 
Dollars 820m in 1996, a 37% increase on the US Dollars 600m recorded last 
year, according to the exporters' association, Adex, which also estimates 
that exports from the sector could be worth an annual US Dollars 1bn within 
four years.

 Copper profits down. The mining sector expects to receive US Dollars 250m 
less than its projected total revenue of US Dollars 1.3bn for this year, as 
a result of the fall in international copper prices following the 'Sumitomo 
scandal'. The price of the metal has fallen to US cents 90/lb, compared with 
an average of US Dollars 1.33/lb in 1995. 

 Corruption charges. A Lima judge has begun proceedings against second Vice-
President Cesar Paredes Canto, on extortion charges. Canto allegedly used 
his influence to gain an extended licence for the US airline Export Air, one 
of companies involved in the scandal over the sale of Argentine arms to 
Ecuador during the border war with Peru in 1995.  

 European food aid. The European Union has signed two agreements pledging 
food for 160,000 schoolchildren and 1,365 displaced families in the central 
highlands. Between July and December this year 2,240 tonnes of food will be 
distributed to children in the departments of Junin and Pasco. Families 
resettled in the department of Ayacucho will receive provisions under a 
food-for-community work scheme between now and June 1997.

 VENEZUELA/ Orinoco floods. A state of emergency has been declared in six 
southern states following severe flooding along the course of the Orinoco 
river caused by heavy rains. Worst affected is the state of Amazonas, where 
40,000 Indians, mostly Yanomamis, Yekwanas and Guajibos, have been forced to 
leave their river-side villages and are now dependent on provisions 
airlifted in by military helicopters.
  The authorities are warning that the greatest danger to the local 
population may come after the floods recede, when conditions will be ripe 
for malaria and hepatitis epidemics.

 REGION/Mercosur talks. At a meeting in Caracas the trade ministers of the 
Andean countries agreed to collectively negotiate trade liberalisation with 
the Mercosur countries, following moves by Bolivia to seek closer commercial 
ties with the Mercosur at the end of June.

 Peru, which has already begun talks with Mercosur, confirmed that it will 
remain a member of the Andean Community, and trade and industry minister 
Liliana Canale announced proposals to harmonise the group's tariff 
structure, which at present Peru considers too complicated.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>