
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B13-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000622-B039-120</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te99.html 205.156.212.5 19970122051152 text/html 42998
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:09:41 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:55 GMT
Content-length: 42811
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/te99.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 2, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* THIS WEEK'S LEAD STORIES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>AIRFONE FOUNDER JACK GOEKEN SEEKS FCC O.K.&nbsp;FOR AIR-TO-GROUND PASSENGER DATA NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1306 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>HUGHES AIRCRAFT ENTERS MOBILE DATA MARKET&nbsp;AS SYSTEMS INTEGRATOR FOR RUGGEDIZED USES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(686 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>IBM MIGHT DEBUT TERMINAL IN FIRST QUARTER&nbsp;FOR HIGHER-END TERRESTRIAL, SATELLITE DATA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(659 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SUCCESSFUL BETA TESTING REQUIRES CAREFUL&nbsp;PLANNING, INTEGRATION FOR TRUCKING FIRM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(618 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* SPECIAL REPORT *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>INTERCONNECTING DIFFERENT TERMINALS, LAPTOPS&nbsp;TO STANDARD COMPUTER PROTOCOLS TO MARK '90S</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1175 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* BRIEF TRANSMISSIONS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>  Airborne Freight Corp. is expected to decide by about February 1</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego will replace Loran-C with its own</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(125 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>  Sales of navigation systems will grow from $5 million in 1990 to</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>  Communications Networks '90 at the Washington, D.C. convention</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>  Kustom Electronics, Inc. in Overland Park, Kan. reports record</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>  West Germany has been exploring the potential of a mobile data</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(25 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>  Robert D. Briskman, senior vice president for engineering and</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>  The winner of the Best Mobile Data-Related Christmas Card Award</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>  Neil P. Saldin has been named vice president at Nav-Com, Inc. in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(44 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>  Richard Kornblum has been named chief operating officer at</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* MOBILE DATA MEETINGS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>January 19</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

AIRFONE FOUNDER JACK GOEKEN SEEKS FCC O.K.
FOR AIR-TO-GROUND PASSENGER DATA NETWORK

Sending facsimiles, receiving pages, checking stock quotations,
obtaining flight information, confirming rental car and hotel
reservations and playing computer games will be possible from your
airline seat if the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approves
a new data network. In-Flight Phone Corp. (IFPC) in Oak Brook, Ill.
on December 14 filed a petition with the FCC to establish a
nationwide air-to-ground data network.

  In-Flight was established by Jack Goeken, the founder of Airfone,
which has installed passenger phones on thousands of airplanes.
Goeken also was one of the founders of MCI Communications Corp.

  The company has asked for a developmental/experimental license that
would be the forerunner of a commercial digital data-only service in
1990. IFPC plans to install a 6" x 4" LCD on the back of each seat,
above the drop-down tray. Buttons that are dedicated to specific data
applications would be positioned around the screen. Also, an RJ-11
jack would be installed next to the LCD.

  A small phone -- dramatically smaller than the current GTE Airfone
model -- would be attached on the side of each seat, says Dimitrios
Lalos, vice president of engineering at In-Flight. A raised
alphanumeric keypad and cursor keys would be included on the back of
the phone's handset. A PC to control the onboard network would be
installed on the aircraft.

  In its FCC filing, the company says six data services for
passengers will be test marketed:

  1. Stock quotations selected  by passengers from New York and
Chicago exchanges.

  2. Video games, where passengers use cursor keys on the telephone
handset to control the actions. To avoid complaints by passengers who
might be bothered by the sounds emanating from the games, users will
have to use headphones. The game chips probably would be stored in
In-Flight's onboard PC.

  3. Connecting flight information that might be displayed 30 minutes
before the plane lands.

  4. Radio paging for passengers who register with In-Flight via
their seat computer after boarding the plane. Passengers could
receive alphanumeric pages from callers using a toll-free telephone
number. IFPC would control the airborne paging operation; the company
hasn't discussed any tie-ins with existing national or local paging
companies.

  5. Obtaining airline information from the North American Official
Airline Guides.

  6. Miscellaneous services, such as catalogue shopping, accessing
databases with laptop computers and sending faxes. Initially, faxes
will only be outgoing, from an In-Flight fax machine on the aircraft
or through a passenger's own PC-based fax card.

  The company also sees a large demand for making or reconfirming
hotel and rental car reservations. The LCDs will include several
buttons that are dedicated to specific applications, including
reservations. Step-by-step instructions would be shown on the LCD.

  In addition to these third-party services, the airline crew could
use the system for transmitting messages to passengers. These
messages could include the traditional pre-flight safety spiels, the
choices of meals and beverages and, possibly, advertising.

  The prices for many of these applications haven't been set, but the
company is looking at about $2 per transaction, says Bob Rubens, vice
president of airline relations at IFPC. For example, $2 would be
charged for confirming or reconfirming hotel or rental car
reservations. Receiving radio pages during the flight might be
cheaper, perhaps $2 for an unlimited number of messages, says Rubens.
Additional charges might be assessed for priority service to skip
ahead of the queue.

  The first network would operate with frequency shift keying at
1,200 bits/second, upgrading in 1991 to 9,600 bits/second, says
Lalos. In-Flight's proposal calls for building 25 ground stations
near major airports and 17 at other locations in the United States.
All the stations would be near GTE Airfone base stations.

  IFPC has requested the use of one subchannel from each of ten
channels used by Airfone under Airfone's experimental license. The
channels would be in 849/850 MHz and 894/895 MHz. Each of the 800 MHz
channels is divided into 31 subchannels, but the first subchannel is
not now used by Airfone, Lalos says.

  Every subchannel pair would be 6 KHz incoming and 6 KHz outgoing --
for a total of 120 KHz. Airfone has been allocated a total of 4 MHz
for its phone service.

  In-Flight is requesting this relatively small bandwidth allocation
because it wants to get up and running as quickly as possible; by
using Airfone's existing network, it can do so. IFPC is concerned
that other companies could beat it to the punch with services to keep
passengers entertained.

  Methods of providing in-flight movies, games and information
services have been under development for several years by such
companies as Avicom International, Air Vision and Transcom. They've
all explored tie-ins with air-to-ground telephone service.

  (Mobile Data Report's first issue in September 1988 featured an
item on Air Video, a Toronto firm developing an "Entray" computerized
game screen.) In-Flight has discussed the possibility of joint
ventures with these firms.

  "This revolution in the in-flight aircraft environment cannot be
realized, however, without the development of an ATG [air-to-ground]
network which can provide the data communications necessary to
support new services sought by the airline industry," says IFPC's FCC
petition.

  Although In-Flight has asked the FCC to use Airfone's frequencies,
Goeken really prefers to obtain his own channels. After five years of
service, Airfone's allocation is still considered developmental. The
FCC is expected to issue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in February
or March that would provide a permanent allocation.

  The possibilities include: giving the entire 4 MHz to Airfone,
allocating 2 MHz to Airfone and 2 MHz to another licensee or allowing
several companies to share the 4 MHz. Obviously, Airfone would prefer
to receive the entire allocation. In-Flight also wants a piece of the
spectrum for voice service.

  In August, IFPC filed comments at the FCC for an air-to-ground
service that would use 2 MHz. The comments replied to a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking issued by the Commission. IFPC is also talking up
the sharing option, where possibly more than two companies would
offer service on 4 MHz.

  In addition, In-Flight is considering the possibility of offering
its services via an existing satellite vendor, says Rubens. He
declines to name the vendor, but Inmarsat's satellite network could
probably transmit the data.

                              *********

                   Goeken's Travails With Airfone

  For years, Jack Goeken has been talking publicly and privately
about offering data and other value-added services over Airfone. When
he was at the helm, Airfone had conducted a few experiments with
transmitting data. The company used modems to transmit electronic
mail and electrocardiographs. A few years ago, Goeken had announced
that the "next generation" of Airfone telephones would include an RJ-
11 jack.

  However, GTE decided not to provide a computer connection. In fact,
it decided not to offer a variety of services that Goeken had wanted.
In February 1989, he resigned from the company and filed a breech of
contract suit against Airfone, seeking release from the non-compete
clause of his contract.

  The DuPage County [Ill.] Circuit Court ruled in favor of Goeken,
stating that GTE Corp. and GTE Airfone had "committed numerous
material breeches of the stock purchase agreement." As a result,
Goeken is free from all of the stipulations in his contract and is
legally able to establish a competitive air-to-ground network.

  GTE Airfone is working on reply comments for the Federal
Communications Commission on In-Flight Phone Corp.'s data network
and, therefore, won't discuss Goeken's plans. However, "we definitely
see that there is a demand out there [for air-to-ground data
services] and we're cognizant of that fact," says Kevin Petschow, a
public relations spokesperson for Airfone.

  What type of data services would Airfone offer? "We're still in the
early stage of figuring that out," Petschow says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

HUGHES AIRCRAFT ENTERS MOBILE DATA MARKET
AS SYSTEMS INTEGRATOR FOR RUGGEDIZED USES

  A familiar name in the military hardware market is entering the
mobile data industry as a systems integrator. Hughes Aircraft in
Carlsbad, Calif. is developing a line of "portable information
equipment" for military and commercial applications that generally
require rugged products and relatively fast data rates.

  The new venture is under the aegis of Hughes' industrial products
division and will capitalize on the company's expertise in building
cathode ray tubes and other types of displays, test equipment and a
variety of electronic gear.

  As part of its entry into mobile data, Hughes obtained the
exclusive worldwide rights to develop military and heavy-duty
commercial products using Reflection Technology's Private Eye display
(see Mobile Data Report, September 11, 1989).

  Private Eye allows users to view a 12-inch image floating in front
of one eye while looking through a tiny display with the other eye.
The display, which features red characters on a black background, is
contained in a 1" x 1" x 3" device that can be held up to the eye or
attached to headsets, eye glasses, etc.

  Reflection Technology sees its product as supplementing or
replacing a variety of displays or hard copy output, such as pager
LCDs, laptop computer screens and paper printouts from facsimile
machines.

  By wearing the device attached to a headset, doctors could see
readouts from medical monitors or scanned images, stockbrokers could
watch especially important real-time data without having to look at a
specific CRT and military field commanders could scan computer
projections and maps while watching the battlefield action.

  Eliminating traditional displays or paper output would
significantly reduce the size and weight of computer devices while
increasing the battery life, says Jim Bradley, assistant division
manager of Hughes' industrial products division. Bradley is program
manager for the company's portable information equipment venture.
Private Eye offers a "unique way" of displaying images with a
satisfactory resolution in a small package and with low power
requirements, he says.

  However, Hughes won't "fall in love" with any display; it will use
whatever is appropriate, Bradley says. Another appropriate technology
for certain mobile data is computer voice recognition. By building a
device that recognizes voice commands, the keyboard could be
eliminated. This further decreases size and weight.

  These advances in display and voice recognition technologies will
produce new types of products that will create new markets for which
today's heavier computers are now unacceptable, he says.

  Although the military is an obvious market for portable data
devices, "we know it takes ten to 12 years to get anything into the
field," he says. There's good and bad news for companies that want to
sell this type of equipment to the military. On one hand, funding for
new projects is less than in previous years. On the other hand, the
Department of Defense (DOD) is placing increasing emphasis on
computer-aided maintenance and logistics.

  For both military and commercial use, Hughes sees a significant
market for "portable maintenance manuals," ranging in size from
products that can hang on a belt to more sophisticated handhelds.
With radio frequency links, maintenance personnel can access host
computer databases. Indeed, some DOD people have been describing the
maintenance manual of the future as a laptop computer that you carry
around, says Bradley.

  Agilis Corp. in Mountain View, Calif. has been talking about this
application since the company was founded. Agilis' rugged mobile
computer is the type of product that Hughes has evaluated. Neither
Hughes nor Agilis will comment on the potential of a formal
relationship.

  However, if Hughes wants products that can be attached to a belt,
Agilis would have to develop smaller products. Interestingly, Roger
Higgins, vice president of marketing at Agilis, has been speculating
(just humorously?) about "computers that you wear."

  Hughes isn't an expert in commercial RF networks; "we're a hardware
manufacturer," Bradley says. He's is especially interested in spread
spectrum transmission because it doesn't require a license from the
Federal Communications Commission. Agilis and Telesystems SLW in Don
Mills, Ontario are among the companies with spread spectrum products
for mobile local area networks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

IBM MIGHT DEBUT TERMINAL IN FIRST QUARTER
FOR HIGHER-END TERRESTRIAL, SATELLITE DATA

  IBM, which has been working on a mobile data system for
Consolidated Freightways, will publicly announce its new mobile data
computers sometime during the first quarter of this year, says John
Pemberton, program director for mobile technologies at the Gartner
Group, Inc. in Stamford, Conn. In an online alert to his clients,
Pemberton says Geostar Corp. might be the first customer for IBM's
vehicular PCs, which would supplement Sony Corp.'s satellite
receivers.

  An article in the January 3 issue of The Wall Street Journal
reported that IBM's product is likely to replace Sony's receiver.
That was a misquote, says Pemberton. IBM's computer will be targeted
at customers who want a more powerful machine, he says. (Of course,
IBM is known for developing numerous products in its laboratories
that are never commercially marketed or are sold only to a limited
number of customers.)

  Sony is "definitely in the [mobile satellite terminal] business for
the long haul," says Shelley Donlon, marketing administrator at Sony
in Park Ridge, N.J. The company will continue to develop terminals
for Geostar, though it has no plans to produce units for other
satellite vendors, she says. Sony won't comment on IBM developments.

  Before releasing his predictions, Pemberton didn't receive any
direct confirmation from IBM, he tells Mobile Data Report. That's
certainly not unusual, since IBM rarely says anything about products
before they are announced. What was somewhat unusual to Pemberton,
though, was that sources at the computer giant not only didn't refute
his claims but seemed to have encouraged him to publish them, he
says.

  Pemberton says he was spurred to make the announcement
some of his clients who were briefed by IBM about the product. For
example, IBM contacted a delivery company with more than 50,000
vehicles that might participate in a pilot program. Several companies
contacted by Mobile Data Report said IBM had asked them to visit Boca
Raton, Fla. where the developmental work is being conducted.

  It's no secret -- though the parties involved have treated it as
one -- that IBM has been developing a mobile computer for
Consolidated (see Mobile Data Report, September 11, 1989). Some 100
vehicles in Cincinnati are testing the system, which includes
dispatching and vehicle location. For Consolidated, Etak is
developing a positioning system based on map matching and Loran-C.

  IBM's mobile units supposedly will work with satellite positioning
networks and terrestrial systems. The computers probably will be
compatible with specialized mobile radio networks, such as Motorola's
Coverage Plus data system, Pemberton says. Coverage Plus was
announced last year -- possibly to counter the publicity over Ram
Mobile Data's 50-city Mobitex network -- but will not be available
until later this year.

  Pemberton says today's 20,000 mobile data terminals have created a
market of $50 million. By 1995, two million mobile satellite
terminals worth $4.15 billion might be sold. IBM could realize more
than $1 billion from the sale of terminals, he says. The computer
firm's entry into the market would bring the benefits of its Systems
Application Architecture and electronic data interchange into the
mobile environment, says Pemberton.

  Other mobile data companies -- such as Motorola, Electrocom
Automation and Kustom Electronics -- promote their compatibility with
IBM systems. But IBM's ability to provide a total host computer-to-
mobile workstation solution, integrating software and hardware, would
be a powerful incentive for existing IBM shops to choose Big Blue's
mobile PC. The majority of traditional mobile data customers, in
trucking, delivery, public safety and field service, use IBM
products.

  Also, if sources are correct, IBM's product will be sort of a
downsized PS/2. Though Motorola and Electrocom provide the ability
for portable PCs to access their proprietary mobile data systems,
they do not offer a DOS machine. Only Agilis now markets DOS-
compatible mobile computers. Agilis' product is a portable that can
be mounted in a vehicle; IBM's computer is expected to be a vehicular
unit, not a portable.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

SUCCESSFUL BETA TESTING REQUIRES CAREFUL
PLANNING, INTEGRATION FOR TRUCKING FIRM

  The key to developing a worthwhile test of a satellite messaging
and location network is to quickly integrate it into a company's
existing computer dispatching system -- not to use just one
standalone PC. That's the view of Tom Burns, senior director of
quality, at Midwest Coast Transport (MCT), which is testing
Transtrack's meteor burst network (see Mobile Data Report, November
15, 1989).

  In June 1989, the Sioux Falls, S.D. trucking company tested a
mobile satellite network. It was either Qualcomm or Geostar, but
Burns declines to identify the company. Equipment was installed in
eight of MCT's 600 vehicles. The host software was installed on a PC
which wasn't interconnected to MCT's computer dispatching system.

  As a result, dispatchers had to leave their seats to use the PC,
which would display the trucks with the satellite equipment.

  "Unfortunately, it just sat in a corner....No one ever used it,"
Burns says. The trucking company employs about 20 dispatchers during
peak times and they were just too busy to spend much time at the PC's
keyboard. However, the standalone PC method might work better at
smaller firms, where the dispatchers aren't as busy, he says.

  This time, Midwest aims to conduct a much better trial and is
"doing a lot of upfront work" to determine how to implement the test.
Most importantly, Transtrack's communications/messaging software will
be integrated into the IBM 38 computer terminals that are used by MCT
dispatchers. A dedicated PC will be needed, but only as a link
between the IBM 38 and Transtrack -- not as a dispatch terminal.

  Also, all of Midwest's dispatchers will be taught how to use the
system. During the previous test, only a few dispatchers were
trained.

  To accommodate Midwest and other customers, Transtrack is modifying
its network to provide real-time transmission of messages from
vehicles to dispatchers. Currently, customers' host computers have to
dial Transtrack's networked 80386-based PCs to obtain messages.
"That's one of the things that I do not want," he says. Receiving
messages quickly is important to Burns, but the modifications are
behind schedule.

  In general, though, he's pleased with Transtrack's service and
responsiveness. "They're very customer oriented....They are very nice
to work with," he says. He's also pleased with the company's pricing,
which is significantly less than Geostar's or Qualcomm's.

  Transtrack's onboard equipment will cost some $2,500 less than
satellite messaging and vehicle location systems, says Burns.
Transtrack charges about $2,000 for its onboard terminal, $30/month
for system access and six vehicle location updates an hour, $.10 for
short, pre-programmed status messages and $.02 per character for free
form text, says Jim Feeney, president at Transtrack. On average,
customers pay $45/month for airtime.

  Dispatching over any RF network is "going to cut down on our phone
bill tremendously" because drivers won't have to use a payphone to
contact the office, Burns says. Monthly telephone bills of $30,000-
$35,000 are not uncommon.

  MCT also expects the system will let its truck drivers get more
sleep. Today, drivers can put in a full day's work and have to stay
awake late at night until notified when another load is available.
With Transtrack, the driver could sleep in the cab until he is
notified. Burns has suggested to Transtrack that it increase the
sound level of its alarm. With an idling engine and a snoring driver,
the present alarm isn't loud enough, he says.

  Other companies scheduled to test the network include the Denny's
restaurant chain and USX, a delivery service. Transtrack's primary
competitor in providing lower cost location and messaging services is
Pegasus Message Corp. in Herndon, Va. Like Transtrack, Pegasus'
network is based upon meteor burst transmission.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

INTERCONNECTING DIFFERENT TERMINALS, LAPTOPS
TO STANDARD COMPUTER PROTOCOLS TO MARK '90S

  Maps and specialized databases on CD-ROMs, faster cellular modems
and new SMR hardware and software are some of the developments just
introduced or expected in the early 1990s.

  Predicting certain mobile data trends is not difficult. Customers
generally want to integrate their existing host-computer software
into any mobile network. Also, existing and potential users are
increasingly interested in taking advantage of the power of laptop
computers for mobile applications. And, the network operators and
manufacturers are going to give them much -- if not all -- of what
they want.

  From the presentations of speakers at Waters Information Services'
"Connectivity in Mobile Data Networks" conference -- representing
many of the industry's leading-edge network operators and hardware
vendors --  it was obvious that compatibility with existing software
and computer protocols are major goals. At the conference in
Washington, D.C., even Motorola emphasized its desire to allow any
terminal -- dedicated or laptop -- to access its Data Radio Networks.

  Compatibility with IBM mini and mainframe architectures, local area
network architectures and the Open System Interface platform is being
pursued vigorously. Yet no single mobile data standard is likely to
emerge for the foreseeable future. For example, companies that are
well known for landline computer products, such as modem
manufacturers, are introducing their own error correcting standards
into the mobile arena.

  Few, if any, mobile data technologies during the next couple of
years will be appropriate or inexpensive enough for the mass market.
However, the introduction of lower cost vehicle navigation products
as part of a driver information system installed in higher-end
automobiles will generate consumer awareness in the early to mid
1990s.

                                Etak

  The president of Murdoch Magazines, which owns the map making firm
of Etak, knows "instinctively" that drivers will want more travel-
related information in the 1990s. "I don't believe you can research
these things," says John Evans, president at Murdoch. In the 1990s,
perhaps in 1992, at least one automobile manufacturer will begin
offering driver information systems that contain databases on CD-
ROMs, says Evans.

  Evans declines to discuss which company will offer such a system,
but General Motors is Etak's exclusive licensee in the United States
for providing equipment to the automobile marketplace. G.M., along
with virtually every other major automaker, has been working on cars-
of-the-future containing cellular phones, facsimile machines,
navigational systems and a host of computer-related add-ons.

  Using Etak's digitized maps and map software, companies will begin
offering databases on CD-ROMs, including the location of and
information on hotels, restaurants, gasoline stations, tourist
attractions and do-it-yourself tours catering to specialized
interests. The data will be displayed on either stand-alone CRTs or
built-in monitors. The success of his vision is dependent upon the
commercial introduction and acceptance of computer displays in
vehicles.

  He envisions motorists being able to obtain subscriptions to a type
of CD-ROM-of-the-Month-Club. Advertiser sponsorship of CD-ROMs will
be vital to generate revenues to sustain this market's growth, Evans
says.

  As a subsidiary of one of the largest publishing firms in the
world, Murdoch Magazines has a great deal of experience in selling
newspaper and magazine advertising, he says. The publishing firm owns
five automotive magazines in the United States and Europe, which
could be used to promote a vehicle location/CD-ROM system.

                               Modems

  "We think having a higher speed modem is very critical to the
success of the mobile office," says John Fox, senior program manager
at Telebit, Inc. in Oak Brook, Ill. With Telebit's Cellblazer modem,
the company wants to create entirely new markets and "revolutionize
the way business is done," says Fox.

  Telebit sees the market for Cellblazer for such applications as:
on-site insurance adjustment, for faster settlement of claims; field
sales, for faster processing of orders and for verifying
availability; field maintenance, for accessing mainframe databases;
government use, for Internal Revenue Service agents to access records
and for security agents to check photographic I.D.; and for
establishing temporary office communications.

  The Waters conference was the first public introduction of
Telebit's modem (see Mobile Data Report, December 4, 1989). In
November, Microcom had announced its MNP 10 modem that was designed
for "adverse environments," such as cellular (see Mobile Data Report,
November 20, 1989).

                        Electrocom Automation

  A new marketing strategy for penetrating the Specialized Mobile
Radio (SMR) industry is under development at Electrocom Automation in
Arlington, Texas. More than a year ago, the company unveiled a
generic dispatching package for E.F. Johnson SMRs that would use
Johnson's modems in conjunction with Electrocom's software and mobile
data terminals.

  But a massive reorganization at Electrocom resulted in layoffs,
including the person charged with selling the SMR system. This has
placed the program on hold. However, Electrocom has just completed a
major survey of the SMR industry and will be rolling out a new
marketing strategy in 1990, says Roy C. Emory, a senior staff
engineer at Electrocom.

  Rather than offering a generic dispatching package for all
potential users, the Texas company is developing a targeted approach
that will focus on individual niche markets. Products will have to be
"cheap," says Emory. A customer who pays $1,000 for his radio doesn't
want to pay more than that for a mobile data terminal, he says.

                             ***********

                       Impact of Higher Speeds
                 On Transmission Time Over Cellular

                               1,200 bits/sec.       16,800 bits/sec.


  1 screen graphics              2.8 min.              11.9 sec.
  160,000 bits

  20 pages text                 10.4 min.              44.6 sec.
  600,000 bits

  360K disk                     62.5 min.               4.5 min.
  3,600,000 bits

  1 megabyte file                2.9 hrs               12.4 min.
  10,000,000 bits


                   Source: John Fox, Telebit, Inc.

                             ***********

                          CONFERENCE BRIEFS


  * Modems Plus, Inc. in Atlanta has sold its first mobile data
system, Commrad, to the Duke Power Company in North Carolina, says H.
Thomas Thorsen, president at Modems Plus. The Atlanta firm offers an
80386-based network controller/protocol converter that allows
vehicular terminals to access IBM systems running 3270 SNA/SDLC. The
system uses Dataradio's packet modems to support transmission rates
of up to 9,600 bits/second.

  Duke Power has been testing Commrad since September 1989. Service
technicians can remotely access customer accounts and enter work
orders. By August 1990, 60 terminals will be installed for Duke
Power's field service force, Thorsen says.

  * American Mobile Satellite Corp. and Telesat Mobile will award a
contract for their satellites this month, says David Castiel, vice
president of marketing and business development at AMSC in
Washington, D.C.

  * Within two years, the shared-used data network of Mobidata in
Canada could be transmitting at 19,200 bits/second. Mobidata, which
is owned by BCE Mobile Communications and Motorola, now transmits at
4,800 bits/second.

  * Racotek is likely to unveil its completed Specialized Mobile
Radio data network software sometime during this quarter, says Dr.
Isaac Shpancer, director of research at the Minnesota company.
Racotek is adapting by the Open System Interface model for SMR
networks. Later this year, the company is also expected to offer a
$1,000 mobile data computer.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Airborne Freight Corp. is expected to decide by about February 1

  Airborne Freight Corp. is expected to decide by about February 1
whether to initiate a mobile data/computerized routing pilot project,
says Martin Langley, corporate fleet manager at Airborne in Seattle.
Replies to the company's request for proposals were due in December
and are under evaluation by Airborne and its consulting firm, Coopers
& Lybrand in Houston.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego will replace Loran-C with its own

  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego will replace Loran-C with its own
proprietary location technology by the end of the first quarterof
1990. QASPR -- Qualcomm Automatic Satellite Position Reporting --
involves triangulation with existing Ku-band satellites and ground
stations (which are regular Omnitracs receivers), says Tom Bernard,
vice president and general manager at the California firm.

  QASPR's accuracy will be one third of a mile in virtually all areas
of the country, he says. This compares with Loran-C, which ranges in
accuracy from one tenth of a mile to several miles. The increased
accuracy will be important mostly to truck companies carrying
hazardous materials. Qualcomm developed the system primarily for
overseas use, in Europe, Japan and Australia, where Loran-C is not
available, Bernard says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Sales of navigation systems will grow from $5 million in 1990 to

  Sales of navigation systems will grow from $5 million in 1990 to
$100 million in 1994, says a new research report by Frost & Sullivan,
Inc. in New York. The report, The U.S. Non-Entertainment Automotive
Electronics Market, forecasts that the "driver information market
sector" will grow from $940 million in 1989 to $1.64 billion in 1994.
That sector includes navigation systems and display components.

  The entire "non-entertainment" market covered by the report, which
also includes powertrain electronics, vehicle controls and comfort
and safety features, will increase from $5.06 billion in 1989 to $8
billion in 1994. The 259-page report is available for $2,375.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Communications Networks '90 at the Washington, D.C. convention

  Communications Networks '90 at the Washington, D.C. convention
center, February 5-8, will feature a panel devoted to cellular data.
Although called "What's New in Digital Cellular?," the panel will
feature four data experts. Robert C. Adair, executive vice president
of sales at the cellular modem company of Spectrum Information
Technologies (formerly Spectrum Cellular) in Dallas, will moderate
the session on February 6, 10:45 a.m.-12:00 p.m.

  Speakers will be G. Christopher Coffin, president at Touchbase
Systems in Northport, N.Y., Dale Fox, manager of data services at
Ameritech Mobile Communications in Schaumburg, Ill. and Glenn
Gottlieb, a product marketing manager at Zenith Data Systems in
Glenview, Ill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Kustom Electronics, Inc. in Overland Park, Kan. reports record

  Kustom Electronics, Inc. in Overland Park, Kan. reports record
fourth quarter net sales for fiscal year 1989 of $3,796,000, an
increase of $306,000 (eight percent) over the same period last year.

  Net earnings for the quarter were $228,000, an increase of $6,000
over the same period in 1988. Total sales for 1989 were $12,930,000,
an increase of $719,000 over 1988. Total net earnings for the year
were $694,000, an increase of $9,000 over 1988. The company's annual
stockholders meeting will be held on February 27 in Kansas City, Mo.
at the Westin Crown Center.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  West Germany has been exploring the potential of a mobile data

  West Germany has been exploring the potential of a mobile data
network and the Deutsche Bundespost could release a request for
proposals by the spring.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Robert D. Briskman, senior vice president for engineering and

  Robert D. Briskman, senior vice president for engineering and
operations at Geostar Corp., has been elected a Fellow of the
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. More than 20
million vehicle location determinations have been transmitted through
Geostar's Washington, D.C. headquarters.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  The winner of the Best Mobile Data-Related Christmas Card Award

  The winner of the Best Mobile Data-Related Christmas Card Award
goes to Mobile Data International's (MDI) Denmark office. It's a dual
purpose card, with traditional holiday greetings and an announcement
that the office is moving to another location. The eight-sided card
features Santa Claus viewing a mobile data terminal displaying a
street map and an arrow extending past the map to the new address.
Santa is also pictured as pulling a small sleigh that is piled with
office furniture.

  MDI Scandinavia's new headquarters is: Hojnaesvej 56, DK-2610
Rodovre, Denmark. The telephone is 45-36-72-34-88. Facsimile: 45-36-
72-07-88.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Neil P. Saldin has been named vice president at Nav-Com, Inc. in

  Neil P. Saldin has been named vice president at Nav-Com, Inc. in
Deer Park, N.Y. Saldin was vice president and technical director and
succeeds Lawrence A. Whitcomb. Whitcomb will return to a management
position at Magnavox' Advanced Products and Systems Co. in Torrance,
Calif.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

  Richard Kornblum has been named chief operating officer at

  Richard Kornblum has been named chief operating officer at
Transtrack, Inc. in Marion, Mass. Kornblum was vice president of
development and engineering at Foxboro Co. which develops systems for
automating process controls at chemical manufacturing Plants.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MOBILE DATA REPORT via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

January 19

January 19

  Gartner Group's Mobile
  Satellite Services Conference:
  On-Line Control of
  Field Operations
  Sheraton Grande Hotel
  Los Angeles, Calif.
  Contact: (203) 967-6757

Panels, including: "Informating Field Operations," "MSS Scenario: A
Five-Year View" and "MSS Applications and Cost Justification." (The
conference will be repeated on January 25 in the Washington, D.C.
area and on January 26 in Chicago area.)

January 29-30

  American SMR Network
  Association SMR Technology
  Symposium and Expo
  San Antonio Hyatt
  San Antonio, Texas
  Contact: (202) 331-7773

Panels and exhibits, including: "Ins and Outs of Data Transmission,"
"How Will We Get Digital?" and "Networking Opportunities for SMRs."

February 5-8

  Communications Networks
  Conference & Exposition
  Washington D.C. Convention Center
  Washington, D.C.
  Contact: (800) 225-4698 or
  (508) 820-2525

Panels and exhibits, including: "What's New in Wireless
Communications," "What's New in Digital Cellular" and "What's New in
Modems."

March 22-24

  Telocator Spring International Convention
  San Diego Convention Center
  San Diego, Calif.
  Contact: (202) 467-4781

Panels and exhibits.

March 28-30

  International Land Mobile
  Communications Expo
  Dallas Convention Center
  Dallas, Texas
  Contact: (800) 525-9154 or
  (303) 220-0600

Panels and exhibits.

May 1-2

  Waters Information Services' Second Annual Mobile Data Report
  Conference
  Omni Shoreham Hotel
  Washington, D.C.
  Contact: (607) 772-8086

Panels.

  May 1-3

  Electronic Highways 90
  Regal Constellation Hotel
  Toronto, Canada
  Contact: (416) 249-7401

Panels and exhibits.

May 7-9

  IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference
  Crown Plaza Holiday Inn
  Orlando, Fla.
  Contact: (407) 629-5712

Panels.

May 9-10

  Portable Computing &
  Communications
  Conference and Exposition
  Anaheim Marriott
  Anaheim, Calif.
  Contact: (800) 225-4698 or
  (508) 879-6700

Panels and exhibits

June 18-20

  Canadian Department of Communications/NASA International Mobile
  Satellite Conference 1990
  Congress Center
  Ottawa, Canada
  Contact: (613) 998-4997

Panels.

June 25-26

  American SMR Network Association Annual Convention
  Park Hyatt Hotel
  Washington, D.C.
  Contact: (202) 331-7773

Panels.

August 26-30

  Associated Public-Safety
  Officers Association
  Annual Conference
  Hynes Convention Center
  Boston, Mass.
  Contact: (904) 427-3461

Panels and exhibits.

September 27-28

  Portable Computing &
  Communications Conference
  and Exposition
  New York Sheraton Centre
  New York
  Contact: (800) 225-4698 or
  (508) 879-6700

Panels and exhibits

October 9-12

  Telocator Annual Convention and Exposition
  Marriott Hotel
  Chicago, Ill.
  Contact: (202) 467-4770

Panels and exhibits.

October 17-19

  Second Rutgers Workshop on Third Generation Wireless
  Information Networks
  Ramada Renaissance Hotel
  New Brunswick, N.J.
  Contact: (201) 932-3262

Panels.

October 22-23

  American SMR Network Association Fall Membership Meeting
  Copley Plaza Hotel
  Boston, Mass.
  Contact: (202) 331-7773

Panels.

October 31-November 1

  Waters Information Services' Wireless Mobile Computing
  Hyatt Rickey's
  Palo Alto, Calif.
  Contact: (607) 772-8086

Panels.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>